_af；------------_
Chinese
1 Contrastr
I I;;*.	f"
■i ■萱、
David C. S. Li
Zoe Pei-sui Luk
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
An Introduction
David C. S. Li and Zoe Pei-sui Luk
否為大
Hong Kong University Press
The University of Hong Kong
Pokfulam Road
Hong Kong
rmv.hkupress.org
丿 2017 Hong Kong University Press
ISBN 978-988-8390-85-4 (Hardback)
ISBN 978-988-8390-86-1 (Paperback)
All rights reserved. No portion of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any infor-
mation storage or retrieval system, without prior permission in writing from the publisher.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record tor this book is available from the British Library.
10 987654321
Printed and bound by Hang lai Printing Co., Ltd. in Hong Kong, China
Contents
List of Illustrations	vi
List of Tables	vii
Preface	viii
List of Abbreviations	xiii
1.	Conversation Analysis, Error Analysis, and	Cross-Linguistic Influence	1
2.	Cantonese-English Contrastive Phonology	11
3.	Transitivity and Syntactic Structures	40
4.	Passive Voice	53
5.	Tense and Aspect	63
6.	Determiners: Articles and Demonstratives	75
7.	Subject-Prominence and Topic-Prominence	88
8.	Europeanization: Influence of English on Chinese Grammar	97
9.	Being Chinese, Speaking English: Pragmatic Norms and Speaker
Identity	125
Suggested Answers to Questions and Activities	141
References	149
About the Authors	158
Index	159
Illustrations
Figure 0.1	The scope of Chinese-English contrastive grammar in this book	ix
Figure 2.1	The vocal organs	13
Figure 2.2	American English vowels	17
Figure 2.3	Cantonese vowels	17
Figure 5.1	The progressive (imperfective) viewpoint in a past event	65
Figure 5.2	The perfective viewpoint in a past event	65
Figure 6.1	Using the lion to refer to a lion that is known to the hearer	78
Figure 6.2	Using the lion to refer to a type of thing	79
Figure 6.3 Transformation from a noun phrase to a noun phrase with
different determiners	85
Figure 6.4 A flowchart or decision tree for ensuring the correct use
of articles	86
Figure 9.1 Hymess (1976) acronym, SPEAKING, used to capture all the
essential information pertaining to the context of social
interaction
126
Tables
Table 2.1
Table 2.2
Table 2.3
Table 2.4
Table 2.5
Table 3.1
Table 6.1
Table 9.1
American/British English consonants	16
Cantonese consonants	16
Interaction between voicing and aspiration, as illustrated by
the bilabial stops	20
Inventory of vowels as shown in the educated Cantonese-Ll EAL
learners	23
Examples of Hong Kong EAL pronunciation, showing a loss
of contrast in RP vowels	23
Different semantic roles, their definitions, and examples	48
A summary of the normative usage of a and the	85
Politeness strategies in Korean and Japanese	130
Preface
This book is written primarily for Chinese readers who have at least some basic
knowledge of English grammar, and who have attained a fairly high level of profi-
ciency in English (roughly upper-intermediate or above). We believe this book will
be a useful study companion for teachers and students specializing in a wide range
of language-fbcused or language-related disciplines, including English, Chinese, lin-
guistics, language information sciences, professional communication, language teach-
ing, cultural studies, translation and interpreting, language pathology, and speech
therapy. The main objective of this book is to familiarize our readers with a subset
of the common difficulties encountered by Chinese learners and users of English,
in Hong Kong and beyond, in ESL or EFL pronunciation and lexico-grammatical
structures.1 A second objective is to help our readers understand the ways in which
the Chinese language has undergone structural changes as a result of Europeanization
(especially anglicization) since the 1900s. Judging from the outcomes of such influ-
ences, some may be seen as beneficial while many more are demonstrably adverse.
In scope, Europeanization is not at all limited to linguistic structures, but these
structures also manifest in Chinese learners> and users' pragmatic competence and
performance in their social interaction with others. Such socio-pragmatic com-
petence (Kasper & Rose, 2002) is reflected in their choice of LI pragma-linguistic
resources when using L2, including pragmatic strategies such as directness and indi-
rectness, routines, and a large range of linguistic forms which can intensify or soften
communicative acts* (Kasper & Rose, 2002> p. 2). We will illustrate such interlanguage
pragmatic (ILP) strategies with a couple of Chinese "rules of speaking when Chinese
EAL learners and users are engaged in intercultural communication in English (e.g.,
preferring more Chinese pragma-linguistic strategies when realizing speech acts such
as making requests or responding to compliments in English). We will also examine 1
1.	Regarding the question, whether the status of English in Hong Kong is more appropriately characterized as
a second language (ESL) or a foreign language (EFL), there is as yet no consensus among scholars (see Li,
2017. for an in-depth discussion). For our purpose in this book, we will use the term 'English as an additional
language' (EAL) as a superordinate of ESL and EFL.
Preface
an apparently contrary case, namely EAL speakers' predilection for one linguistic
subsystem in (especially American) English when interacting with others in Chinese
or English, the adoption of an English(-sounding) first name.
The grammar of any language is a huge topic. And, given that Chinese and English
are among the languages of wider communication with the largest numbers of first
and/or second language learners and users in the world, to compare and contrast
these two grammatical systems is an even more challenging task. In this book, we will
follow Michel Paradiss characterization of language and grammar as follows:
[Language] refers to the language system (phonology, morphology, syntax and
semantics), often referred to as "he grammar' or 'implicit linguistic competence*
by contemporary linguists within the generative-grammar framework. Language
is a necessary but not sufficient component of verbal communication. (Paradis,
2004, p. 240)
Thus, for our purpose, grammar is used in a broad sense to include not only the
morphology and syntactic structures (often referred to as <morphosyntax,) of a lan-
guage but also its sound system (phonetics and phonology) and how these linguistic
resources are used to make meaning when speakers/writers interact with others in
context-specific situations (pragmatics). The scope of each of these research areas
is huge. To make our task more manageable, the main focus of this book will be on
lexico-grammatical deviations commonly found among Chinese EAL learners in the
process of learning or using English (Chapters 3-7). This will be supplemented with
a chapter on contrastive phonology between (Hong Kong) Cantonese and English
(Chapter 2)； a chapter that examines how, fbr over 100 years, Chinese grammar has
been influenced by European languages (i.e., Europeanized) since the beginning of the
twentieth century (Chapter 8); and a chapter on various socio-pragmatic problems,
typically in intercultural communication contexts involving interaction between
native and Chinese speakers of English (Chapter 9). As the non-standard lexico-
grammatical and non-native pronunciation features (when using English) as well as
socio-pragmatic choices (when using Chinese) arise from contact between English
and Chinese via their speakers/writers, the problems identified in this book may be
located in the contact zone of the grammars of these two languages (see Figure 0.1).
English Chinese
Figure 0.1
The scope of Chinese-English contrastive grammar in this book
Preface
English and Chinese belong to totally unrelated language families, which is why the
two languages have very little in common. A lack of similarities between English
and Chinese helps explain the enormous learning difficulties on the part of Chinese
learners of EAL.
English and Chinese belong to two typologically different language families, and
the typological distance between them is huge. In the study of linguistic typology,
languages are classified according to their structural features and functional affinities
(i.e., similarities and differences), the goal being to describe and account fbr common-
alities and diversity in the linguistic structures and functions of the worlds languages.
English is a Germanic language within the Indo-European family. Extending the
kinship metaphor a little more, we may say that English has several cousins, of which
the most prominent are German and Dutch. Also, practically all of the Scandinavian
languages—Norwegian, Danish, and Swedish (but not Finnish)—are Germanic (see
Crystal, 1997, for more details). The typological proximity between these languages
helps explain why speakers of other Germanic languages tend to pick up English more
easily, thanks to the systemic similarities in lexis and grammar between English and
their native language. Similarly, English-speaking learners of French as an additional
language will appreciate that many French words look like English words. The reason
is that, for centuries, English has been heavily influenced by the French language.
French, however, does not belong to the Germanic family； it is a prominent member
within the Romance family, which includes other well-known European languages
such as Spanish, Italian, and Portuguese (Crystal, 1997).
The two branches of Indo-European, Germanic and Romance, have many linguis-
tic features in common. For instance, they all have a tense system, definite and indefi-
nite articles, and they all distinguish between singular nouns and plural nouns. None
of these features are shared by Chinese, which is a Sino-Tibetan language (Sinitic).
Other Sino-Tibetan languages include Tibetan and Burmese (Tibeto-Burman) and
Thai (the Tai division).2
The reason fbr going into some details of language typology here is that, fbr
Chinese learners of English, many of the EAL learning difficulties may be accounted
fbr by the notion of typological distance. In principle, the more linguistic features
shared by the two languages in question, the easier it is fbr native speakers of either
language to learn the other language. For instance, Ringbom (2007, p. 54) distin-
guishes behveen three levels of cross-linguistic similarity: (a) item level, (b) system
level, and (c) overall level. Based on second language acquisition (SLA) data involving
different language pairs, Ringbom concludes that cross-linguistic similarities such as
*item transfer tend to facilitate language learning：

2.	Although Japanese and Korean have borrowed and incorporated a large number o! Chinese lexical itenis into
their languages, they do not belong to the Sino-Tibetan family. It is widely believed that Korean and Japanese
are Altaic languages. Such a belief would make them distant cousins of Turkish, Mongolian, and Manchu.
Preface
Item transfer in comprehension is overwhelmingly positive: if cross-linguistic
similarities between items can be perceived and established, comprehension
is facilitated. Quick and effective item learning for comprehension is above all
what distinguishes the learning of a related TL [target language] from learning an
unrelated language. (Ringbom, 2007, p. 57)
Thus, for example, French learners of English will find in the tense system of French
a convenient frame of reference when they try to make sense of the English tense
system, and vice versa for English-speaking learners of French. Such convenience is
not available to Chinese learners of English, however. Owing to tremendous typo-
logical differences between Chinese and English, the two languages have rather few
linguistic features in common. These include subject-verb-object (SVO) basic word
order, verb-particle constructions such as pick up (拿起，nd qi, naa4 hei2) and put
down (放下，月暧 xiay fong3 haa6), and double-object constructions like give me
ten dollars (給我十塊錢/畀十蚊我)F All of these seem to be relatively straight-
forward for Chinese learners and users of English, suggesting that positive transfer
is taking place thanks to structural overlap between Chinese and English (Yip &
Matthews, 2007).
Compared with structural similarities, however, there are many more structural
disparities. One consequence is that native speakers of either language who want to
learn the other language tend to come across enormous acquisitional problems. This
is why Chinese learners of English tend to find it so hard to grasp, for example, the
grammatical subsystems of tense and articles in English, among otliers (see Chapters 5
and 6; see also Li, 2017, for examples of common EAL errors). Similarly, many
Westerners have tremendous difficulties mastering the tone system in Putonghua
(Mandarin) or, worse still, Cantonese, mainly because tonal differences as the basis
for differentiating lexical meanings are unknown in their languages (Li, Keung, Poon,
&Xu, 2016).
Informed essentially by insights of research on contrastive analysis (CA), error
analysis (EA), contrastive phonology (Cantonese and English), Europeanized gram-
matical features in Chinese, and intercultural pragmatics, this book highlights some
of the salient acquisitional and communication problems encountered by Chinese
learners when learning and using English (and, to a lesser extent, Chinese), with
special reference to Hong Kong Chinese learners and users of English. Through sys-
tematic comparison and contrast between the relevant parts of (standard) English
and (standard) Chinese/Cantonese grammar, it is hoped that the reader will better
appreciate why certain anomalies occur and how to overcome them. A majority of the
common learning difficulties discussed and exemplified in this book may be shown
to be caused, at least in part, by adverse influence of the learners mother tongue (i.e.,
3.	Gli shi kuai qidn, kapl ngo5 sap6 faai3 cin4 / bei2 snp6 manl ngo5.
xii
Preface
cross-linguistic influence or negative transfer), which in Hong Kong refers to spoken
Cantonese (the vernacular) and Standard Written Chinese (SWC). Similar influence,
more often adverse than conducive, may also be detected in the other direction, given
that knowledge of English tends to impact negatively on Chinese speakers' or writers'
native language due to adverse Europeanization (非良性歐lidngxing du hua/
fei5 loeng4 sing3 au5 faa3).
This book consists of nine chapters. At the end of each chapter there is a Turther
Reading* section pointing the way to accessible material on the main topics covered
in the chapter and a list of questions or activities that are useful for reviewing the
main points of the chapter. Suggested answers to these questions and activities may
found at the end of the book.
Regarding terminology, the term "Putonghua* will be used when reference is made
o the national spoken language in China. On the other hand, ‘Mandarin’ will be
used to refer to (a) the biggest "dialecf group in northern China (generally referred
to as 北方方言，‘northern dialect, as opposed to other southern ’dialects’), or (b) the
standard variety of spoken Chinese in Taiwan.
As the reader may have noticed, Chinese characters are transliterated into both
Mandarin (Putonghua) and Cantonese: the former in pinyin, the latter in the romani-
zation system devised by the Linguistic Society of Hong Kong (LSHK) called Jyutping
(Tang et al.» 2002). To cater fbr the needs of both readers who can read Chinese and
others who may find romanization more convenient, each of the linguistic examples
will be presented in Chinese characters, supplemented with inter-linear glosses, fol-
lowed by the rendition of words at the morphemic level, plus an idiomatic translation
of the example. As logographic Chinese characters may be read in either Mandarin
or Cantonese, romanization in both pinyin and Jyutping will be provided (except
fbr Cantonese-specific expressions). For highly technical, field-specific jargon in
English, the Chinese equivalents will be provided but not the romanization. Finally,
following common practice in applied linguistics research, an asterisk (*) placed at
the beginning of an expression indicates that it deviates from the norms in Standard
English, Cantonese, or SWC, while a question mark (?) at the beginning of a linguistic
example signals that it is marginally acceptable.
This book grew out of our efforts in teaching an undergraduate course entitled
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar. We would like to thank our students fbr their
feedback to an earlier draft of the manuscript prepared fbr that course. In the process
of revising the manuscript fbr publication, we have also benefited from two anony-
mous reviewers' insightful, critical, and constructive comments, as well as useful
input and instructive feedback from our colleagues Rebecca Chen, Regine Lai, and
Christy Liu. Their kind assistance is hereby gratefully acknowledged. It goes without
saying that, as co-authors, we alone are responsible fbr any inadequacies that remain.
Abbreviations
Adj	adjective
AmE	American English
ASP	aspect marker
BEI	passive marker U (be/)
BrE	British English
CA	contrastive analysis
CL	classifier
CLI	cross-linguistic influence
DISP	disposal construction marker 把(baa2/ba) or 將(zoengl/jiang)
EA	error analysis
EAL	English as an additional language
EAP	English for academic purposes
EFL	English as a foreign language
English-Ll	English as a first language
ESL	English as a second language
FL	foreign language
FN	first name (address system)
F.P.	final particle
GA	General American
HKE	Hong Kong English
IL	interlanguage
ILP	interlanguage pragmatics
IMPF	imperfective
I PA	International Phonetic Association
IVE	indigenized variety of English (cf NVE)
LI	first language
L2	second language
LSHK	Linguistic Society of Hong Kong
MSC	Modern Standard Chinese
NVE	nativized variety of English (cf. IVE)
xiv
Abbreviations
NOM	noniinalizer 的(dik5/de)/嘅(ge3)
NP	noun phrase
NNS	non-native speaker
NS	native speaker
PERF	perfective
PL	plural suffix 們(-men)
PP	prepositional phrase
RP	received pronunciation
S-P	subject-predicate structure
SLA	second language acquisition
SFP	sentence final particle
	question particle
；OV	subject-object-verb word order
SVO	subject-verb-object word order
swc	Standard Written Chinese
T-C
TL
TLN
VP
Topic-Comment structure
target language
title with last name (address system)
verb phrase
Conversation Analysis, Error Analysis,
and Cross-Linguistic Influence
Contrastive analysis (CA) and error analysis (EA)
Contrastive analysis (CA) is a language learning/teaching theory which promotes
the systematic comparison and contrast between the grammars of two or more lan-
guages, with a view to better understanding the similarities and differences between
those languages (James, 1980, 1998; Lado, 1957). CA was very popular in the 1950s
and 1960s, when it was widely believed that such information could help explain
language learners, learning difficulties and errors they make in the language-learning
process. Mother-tongue influence, technically known as 'Ll interference or ‘negative
transfer, was held to be a major source of learning difficulties (a more general and
neutral term is cross-linguistic influence'; see Kellerman, 1995). The strong version
of CA predicts that structural differences between languages will lead to learning
difliculties and errors, while structural similarities will facilitate language learning or
acquisition. Such a claim was later challenged after it was found that what CA predicts
based on contrastive differences is not always valid. Quite the contrary, it was found
that, whereas structural similarities may sometimes lead to errors, structural differ-
ences do not always give rise to learning difficulties. Notwithstanding these criti-
cisms, many scholars still believe that mother-tongue or cross-linguistic influence
(CLI) is very common and that more CA research is needed to better understand how
systematic structural similarities and differences between languages may affect the
relative ease with which second or foreign language learning takes place (Ringbom,
2007; cf. Ringbom, 1987).
In the late 1960s and early 1970s> CA gave way to error analysis (EA), another
language learning/teaching theory which holds that learner errors are rule-governed
and, as such, reflect the learners underlying "interlanguage (IL) system (Seiinker,
1972; cf. Richards, 1971, 1973, 1974). Language acquisition is thus postulated as
a process that may be represented as a continuum, with the learner progressively
approximating target language norms over a number of discrete stages. At each stage
of the learning process, although the language output generated by the IL system
is erroneous and thus substandard according to the norms of grammar, including
2
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
pronunciation, research has shown that the learners IL competence is just as rule-
governed. For instance, many Chinese EAL learners have a tendency to pronounce
words beginning with [n] (e.g.> intending to say no name) systeinatically with [1] (e.g.,
pronounced and heard as low lame). We may say that such learners under-differentiate
/n-/ and /I-/ at the syllable-initial position. While it deviates from Anglo-American
norms of pronunciation, such a rule forms part of the learners IL, which may or may
not be overtaken by the normative pronunciation in the learning process.
Like CA, EA was later shown to be inadequate not only because focusing on errors
ignored what the learner does know, but also because it overlooked the problem
of avoidance (Schachter, 1974; Schachter & Celce-Murcia, 1977). That is, when the
learners feel unsure about the correctness of certain grammatical structures or lexical
items, they may consciously avoid using them in their language output. This is espe-
cially obvious when the learners language output is assessed. Since learners avoid-
ance cannot be ruled out, the learners' underlying IL system may not be accessible to
the researcher by conducting EA.
With regard to a systematic comparison and contrast between the grammars of
jo major languages in the world—Chinese and English—relatively little has been
*one» and yet it seems intuitively clear that many of the learning difficulties and errors
commonly found among Chinese EAL learners may be accounted for at least in part
by mother-tongue (or cross-linguistic) influence. This is the main reason why the
authors decided to write this book: By analysing a list of non-standard anomalies
commonly found among Chinese EAL learners in Hong Kong with reference to the
relevant linguistic structures or functions (e.g., transitivity, passivization, tense and
aspect, determiners, topic-prominence vs. subject-prominence), we hope to be able
to shed some light on the extent to which such acquisitional problems are due to
CLI. It should be noted, however, that CLI or transfer may not be the only cause of
learner errors (Kellerman, 1995). As we will try to make clear in this book, many
learning difficulties and non-standard grammatical features are triggered by some
combination ofboth LI- and L2-related factors. Unfortunately, it is not always easy to
isolate lhe two sets of factors unambiguously. Nevertheless, in our analysis of common
errors, we will make a case for mother-tongue or CLI when the deviant/erroneous
grammatical structure coincides, wholly or partly, with the correct, normative gram-
matical structure in the learners' LI which, in the case of Hong Kong, corresponds
with spoken (vernacular) Cantonese and Standard Written Chinese (SWC).
Error vs. mistake
Before moving on, we need to make an important distinction between two terms in
SLA (second language acquisition) research: 'mistake and error' While the ordinary
Conversation Analysis, Error Analysis, and Cross-Linguistic Influence
3
usages of these two terms are more or less synonymous, in SLA research they have
rather different meanings. When a patterned deviation is characterized as a mistake.
we mean that it is most likely a performance problem, an oversight which may be
due to carelessness and/or fatigue. In other words, a mistake is deviation that the
speaker/writer is capable of self-correcting if his or her attention is drawn to it explic-
itly. On the other hand, when a deviation is characterized as an error, we mean it is a
competence problem, a rule-governed anomaly that reflects the learners underlying
substandard IL system. Unlike a mistake, therefore, an error is an anomaly which the
learner cannot self-correct even if his or her attention is drawn to it explicitly, for he
or she has no awareness of it being a problem.
Cross-linguistic influence: Positive transfer and negative transfer
Research in SLA has shown that knowledge of one or more previously acquired
languages tends to have some influence on the learners competence and performance
in the target language. Tliis is generally referred to as transference (also known as
CLI). If the outcome of transference is positive (i.e., target language norms are
acquired with no errors involved), this is known as "positive transfer For instance,
a sound knowledge of Chinese characters tends to enable Chinese learners of Japanese
to be more successful in their learning of kanji (漢字)in Japanese, compared with
European (e.g.» French, German, or Spanish) learners who have no prior knowledge
of written Chinese. In contrast, compared with Chinese learners, French learners
of English tend to have an advantage thanks to the large number of cognates—
words which are spelled identically or are similar in spelling, pronunciation, and/or
meaning. Compare, for example, words like courage, garage, international, history-
histoire, hospital-hopital, and many other words ending with the same affix such as
combine-combiner^ recycle-recycler (verb); civilisation, revolution-revolution (noun).
No such advantage is available to Chinese learners of English if they have no knowl-
edge of French or any other European language.
Linguistically, transfer in the process of learning an additional language may be
positive or negative. However, compared with negative transfer, positive transfer
tends to be less visible. This is why the study of CLI as a branch of SLA research tends
to focus on negative transfer. For instance, it has been shown that Chinese learners of
English have a strong tendency to topicalize the subject in the sentence-initial posi-
tion, even though the same person or thing is referred to by a subject pronoun in the
following clause. Below are a few typical examples:
1.	? According to Time Chee-Hwe he said that $2 billion would be set aside
for education reforms.
(cf. According to Tung Chee-Hwa, $2 billion would be ...)
4
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
2.	? Based on the book, it describes two ways to solve the problem.
(cE Based on the book, there are two ways to solve the problem.)
3.	? In • reliable report, U says that 300 cases have been reported to the police.
(cf. In a reliable report, 300 cases have been ...)
Strictly speaking, (1)-(3) are not so much ungrammatical as stylistically clumsy;
they tend to give their listener/reader a poor impression of the speaker/writer.
Since the underlined segments are co-referential (i.e., have the same referent by
referring to the same person or thing), the topicalization is unnecessary (compare
the normative version with unnecessary topicalization removed； see Chapter 7 for
more details).
Similarly, in their corpus consisting of first- and second-year university students,
EAL writing output, A. Y. W. Chan, Kwan, and Li (2003, p. 107) found that an inde-
pendent clause is often misused as the subject of a sentence. For example：
4.	"Szioopy is leaving makes us all very happy.
5.	*She was enger to quit embarrassed her boss.
6.	*He objected 1。your plan was totally unreasonable.
That (4)-(6) are in part a result of mother-tongue influence is evidenced by their
direct translation into Chinese in (4a)-(6a), where the corresponding underlined
clauses are perfectly acceptable：
4.	a.史諾比要離開讓我們非常高興。
Shinuobi ydo Hkai rang wdmen feichang gaoxing
Snoopy will leave make us very happy
'That Snoopy is leaving makes us very happy?
5.	a.她堅決要辭職讓老堅感到尷尬。
la jianjue yao cizhi rang laoban gandao ganga
she determined will resign make boss feel embarrassed
'That she was determined to resign made her boss feel embarrassed?
6.	a.他反對你的計劃是完全不合理的。
ta fandui rude jihua sht wanqudn biiheli de
he object your plan be completely unreasonable F.P.
*That he objected to your plan is completely unreasonable?
One way to help Chinese learners of English overcome such adverse influence or
negative transfer is to raise their consciousness of such structural problems by going
through self-correction procedures step by step (Li & Chan, 1999, 2001； cf. Chan,
2006c). Instruction to teachers and self-correction materials for learners showing
how this consciousness-raising approach works with regard to 13 high-frequency
errors may be retrieved from the following website (Li, Chan, & Kwan, 2002; see also
Chan, 2006c): http://personaLcityu.edu.hk/~encrproj/eiror_types.htn】.
Conversation Analysis, Error Analysis, and Cross-Linguistic Influence
5
English and Chinese: Between standard and local varieties
The terms 'English' and 'Chinese'(中文，zhongwen/zungl man4) are ambiguous,
for they give us the impression that we are dealing only with two languages. This
false impression is no doubt reinforced by ordinary questions such as 'Do you speak
English?* / '你講中文嗎? M / '你識講中文嗎？'.2 Yet students of English or Chinese
will realize that there is a great deal of diversity behind the general labels 'English' and
'Chinese： Consider the kinds of modifier that may be placed before them. It is well
known, for example, that speakers of British English, American English, and Australian
English have distinctive accents and often use different vocabulary items to refer to
the same things. The following are some examples of lexical and spelling differences:
British English lorry / lift / petrol / storey / plough / cheque / grey / ...
(BrE)
American English truck / elevator / gas / story / plow / check / gray /...
(AmE)
Contrastive examples such as these can easily be multiplied? To a lesser extent,
what is true of lexical and spelling differences may also be said of grammar. In any
case, it is clear that grammatical norms are not identical across different English vari-
eties. Thus in British English (BrE), a well-known grammatical rule stipulates that the
present perfect tense should never be used in the presence of the words ago, yesterday^
or any other time adverbials referring to the past. Similarly, in BrE, the word already
collocates as a rule with the present perfect but not with the simple past. Thus the
following sentences
He has eaten the cake yesterday. He ate the cake already.
are considered ill-formed according to standard BrE grammar. However, as is noted
by Milroy (1992, pp. 7-8), these rules are increasingly "flouted1 by native speakers of
English in Great Britain, so that it is not uncommon to hear (though less often, read)
sentences such as:
He's done it two days ago.	I've seen him last year.
1.	Ni jiangzhongwhx mdVNci5gong3 zungl man2 maa31 ('Do you speak Chinese?*).
2.	Nei5 sikl gong2 zimgl nian2 mn3? ('Do you speak Chinese?').
3.	Many more examples may be found, for example, in Hou (1992, pp. 132-138), who presents 10 systematic
differences (BrE-AniE) as follows： (i) -ourl-or (e.g.» colour!color), (ii) -re/-er (e.g., litre/liter)； (iii) past tense
forms of verbs ending in -el or -al (e.g., levelled/leveled； equalled/equaled); (iv) -ce/-se (e.g., defence/defense);
(v) -oguehog (e.g., catalogue/catalog); (vi) -granmi/-gram (e.g , programme!program); (vii) -ette/-et (e.g., ome-
lette/omelet); (viii) ~xion/-ction (e.g., injlexioti/inflection); (ix) -ae- or -oc-/-c (e.g.. encyclopaedia/encyclopedia;
fttattoeuvreltn(inetiver)\ (x) -ise/^ize (e.g., recognise!recogtiize).
6
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
By contrast, the collocational restriction bearing on the adverb already and the
simple past mentioned above is seldom followed in American English (AmE). Indeed,
it is more common to hear Americans say CI finished already' rather than Tve already
finished： It is therefore not without reason that, according to one netizen, the Irish
playwright George Bernard Shaw (1856-1950) was quoted as saying 'England and
America are two countries separated by the same language?
The above examples have been drawn from countries where English is considered
a standard language, suggesting that norms of grammatical correctness may not be
the same across the continents. For our purpose in this book, we will follow Trudgill
and Hannahs (1994) definition of Standard English as follows:
Standard English [is] the variety of the English language which is normally
employed in writing and normally spoken by educated* speakers of the language.
It is also, of course, the variety of English that students of English as a Foreign
or Second Language (EFL/ESL) are taught when receiving formal instruction.
The term Standard English refers to grammar and vocabulary (dialect) but not to
pronunciation (accent). (Trudgill & Hannah, 1994, p. 1; also cited in Widdowson,
2003, p. 44)
Following the spread of English as a world language as a result of worldwide
influence of the US since the end of the Second World War, especially through the
mass media, English has come to be used as a second or foreign language in many
countries. In the former British colonies India and Singapore, for example, where
English is one of the official languages, English is used as a lingua franca by many
Indians and Singaporeans of distinct ethnic origins. Over time, English has devel-
oped its own norms distinct from Standard English in these countries at practically
all levels—from pronunciation and vocabulary to grammar and the "rules of speaking
(e.g., making a request, responding to a compliment; see Chapter 9). In the past, such
deviations from Standard English were systematically dismissed as erroneous, sub-
standard features which should be discouraged and corrected. Increasingly, however,
partly in acknowledgement of the geographical and functional diffusion of such
varieties of English as well as the tremendous number of speakers involved, many
scholars feel that their legitimacy as indigenized or new varieties of English (IVEs/
NVEs) should be recognized. Hence terms such as 'Indian English, and "Singapore
English1 have gradually lost their derogatory connotations and are more and more
widely accepted. One direct consequence of this development is that the word
English has been pluralized as Englishes. For example, since the 1990s, a well-known *
4.	A similar saying has been attributed to diflerent writers depending on the sources (mainly Oscar Wilde
and George Bernard Shaw). The citation above was adapted from the website 'English Language & Usage
Stack Exchange* Retrieved from http://cnglish.stackexchange.com/questions/74737/what-is-the-origin-of-
thc-phrase-two-nations-divided-by-a-common-language.
Conversation Analysis, Error Analysis, and Cross-Linguistic Influence
international journal. World Englishes, has been devoted to the description and study
of IVEs as a result of contact with their "parent language, English. One interesting
question is whether or not there exists a Hong Kong variety of English (HKE), and if
so, what its norms of reference are (see, e.g., Bolton, 2000, 2003; cf. Li, 2000, 2007).
The term Chinese (中文，zhongwen/zungl nian4) is no less ambiguous. It is well
known that, in mainland China, the accent changes from village to village, especially
when villages are separated by natural boundaries such as mountains and big rivers.
In general, the farther one travels away from ones native village or birthplace, the more
progressively difficult oral communication becomes in ones own home dialect owing
to tremendous differences in 方言(fangyan/fongl jin4). Since many Hongkongers
originate from different parts of the Mainland, they bring with them their unique
accents which may not be comprehensible to native speakers of Cantonese in the
territory. Indeed, communication difficulties were often dramatized* sometimes
with exaggeration, in many local films produced in the 1960s, popularly known
as 粵語長片jyu2 coeng4 pin2/Yueyu chdngpidn). What is generally known
as Cantonese	gudngddnghud/gwong2 dungl waa2) belongs to the 粵(Yue)
dialect group; it is one of many subdialects (e.g.» 四邑，Szeyap;台山 , Ibishan) spoken
in the provinces Guangdong and Guangxi. There are altogether seven major dialect
groups, each with considerable variation (for more details, see Chen, 1999; Norman,
1988; Ramsey, 1987). Tlie tremendous interdialectal differences outlined above help
explain the need for a national language, which used to be called 國 語(guoyil/gwok3
jyu5)—generally known in the Western world as Mandarin—and which was redes-
ignated as 普通話(putonghua/pou2 tongl waa2, meaning common language) in
the 1950s. As the national language of New China, Putonghua is essentially based
on the phonology of the variety spoken in Beijing, while exemplary literature written
in 白話｛bdihua/baak6 waa2) since the turn of the twentieth century constitutes the
model of its vocabulary and grammar (Chen, 1999, p. 24). However, the bounda-
ries between different Chinese varieties, especially at the lexical level, are far from
clear-cut.
Unlike the vernacular (i.e., the local spoken dialect or language variety)* which
presents enormous difficulties for intra-ethnic communication across different
regions in mainland China, written Chinese characters have remained relatively
stable since the Han dynasty (206 BCE-CE 220). Standard written Chinese, as it
has come to be called, is among the most treasured heritages of Chinese civiliza-
tion. Tliere is a good reason for that. With the help of contextual information, much
of the stock of Chinese characters can be understood by people from Heilongjiang
to Hainan (province), or from Shanghai to Sichuan, despite the fact that they are
pronounced very differently in the local Han Chinese dialects. This helps explain a
popular belief that; in general, what cannot be communicated orally can be conveyed
in print. In this sense, it is often claimed that SWC serves to unite the Han Chinese
8
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
peoples throughout the world. In reality, however, this unifying function of Chinese
characters is sometimes exaggerated, as it fails to take into account the significant dif-
ferences in the two writing systems across the Strait of Taiwan since the promulgation
of the simplified characters by the Chinese government in the mid-1950s (fbr more
details, see Lee & Li, 2013; Li, 2006, 2017; Li & Lee, 2004).
Thus the answer to the question *What is Chinese?* may be rather different
depending on the locality. In the case of Hong Kong, the term Chinese may be further
specified according to the spoken and written media. Whereas the vernacular is the
variety known as Cantonese in the sense described above, the written medium may
be described as SWC, which varies from place to place. For example, there exist
considerable lexico-grammatical differences in the Chinese language of Taiwan,
Hong Kong, and Singapore, as compared with the norms in mainland China.
For our purposes in this book, the term Chinese will be used in its broad sense
to refer to Han Chinese varieties in general, covering Putonghua as well as regional
'ialects. Occasionally, reference will be made to its narrow sense, viz. Putonghua
dandarin) and SWC. This will be clearly indicated. Although dialects or new varie-
es are no less important as carriers of their speakers local/regional identities, in this
oook we will focus on the grammars of the two written varieties： Standard Chinese
and Standard English (primarily BrE and AmE)» with special reference to the use of
English tor Academic Purposes (EAP).
Synopsis of the book
The book is divided into nine chapters. Chapter 1 outlines the background to
research on CA and EA and how they relate to the key concepts of CLI and transfer-
ence (positive transfer vs. negative transfer). Chapter 2 gives an overview of the key
features involved in Cantonese-English contrastive phonology, which helps account
fbr some of the main pronunciation problems encountered by Cantonese learners of
English. Chapter 3 is devoted to transitivity, showing how the divergence of transitiv-
ity patterns in Chinese and English verbs may lead to frequent EAL errors concerning
the non-standard use of verbs. Chapter 4 examines the typical circumstances under
which the English passive is used and why the passive in Chinese—typically using the
passive marker U (bei)—may or may not be appropriate. Such a contrastive differ-
ence. amon^ others, helps explain frequent misuse of the English passive by Chinese
EAL learners and users. Chapter 5 explains the similarities and diflerences between
two closelv related concepts: tense and aspect. Standard English has both tense and
aspect? Since tense does not exist as a gram mat ical category in Standard Chinese or
5.	Rr mstaiwe. consider the pertective aspect in simple past tense (e.g„ he amir), as opposed to the progressive
aspect in past continuous tense (e.g.. he wa$ coming).
Conversation Analysis, Error Analysis, and Cross-Linguistic Influence
9
other Chinese dialects like Cantonese, Chinese EAL learners tend to experience a
lot of tense-related problems and difficulties in the learning process. Aspect, being
semantically akin to but conceptually distinct from tense, exists in both Chinese and
English. We will illustrate the functions and meanings of aspect markers in Mandarin
Chinese and demonstrate how knowledge of Chinese aspect may help account for
some tense-related common errors among Chinese EAL learners and users.
Chapter 6 gives an overview of the contrastive usage differences associated with
the use of determiners in Chinese and English. A noun phrase in English may include
an article or a demonstrative pronoun, among other determiners. The typical func-
tions of articles in English, and how they are embedded in a broader system of deter-
miners, will be discussed and exemplified. Since articles do not exist as a grammatical
category in Chinese, it is understandable that in general EAL learners find English
articles difficult to master. Demonstratives exist in both Chinese and English, but
they function somewhat differently. Apart from explaining the nature of the learning
difficulties, the chapter will provide useful tips on how to avoid making common
errors involving the misuse of articles. Chapter 7 explains why, whereas English is
syntactically characterized as a subject-prominent language, Chinese is more appro-
priately called a topic-prominent language. Topic-prominence in Chinese helps
explain the tendency for Chinese EAL learners to compose English sentences using
a topic-comment (T-C) structure, resulting in non-standard features. Chapter 8 will
examine language contact phenomena between Chinese and English since the 1900s
and discuss some of the high-frequency problems associated with Europeanized lin-
guistic features (歐f匕，or Europeanization) hi Modern Written Chinese. In the last
chapter, Chapter 9, we will exemplify some of the common socio-pragmatic prob-
lems that Chinese learners and users of English are likely to encounter in intercul-
tural communication contexts, for example, when interacting with native speakers
of English.
Questions and activities
1.	What is meant by Standard Chinese and Standard English? Why do we need
a standard variety? Which variety of Chinese/English was selected to be the
standard? How were these varieties selected? By whom?
2.	Is Cantonese a standard or non-standard variety? Does Cantonese have
grammar? If so, what are some of the elements of Cantonese grammar that you
have come across?
3.	Which variety of English predominates in Hong Kong? Specify your answer
with regard to the domains of government, education, business, law, and media
(electronic and print).
10
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
4.	What is meant by ^lother-tongue influence? How does it differ from transfer-
ence? What other terms are used by SLA scholars to refer to the outcomes of
transference? Can you illustrate your answer with one or two examples in your
EAL language experience?
Further reading
Lado (1957) is a classic work written by the originator of the Contrastive Analysis
Hypothesis. For a systematic introduction to CA, see Janies (1980). Littlewood (1984)
provides an overview of various issues and key concepts in the field of SLA, includ-
ing CA, EA> and IL that were briefly outlined and discussed above. More advanced
students may wish to consult Richards (1971, 1973, 1974), who provides many
instructive examples to illustrate CA, EA, and IL from a theoretical perspective.
For EAL errors or mistakes commonly found among Chinese learners and useful
strategies fbr correcting them, see practical works by Bunton (1989), Edge (1989),
Newbrook (1991), Norrish (1983), Webster and Lam (1991), and Yiu (1992). A more
recent, if more technical, introduction to the study of SLA is Gass and Seiinker (2008).
Seargeant (2012) and Seargeant and Swann (2012) are highly accessible introduc-
tory volumes on the historical background to the global spread of English as well as
the critical (including ethical) issues arising. On linguistic variation within Greater
China, including mainland China, Taiwan, and Hong Kong, see Li (2006, 2015).
2
Cantonese-English Contrastive Phonology
Background
Since the colonial era, English has been taught and learned in Hong Kong from
preschool to tertiary level. Through education, Cantonese-dominant Hongkongers
grow up and become bilingual in English. Whether English is learned under second-
language (L2) or foreign-language (FL) conditions (Li, 2017), there are plenty of EAL
learning difficulties to overcome, including non-native pronunciation features that
may give rise to intelligibility problems or misunderstanding. For instance, English
words that begin with the letter 'n： as in no, namey and night, tend to be pronounced
with an T making them sound like /oiv, lame, and light. What is the status of such
deviations from native (e.g.» British, American, or Australian) English pronuncia-
tion? Should they be seen as 'errors* through teacher feedback until they get corrected
(Li, 2000)? Or, should they be regarded as normal, as part of a new variety of English,
'Hong Kong English' (HKE)? There are no simple answers to these questions (see Li,
2007, for some of the critical issues involved).
In this chapter, apart from introducing the basics in articulatory phonetics and
contrastive features of the phonological systems in Cantonese and English, we will
draw on Tony Hungs (2002) empirical insights, with a view to elucidating the phono-
logical system of HKE, as reflected in educated Chinese Hongkongers English pro-
nunciation. Where appropriate, we will also discuss some of the learning difficulties
commonly encountered by learners of Cantonese from an English-Ll background.
Transcription vs. transliteration (romanization)
Since discussion in phonetics and phonology necessitates the use of written symbols
to represent speech sounds in print, various systems of phonetic symbols have
been proposed. The most commonly accepted system is known as the International
Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) (International Phonetic Association, 2015), which will be
used in this book. However, many of the IPA symbols are obscure to laypersons
(many IPA symbols originate from Modern Greek letters). In addition, there are
12
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
practical typographical difficulties involved when using phonetic symbols in writing
or word processing on the keyboard. Largely fbr these practical reasons, an alterna-
tive romanization or transliteration system is often preferred, especially fbr language
teaching purposes (e.g., pinyin in piltdnghua). In a romanization or transliteration
system, speech sounds of a given language are represented only by a combination of
letters of the English alphabet. For instance, the Cantonese word gweilo is commonly
used in English newspapers in Hong Kong in reference to 鬼佬(gwai2 lou2, liter-
ally ghost guy'; more idiomatically 'foreign devif). In the case of tone languages like
Cantonese and Putonghua, sometimes additional tone markers known as 'diacritics'
are added on top of the vowel (e.g.» according to the Yale System, in a word like gwdi
lou, the diacritic above the letters a and o symbolizes 'rising intonation).
Tliere have been several competing transliteration systems to represent Cantonese
in print. Until recently, the Yale System was the dominant system used in both
Cantonese course books and academic discussions. In late 1993, the Linguistic Society
of Hong Kong (LSHK) came up with its own transliteration system, called Jyutping,
which has at least two advantages over the Yale System. First, the tone levels are indi-
cated by numbers 1 to 6,1 which is more user-friendly when word-processing (using
a computer or mobile device) compared with marking tone contours using diacritics
in Yale. Secondly, the LSHK system differs only minimally from I PA, which makes it
easier to remember. Thus the Cantonese words 飲茶，點心 and 韓語 are transliter-
ated as jam2 caa4. dini2 sanil, and hon4 jyu5y respectively (for details of the LSHK
Cantonese transliteration system, see Tang et al., 2002). It should be noted, however,
that the same symbol does not necessarily represent the same sound in Jyutping and
the IPA systems. For example, 'd' in the IPA system is a symbol fbr a voiced alveolar
stop, while'd' in the Jyutping system represents a (voiceless) unaspirated alveolar stop.
In fact, this applies to other symbols such as and 'g； as Cantonese has no voiced
stops (see below). In this chapter, all references to English pronunciation features are
based on General American (GA, commonly heard in the US, e.g., on CNN), which
is somewhat different from Received Pronunciation (RR also known as 'The Queens
English, or 'BBC English* in the UK). The differences are mainly found in their vowel
inventories (see, e.g., Rogers, 2000). We will use IPA throughout, supplemented
with Jyutping in footnotes where appropriate, to better demonstrate the differences
between the sound inventories between English and Cantonese.
Cantonese and English sound inventories: An overview
The phonemes of a language consist of vowels (元音)and consonants (輔音).Vowels
are sounds that are produced by vibrating the vocal cords with little obstruction of
the airstream at any point along the vocal tract. They are, therefore, usually loud. The
1.	For instance, sil (詩),si2 (史),si3 (試),#4 (時)，必(市),(P).
Cantonese-English Contrastive Phonology
13
first sounds in words like apple and eagle are obvious examples. Consonants, on the
other hand, usually involve some obstruction of the airstream during production.
They may involve the vibration of the vocal cords. Because of the obstruction of the
airstream, they are usually less loud than the vowels. Examples are the first sounds in
the words fit and pot.
To people who have had no training in linguistics, it may seem difficult to describe
what a speech sound is: How can one describe the difference between a [t] sound,
as in tap, and a [k] sound, as in cap? In fact, speech sounds in any language, both
consonants and vowels, can be described in systematic ways. Consonants are usually
defined using three features: (i) place of articulation, (ii) manner of articulation,
and (iii) voicing. Vowels can be described using another set of features： (i) height,
(ii) backness, and (iii) roundedness.
Consonants
Place of articulation
The vocal tract consists of both the oral and nasal cavities. The vocal tract can be
thought of as a flute： By placing fingers upon different holes on a flute, different
sounds are produced. Different linguistic sounds are produced by obstructing the
airstream at different locations of the vocal tract. Unlike playing the flute, however,
in which case we would use our fingers, articulating speech sounds involves obstruct-
ing the airstream using different parts of the tongue and other muscles along the
vocal tract. The place of articulation refers to the place where the obstruction occurs
(i.e., the opening is the narrowest or closed). Figure 2.1 shows the different places of
articulation that are involved in the production of sounds in Cantonese and English.
1.	Vocal cords
2.	Lips
3.	Teeth
4.	Alveolar ridge
5.	Tongue (tip)
6.	Hard palate
7.	Velum (soft palate)
8.	Tongue (root)
9.	Pharynx
10.	Nasal cavity
11.	Oral cavity
Figure 2.1
Tlie vocal organs (adapted from place of articulation
[active and passive]')2
2.	© Rohieb, retrieved from https://uploadwikimedia.org/wikipedi3/con】mons/7/75/PKces_ofLarticul3tion.svg
used under Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-sa/3.0/decd.en).
14
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
The term 'bilabial' describes sounds that are produced by obstructing the airstream
using the two lips (bi = ctwo' labial = lips'). Examples of bilabial sounds are [m]> [b],
and [p]. Tabio-dentaF refers to sounds that are produced using the lower lip and the
upper front teeth. Examples are [f] and [v]. 'Dental' or 'interdental' refers to the W
sounds that are produced by putting the tongue in between the upper and the lower
front teeth. Examples are [0], as in thank, and [3], as in that. Going into the oral
cavity, the first place of articulation that we encounter is the alveolar ridge. It is the
'bump' located right behind the upper front teeth. Alveolar sounds such as [s] and
[t] are produced by obstructing the airstream at the alveolar ridge with the tip of
the tongue. Some sounds are produced slightly behind the alveolar ridge. They are
referred to as post-alveolar sounds. Examples are [J] as in show and [tj] as in chin.
Further back is the hard palate. Sounds produced by narrowing the opening at the
hard palate are called palatal sounds. An example is [j], as in yes. Velar sounds are
'hose that are produced at the velum, which is behind the hard palate. Examples
re [k] (e.g.» keep) and [i)] (e.g., wing). Finally, sounds can be produced at the glottis,
/hich is near the root of the tongue. In English and Cantonese, [h] is the only glottal
sound, as in house and 好[hou].3
Manner of articulation
It should be clear that using different places of articulation will result in different
sounds. However, [m] and [p], for example, are both bilabial according to place
of articulation, but they obviously sound different. How can we distinguish them?
There is thus a need to specify the manner of articulation. Manner of articulation
describes how the airstream is obstructed, such as whether it is partly or completely
obstructed, and where the airstream passes through after leaving the lungs. There are
six major manners of articulation: (i) stops (or plosives), (ii) fricatives, (iii) affricates,
(iv) nasals, (v) approximants, and (vi) lateral approximants.
Stops (or plosives)(塞音)refer to sounds that involve a complete obstruction of
the airstream. Take [p] as an example. One will not be able to produce [p] without
closing the lips completely to block the air from coming out of the mouth. The lips
will eventually open and allow the air to come out so that the speaker can produce the
next sound in the word (consider the production of the word pay).
Fricatives are produced by creating a narrow opening at the place of articulation to
allow the air to flow out of the oral cavity. Because the opening is too small, it creates
a turbulence, which results in a high-frequency sound. For instance, [s] is a fricative
produced at the alveolar ridge, and [f] is a fricative produced using the upper front
teeth and the lower lip (i.e., labio-dental). Affricates (塞擦音)are a combination of
a stop and a fricative, as evidenced in their 1PA symbols. The first sound in chin, fbr
3.	hou2
Cantonese-English Contrastive Phonology
15
example, is produced by stopping the airstream at the alveolar ridge, and then releas-
ing it through a small opening at the post-alveolar region (thus the IPA symbol [tj]).
Nasals are distinct from other manners of articulation, in that the air flows out
primarily through the nasal cavity. That is why we have difficulty producing [m]» [n],
and [ij] when we have a stuffy nose, because air cannot flow through the nasal cavity.
The last manner of articulation is called approximants. Although approximants are
classified as consonants, they are similar to vowels in that they involve little obstruc-
tion of the airstream and thus are comparatively louder than consonants produced by
other manners of articulation. Examples are [j] (as inges) and [w] (as in win). There
is another kind of approximant known as lateral approximants. They are so named
because the airstream flows on the sides of the tongue during their production. The
only lateral approximant in English and Cantonese is [I] (as in look).
Voicing
The last feature that defines a consonant is voicing. A sound is voiced (濁音)when its
production involves the vibration of the vocal cords. As mentioned above, all vowels
are voiced. Consonants, on the other hand, can be either voiced or voiceless (清音).
Voicing can be illustrated using the sounds [s] and [z]. By putting our hands
around our voice box (Adams apple), and uttering the sound [z] until we are out of
breath, our hand should be able to feel the vibration while hearing a hissing sound
/zzzzzzz/. That sound, the voiced [z] sound from our voice box, is caused by the vibra-
tion of the vocal folds. Then, if the same procedure is followed to utter the sound [s],
we should feel the difference: There should be no vibration in the voice box.
Theoretically speaking, one should also find the same difference in vibration
between other voiced/voiceless pairs, such as [p] and [b]. However, because of their
short duration, the difference is not easy to detect. One way of contrasting [p] and [b]
is by putting them in between vowels, such as [apa] and [aba]. For [apa], one should
feel a very brief period of time between the two vowels, during which there is no
vibration of the vocal cords. In contrast, [aba] will produce continuous vibrations.
In Table 2.1 where American and British English consonants are shown, the IPA
symbol on the left in each cell is voiceless, and the one on the right is voiced. Nasals,
lateral approximants, and approximants are naturally voiced, so no such distinction
is shown in the table for these categories. Table 2.2 shows the consonants that are
present in Cantonese. Note that there is no voicing contrast in stops, fricatives, and
affricates. Instead of voicing, Cantonese makes use of aspiration (eg, [p"a]爬** and
[pa]爸5 are two different words). Aspiration is indicated by the superscript after
[p]. We will come back to this in the later sections. * *
4.	paa4
5.	baa /
16
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
Table 2.1
American/British English consonants
Manner of articulation	Place of articulation							
	Bilabial	Labio- dental	Dental	Alveolar	Post- alveolar	Palatal	Velar	Glottal
Stop/plosive	P b			t d			k g	
Affricate					tj d3			
Nasal	m			n			D	
Fricative		f V	6 S	s z	J 5			h h
Approximant				j		j	w	
Lateral Approximant				I				
Note: From Handbook of the IP A, by P. Ladefbged, 2009.
Fable 2.2
Cantonese consonants
Manner of articulation				Place of articulation					
	Bilabial	Labio- dental	Dental	Alveolar	Post- alveolar	Palatal	Velar	Labio- velar	Glottal
Plosive	p ph		t th				k kh	kw kwh	
Affricate				ts tsh					
Nasal	m		n				y		
Fricative		f		s					h
Approximant						j		w	
Lateral Approximant			1						
Note: From Handbook of the I PA. by E. Zee, 2009.
Vowels
Height
We now turn to another set of sounds: vowels. As mentioned, vowels can also be
described with three features： height, backness, and roundedness. The first two fea-
tures are used to indicate the location of the tongue. The vowel [i], as in beat, is a high
vowel, because the tongue is raised when it is produced. The vowel [e] (as in the word
姐[dzc]6 in Cantonese or bet in English) is a mid-low vowel, because its production
involves the lowering of both the tongue and the jaw. If one reads aloud [i] and [e]
repeatedly, one should feel the raising and lowering of the jaw.
6.	zc2
Cantonese-English Contrastive Phonology
Backiiess
As explained, [i] is a high vowel. It is also a front vowel when backness is concerned.
When producing [i], the front part of the tongue is located in the front part of the
oral cavity, somewhere right behind the alveolar ridge. On the other hand, [u], as in
boot, is a back vowel with the same height (i.e., a high back vowel). If one reads aloud
[i]	and [u] repeatedly, one should feel that the tongue mass is moving back and forth.
Roundedness
Finally, vowels with the same height and backness may be perceived differently if they
are different in roundedness. Consider the vowel [i]. It is produced by spreading the
lips, as in the Cantonese word 衣(/ji/).7 In Cantonese, there is a rounded counterpart
of [i], which is represented by [y]. It is the vowel found in the word 於(/jy/).8 Again,
one can see that these two sounds only differ by roundedness by saying them aloud
repeatedly. The inventories of vowels in (American) English and in Cantonese are
listed in Figures 2.2 and 2.3 respectively. In these figures, each of the dots symbolizes
the place of articulation of a vowel. If a symbol is placed on the left of the dot (e.g.,
[i], [e], and [a]), the vowel is unrounded. But if a symbol is placed on the right of the
dot (e.g., [u], [o], and [y]), the vowel is rounded. As shown in Figure 2.3> there are
two high front vowels in Cantonese： unrounded [i] and rounded [y].
Figure 2.2
American English vowels. From Handbook
of the IPA> by P. Ladefbged, 2009.
Figure 2.3
Cantonese vowels. From Handbook of the
IPAy by E. Zee» 2009.
Tlie vowels introduced so far are monophthongs (單元音).While producing these
monophthongs, the tongue and the lips should remain in the same position, because
there is no change in the quality of the vowel. Diphthongs (雙元音)，on the other
hand, involve a change in quality' (Ladefoged, 2001, p. 272). That is, the tongue and/
or the lips need to 'move' while producing the vowel. For example, the English word
buy [bai] involves a diphthong, in which the tongue moves from a low back position
7.	jil
8.	jytd
18
Chinese^English Contrastive Grammar

to a high front position. An example of a Cantonese word that consists of a diphthong
would be 包[bao].9
Phonemes (音素)and allophones (同位音位)
Up to now, we have been concerned with the study of articulatory phonetics, which
addresses the question of how specific speech sounds of a language are produced.
Related to this is another question: How do we know whether a particular phoneme
(vowel or consonant) is present in a language? The answer to this question involves a
discovery procedure, which is crucial in the study of phonology.
When two speech sounds X and Y are said to be phonemes of a language Z,
it means that they may be found in the pronunciation of individual words of language
Z to differentiate between word meanings. This may be demonstrated through a dis-
covery procedure known as "minimal pair'(最小音對/最小對立體).According to
Duanmu (2007, p. 10), a minimal pair 'is a pair of words that are identical in pro-
nunciation except fbr one sound* That is, any two words with distinctive meanings
and which differ by only one segment of their phonetic shapes with regard to the
same position will produce two phonemes. Thus, by comparing bit [bit] with pit [pit]
(but not bit [bit] with tip [tip])，we can show that /b/ and /p/ belong to the stock of
phonemes in English. This may be confirmed, fbr example, by other minimal pairs
such as tab [t<eb] and [tasp], which further suggest that the opposition between
/b/ and /p/ in English may occur at the beginning as well as the end of a syllable (i.e.,
at both the syllable-initial and syllable-final positions). Further confirmation may be
obtained by still other minimal pairs, such as book [bok] and cook [kok]; rob [ra:b]
and rot [ra：t]; pub [gAb] and rub [rAb]; cup [kAp] and cut [kAt], etc. Through similar
contrasts between minimal pairs in Cantonese, its phonemes may also be discovered
and worked out accordingly.
Deviations ofEAL from Standard English
Now we have seen the features used to describe consonants and vowels in any lan-
guage. We can now discuss the deviations of EAL pronunciation with regard to the
norms of native varieties of English using these features. Tlie deviations can be classi-
fied into three categories of difficulty arising from:
(i)	the segmental differences between Cantonese and English,
(ii)	the differences in the restrictions oflocations where a sound can occur in
a syllable, and
(jjj) the difference in syllable structure between Cantonese and English.
9.	baaul
Cantonese-English Contrastive Phonology
19
Segmental differences between Cantonese and English: Sounds that do not
exist in Cantonese
Tliere are differences and similarities between the speech sounds used in Cantonese
and English. It has been argued that these differences can account for most of the
deviations made by Cantonese EAL speakers while learning English, as well as pro-
nunciation difficulties encountered by learners of Cantonese from an English-Ll
background. We will discuss these differences in some detail, focusing on those that
may give rise to intelligibility problems.
Voiced and voiceless consonants
One of the major differences between English and Cantonese is that English uses
voicing contrastively (含對 比，性),but Cantonese does not. This means that, in English,
if we only change the voicing property of a sound when it is used within a word, the
meaning of the word will be changed. Consider a minimal pair like sip [sip] vs. zip
[zip]. The only difference between these two words is the initial consonant: /s/ vs. /z/.
Both /s/ and /z/ have the same place and manner of articulation; the only difference
is voicing: /s/ is voiceless, while /z/ is voiced. This distinction is particularly difficult
for native Cantonese speakers to perceive and produce, partly because voicing is not
a distinctive feature in Cantonese consonants (i.e., in Cantonese, voicing is not used
to distinguish behveen word meanings). Cantonese speakers often replace voiced
consonants in English (i.e., /b, d, g, v, z, z, dz/) with their voiceless counterparts, as in
examples (1)-(5):
(1)	/b/
e.g., modelling the pronunciation of big [big] on Cantonese unaspirated
plosive [p] (compare:碧[pik])10 11
(2)	/d/
e.g., modelling the pronunciation of Dick [dik] on Cantonese unaspirated
plosive [t] (compare:的[tik])H
(3)	/g/	-
e.g.» modelling the pronunciation of got [got] on Cantonese unaspirated
plosive [k] (compare:葛[kot])12
(4)	/v/
e.g., modelling the pronunciation of vogue [voug] on Cantonese labio-
dental fricative [f] (compare:福[fbk])13
10.	btkl
11.	dikl
12.	got3
13 顶 kl
20
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
(5)	/z/
e.g., modelling the pronunciation of zip [zip] on Cantonese alveolar
fricative [s] (compare:攝[sip])14
For Cantonese speakers, the voiced post-alveolar fricative /z/, as in the words
measure (/'mezsr/) and the lexical borrowing from French, genre (/'3a:.ro/), is not
easy to produce. This sound is also found in the intervocalic position (e.g., between
vowels) of a few other words borrowed from French (e.g.» garage, mirage, treasure).
The main challenge lies in the fact that it is voiced, which is probably the reason
why a common pronunciation strategy among Cantonese speakers is to substitute
the voiceless counterpart /J7 for it, resulting in non-target-like pronunciation. This is
empirically attested in Hungs (2002) study. For instance, instead of [3], all 15 of the
Cantonese-Ll subjects mispronounced the word pleasure (/'plezsr/) with [J] (p. 131).
nteraction between voicing and aspiration (送氣)
Phonologically, the English words cot /ka：t/ and got /ga:t/ only differ in one sound.
The sounds /k/ and /g/ differ only in voicing: /k/ is a voiceless velar stop, while /g/ is
a voiced velar slop. Their place and manner of articulation are the same (i.e., both are
velar stops). Phonetically, however, these two sounds differ not only in voicing but
also in aspiration. When pronouncing the word cot, if we place our palm in front of
our mouth, we should be able to notice a puff of air rushing out. This additional puff
□fair is one defining characteristic of an aspirated sound. By contrast, there should be
no detectable aspiration when pronouncing the word got.
The features, voicing and aspiration, are independent of each other. This is the
reason why there are four possible combinations: (i) voiced aspirated, (ii) voiced
unaspirated, (Hi) voiceless aspirated, and (iv) voiceless unaspirated (see Table 2.3).
Table 2.3
Interaction between voicing and aspiration, as illustrated by the bilabial stops
	Voiced?	Aspirated?	Language	Example
[bh] (voiced aspirated)	Yes	Yes	—	—
[b|	(voiced unaspirated)	Yes	No	English	bill
[ph] (voiceless aspirated)	No	Yes	English	pill
			Cantonese	N (piu5)
[p]	(voiceless unaspirated)	No	No	English	spill
			Cantonese	錶（加“5）
14. >ip3
Cantonese-English Contrastive Phonology
21
Although all of the sounds in Table 2.3 are possible sounds in human languages,
in any single language we do not necessarily find all of the contrasts. In Cantonese,
the aspiration contrast is present but not the voicing contrast. But in English, the
opposite is true—only voicing is used contrastively, not aspiration. The reason is that,
in English, 'voiceless aspirated' (as in pill) and 'voiceless unaspirated* (as in spill) are
in complementary distribution, in that no minimal pairs may be found that consist
of a contrast between aspirated* and 'unaspirated： The contrastive difference between
the distinctive feature ofEnglish stops on one hand, and Cantonese stops on the other,
helps explain why, in the pronunciation of many Cantonese EAL learners, the voiced
and voiceless stops tend to be treated as unaspirated and aspirated stops, respectively
(Hung, 2002, p. 130). In fact, native Cantonese speakers often mistake the first sound
in 爸[pa]15 "father1 as [b] in English. As we will see below, this contrastive difference
between Cantonese and English creates problems for both Cantonese-Ll speakers
learning English and English-Ll speakers learning Cantonese.
Other missing consonants: /0/> /d/, /tJ/> /ciz/, /r/
As mentioned, the 7/f sounds are said to be produced at the interdental position.
There are two dental fricatives: one voiced (/d/), as in several monosyllabic function
words like the (/d/), that (/dcet/), and these (/di:z/); the other voiceless (/0/)> as in thief
(/0iif7), thumb (/0Am/), and enthusiasm (/in'OjuLzi.aez.om/). Tliere are variations in
the way these sounds are produced, even within the so-called Standard Englishes.
Whereas in AmE, speakers place the tongue tip in between their teeth (of the upper
jaw and the lower jaw) when they say the th sound, in BrE (RP in particular), the
sound is not really produced at the interdental position. Rather, BrE speakers
raise the tip of the tongue towards the back of the upper teeth when producing th
sounds. Nonetheless, all th sounds in AmE and BrE alike are grouped collectively as
interdental sounds, which for Cantonese speakers are not easy to learn. Apart from
the fact that neither the voiced /3/ nor the voiceless /0/ is present in the Cantonese
inventory of phonemes, both dental fricatives are rather difficult to produce from
the articulatory point of view. This is why many Cantonese EAL learners tend to
substitute other speech sounds for these interdental sounds, especially substituting
the labio-dental fricative [f] for /6/» and the voiceless unaspirated alveolar stop [t] for
/3/. Consequently, in their pronunciation, word pairs such as thin-fin and those-dose
are often indistinguishable.
Both Cantonese and English have a pair of affricates. Similar to stops> the pair
of Cantonese affricates is distinguished by aspiration, while the pair of affricates in
English is differentiated by voicing. Apart from their difference in place of articulation
15.	baa l
22
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
(alveolar in Cantonese vs. post-alveolar in English), the English affricates are further
characterized by lip-rounding, a feature which is not shared by their Cantonese coun-
terparts; instead, Cantonese affricates are characterized by lip-spreading. Cantonese
EAL learners, especially beginners, may find it difficult to pronounce the sounds /tJ7
and /6z/» and they often replace these sounds with /tsh/ and /ts/ respectively. In addi-
tion to lip-spreading, they may produce jump /d’Amp/ as 金十[tsBm].16
Similarly, the (represented by an upside down /』/ in IPA) is absent in Cantonese.
Depending on its location in a word, it is realized in different forms. If it appears
in the beginning of a syllable, as in rest, native Cantonese speakers may replace it
with a [w]. Since /j/ is produced with lip-rounding, this feature is maintained by
Cantonese speakers as shown by the substitution of the glide [w], which also requires
lip protrusion. Therefore, rest may be pronounced as west; read as weed; and run
as won. According to Hung (2002, p. 136), the substitution of the glide [w] for [j]
is indeed attested in isolated word-reading data from educated Cantonese EAL
learners, but such a tendency was found only among a small minority of the 15 sub-
jects in his study.
When hl occurs at the end of a syllable, it is either dropped17 or replaced with
a monophthong [o] (e.g., pronouncing pair as [*pe] or in two syllables as [*'peai]>
instead of the normative /peor/ pronounced with a diphthong and an [r]). Since
syllable-final approximants in English are acoustically less salient and more difficult
to perceive, they are more difficult to acquire.
Missing vowels
For the sake of convenience, we will examine monophthongs in two environments:
open syllables (CV), and closed syllables (CVC). There are seven monophthongs in
Cantonese (cf. Hung, 2002, pp. 122-127):
/a/:沙	/e/:些 /i/:詩	/。/:疏 /u/:夫 /oe/:鋸 /y/：書
saal	sei sil	sol ful goe3 syul
This is remarkably similar to Hungs (2002, p. 127) data-driven analysis of the inven-
tory of vowels in the EAL pronunciation of Cantonese-Ll learners, as follows:
16.	zarnl
17.	Note that in BrE, [j| that occurs in the syllable-final position is dropped unless the word is followed by a word
that starts with a vowel. For example, the word car is produced without [r] when it is produced on its own, but
when it is in a sentence like The car is nice, the [r] is produced, because it is followed by a vowel (i.e.» [i]).
Cantonese-English Contrastive Phonology
Table 2.4
Inventory of vowels as shown in the educated Cantonese-Ll EAL learners
Vowel	Examples
[i]	heat, hit
⑻	bet, bat
[u]	hoot, hood
[o]	cot, caught
[a]	heart
[A]	hut
[3]	hurt
Note: From 'Towards a Phonology of Hong Kong English, byT. Hung, 2002. In K. Bolton (Ed.),
Hong Kong English: Autonomy and creativity, p. 127.
Table 2.5
Examples of Hong Kong EAL pronunciation, showing a loss of contrast in RP vowels
Words	HK EAL vowels	RP vowels
heed - hid, heat - hit	/i/	/i:/ -/i/
head - hadt bet - bat	/£/	/e/ - l&l
hoot - hood	/u/	/u：/ -/u/
hawed - hod, caught - cot	/□/	/□:/ - /o/
Note: From 'Towards a Phonology of Hong Kong English', byT. Hung, 2002. In K. Bolton (Ed.),
Hong Kong English: Autonomy and creativity, pp. 125-127.
According to Tables 2.4 and 2.5, educated Chinese speakers of English in Hong Kong
tend to produce fewer monophthong vowel contrasts than do RP speakers. In the
HKE vowel system, there is a "lack of the tense/lax or long/short distinction, which
more than anything else, accounts for the smaller number of vowel contrasts in HKE'
(Hung, 2000, p. 125). Relative to the contrasts made in a number of RP monophthong
vowels, we may speak ofEAL speakers under-differentiation of such vowels, as exem-
plified in the word pairs in Table 2.5.
Tlie monophthongs in the Cantonese vowel inventory are relatively rich, and this
seems to help Cantonese speakers produce more or less target-like vowel sounds in
English. On the other hand, there are a few Cantonese vowels that are not shared in
English. These missing sounds may lead to specific problems fbr learners of Cantonese
from an English-Ll background. Tlie high front rounded vowel /y/ (e.g・，書，[sy]»
'book';18 19 住，[dzy], ’live%) and the low mid-central rounded vowel /ce/ (e.g.,鋸,
18.	syul
19.	zy〃6
24
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
[koe]> saw1;20 * 腳,[koek], 'foot勺)，for example, may be especially difficult for English
speakers. Possible substitutions for these sounds include [u]> [3], and a diphthong
like [iu].
There are three vowels which only occur in a closed syllable (CVC) in Cantonese：
e實】激。出
/set/ /kik/ /tshet/22
There are some restrictions on what coda can follow these vowels. For instance, /b/
can occur before any coda consonants, so it poses the least problem; /i/, on the other
hand, only allows the velar consonants (/r>/ and /k/) in the coda position. As for /o/>
it is also restricted, but in a different way. It only allows alveolar sounds (/t/ and /n/)
to be in the coda position.
The vowel that generates the most problems fbr Cantonese speakers is the /i/
vowel. As mentioned, its distribution is limited to syllables that contain a velar stop
(/k/) or velar nasal (/1)/) in the coda position. English words do not conform to this
Cantonese phonotactic rule, so words that contain the vowel [1] but followed by a
non-velar consonant coda are likely to be problematic fbr Cantonese EAL learners.
As a result, they may replace [1] with a vowel that can occur with a non-velar conso-
nant, and that choice usually falls on [i], as in the following examples:
(6)	'sit'	/sit/	->	[sit]	(~ 'seat')
(7)	'mince'	/mins/	—-	[mins]	(~ ’means')
(8)	live	/liv/	—>	[liv](〜'leave')
In effect, fbr such learners, word pairs like chip-cheap and fit-feet are phonetically
indistinguishable. Non-target-like substitutions such as these may be accounted fbr
by the absence of a similar functional contrast in Cantonese. As /i/ and /i/ are con-
trastive in English (e.g., chip [tfip], and cheap [tfi:p]), it is not surprising that such
mispronunciations may give rise to communication problems. Another problem has
to do with the unstressed middle vowel schwa [0], which is not found in Cantonese.
This is the case of a trisyllabic verb like consider (/kon'sid.or/). Many Cantonese
EAL learners tend to assign the same amount of stress to all of the three syllables
(i.e., [korn'siido:]), rather than pronouncing the first and last syllables with the
unstressed schwa.
Native Cantonese speakers generally have little problem in producing the diph-
thongs in English, because Cantonese has some diphthongs that sound similar to
their counterparts in English. However, in Cantonese a diphthong is never followed
20.	goe3
2】.goek3
22.	sat6t gikL ceoll
Cantonese-English Contrastive Phonology
25
by a coda, whereas in English a diphthong is sometimes followed by a coda. This will
be discussed in the next section.
Differences in the restrictions of sounds in onsets and codas
So far we have discussed problems encountered by Cantonese-Ll EAL learners due to
the absence of some of the English sounds in the Cantonese sound inventory. Now we
move on to discuss sounds that exist in both English and Cantonese but are nonethe-
less difficult for native speakers of Cantonese.
The lateral approximant /!/ exists in both Cantonese and English. The English
lateral approximant /!/ can occur in the initial or medial position (i.e., the onset of a
syllable, characterized as clear E), as in the words late and plate, and in the syllable-
final position (i.e., the coda of a syllable, known as 'dark E), as in the words cool and
tail. In Cantonese, however, the same sound can only occur in the onset position, as in
the word 藍 /lam/.23 Thus many Chinese EAL learners find it difficult to pronounce
the dark L, which is non-existent in Cantonese or Putonghua. Often an epenthetic
vowel (typically [0]) is added to produce an extra syllable (i.e., [Is]). Another strategy
employed by Cantonese-Ll EAL learners is to replace the syllable-final [1] with a [w].
This tendency is empirically supported in Hungs (2002) acoustic analysis, as shown
in the average formant frequencies of the spectrogram for a word like feel (p. 134).
Interestingly, according to the isolated word-reading data in Hungs (2002) study, the
tendency to pronounce the syllable-final [1] with the velar approximant [w] does not
apply when /I/ is preceded by a back vowel such as [o] (e.g. call, [ko:]) or [u] (e.g. cool,
[ku：]). In this case, the [1] is simply deleted.
Onset: /n/ vs. /I/
In Cantonese, the alveolar nasal /n/ in the syllable-initial position can either be real-
ized as [n] or the alveolar lateral sound [1]. When transferred into English, this free
[n]/[l] variation in the syllable-initial position may lead to potential misunderstand-
ing since these two sounds are phonemic in English (and therefore strictly non-inter-
changeable). Consider the following examples:
(9)	* knife [naif] vs. "like' [laif]
(10)	"night，[nait] vs. 'light，[lait]
Based on the phonological characteristics in Cantonese, it is predicted that
Cantonese-Ll learners are likely to replace syllable-initial /n/ with [1] when speaking
in English. This prediction is clearly borne out in Hungs (2002) empirical findings.
23.	Iaain4
26
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
Interestingly, Hung (2002) found that the opposite direction of substitution (/I/ T
[n]) is also quite common in the English pronunciation of the 15 Cantonese-Ll EAL
students in his (2002) study, suggesting that both sounds are indeed treated like free
variants sometimes. Such a bidirectional substitution between /n/ and /I/ may also
be a result of hypercorrection, as when English words with /I/ in the syllable-initial
position are pronounced with [n]. Hung (2002, p. 135) found that, of the 29 words
showing a syllable-initial /n/ and /!/ (pronounced twice by each of the 15 subjects),
18 with initial /I/ were pronounced by some subjects with initial [n],24 while 11 with
initial /n/ were pronounced by some subjects with initial [I].25 What is interesting is
that if the rime contains a nasal (e.g. line and lame), initial /I/ tends to be pronounced
as [n] (i.e., line was mispronounced as "nine in 37% of all the tokens; lame was mis-
pronounced as name in 27% of all the tokens). Conversely, if the syllable begins with
the alveolar nasal /n/, the presence of a nasal in the rime decreases the possibility of
mispronunciation (i.e., nine was mispronounced as 'line' in only 7% of all the tokens;
tarne was mispronounced as lame in barely 3% of all the tokens). In other words,
•vith a nasal in the rime, the likelihood of the syllable-initial /n/ being pronounced
as [1] is very low. These findings suggest that the variation between syllable-initial
/n/ and /!/ in Cantonese-Ll EAL learners, English pronunciation is not random but
appears to be partly conditioned by the phonological environment of the syllable.
One way to look into this issue more closely is to explore to what extent such a pattern
of variation is related to what Hung (2002) calls "nasal harmony' (p. 135).
Coda: /n/ vs. /i)/
In the coda position, many Cantonese-Ll learners have a tendency to substitute
the alveolar nasal (/n/) for the velar nasal (/i)/) in their LI. For instance, the nor-
mative pronunciation of the disyllabic verb 翱翔('hover； [ijou tS3i)])26 and noun
银行('bank； [ijen hoi)]),27 may be pronounced as [ou ts3n] and [eh hon], respectively.
In both cases, the velar nasal [r)] in the onset position is dropped, whereas in the
coda position it is replaced with the alveolar nasal [n]. Such a tendency is likely to
be due to the fact that /n/ and /i)/ are treated by some Cantonese speakers as vari-
ants, and they use them interchangeably in the coda position. Similar to the [l]/[n]
confusion, the direction of substitution is two-way. That is, /n/ may also be replaced
24.	These include: line (37%), lame (27%), longing (17%), lead (17%), loose (17%), loud (17%), lower (17%),
lot (13%), lake (13%), leafing (10%), long (10%), low (】0%), leaf (7%), let (7%), leaving (7%), light (7%).
leave (3%), lumber (3%) (Hung 2002, p. 135).
25.	These include: night (33%), no (23%), naked (20%), number (20%), need (13%), not (10%)> net (10%),
“0*(10%), noose (7%), nine (7%), name (3%) (Hung 2002. p. 135).
26.	ngou6coeng4
27.	ngan4 hong4
Cantonese-English Contrastive Phonology
27
by [i)]» and /i]/ may be replaced by [n]. This tendency, which is often characterized as
'lazy pronunciation (懒音,laan5 jaml, Ian yin\ is getting increasingly common
among younger Cantonese speakers, who in effect treat the velar and alveolar nasals
as allophones in the coda position. For instance：
(11)	餅乾 /pei)kon/ ('biscuit')
a.	[pci] kon] (regular pronunciation)
b.	[pen koi)] ("lazy pronunciation)
As shown in example (I I), those Cantonese EAL learners who show intrapersonal
variation in their pronunciation of 餅乾,as [peq kon] (1 la) or [pen koij] (11b) may
extend this pattern of variation to their English pronunciation. Since the two nasal
sounds, Ini and /ij/, are used contrastively in the coda position in English, replac-
ing one sound with the other will deviate from the normative pronunciation. For
example:
(12)	'hang' /haeij/ —- [haen]
It is not clear to what extent such a mispronunciation may be attributed to the practice
of so-called lazy pronunciation in Cantonese. What is clear is that, if hang is mispro-
nounced as [hasn], as in (12), it may conceivably lead to intelligibility problems, not
only because there is no such word ([hcen]) in English, but perhaps more seriously,
it may likely be heard as 'hand' rather than 'hang：
Stops in the coda position
Tliere is a fundamental difference between the English and Cantonese stops in the
syllable-final position： Whereas the English stops are normally released (i.e., opening
the closure at the place of articulation to let the air flow out of the mouth), as is the
case with /t/ in the word faty the Cantonese counterparts are not released, as is the
case with /t/ in 發達(/fat dat/>28 'get rich'). This contrast helps to explain some of
the problems in pronunciation on the part of L2 learners of English or Cantonese.
It is well known that Cantonese-dominant learners of English have a tendency not to
release English voiceless stops. As for learners of Cantonese coming from an English-
speaking background, at the initial stage of learning, they tend to carry over pronun-
ciation rules from English and erroneously release the plosives occurring in the final
position of a Cantonese syllable such as 發達(/fat dat/, get rich') and 赤頰角(/tsek
lap kok/,29 *Chek Lap Kok [Hong Kong International Airport]').
28.	faat3 daat6
29.	cek3 laap6 gok3
28
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
A logical consequence of releasing a coda is liaison (or linking), which happens
if the next word begins with a vowel. As a result, the consonant is carried forward
to the next syllable. For instance, the pronunciation pattern of pick it up should be
[pikitAp], so all of the three syllables are headed by a voiceless plosive, with no glottal
stop in between. By contrast, liaison is uncommon in Cantonese (and Chinese varie-
ties in general), since syllable-final plosives and nasals in Cantonese are not released.
Consider a bisyllabic adjective like 不安(batl only 'uneasy'): As the syllable-final
/t/ is unreleased, it is not carried forward to the second syllable that begins with the
vowel /d/・ This contrastive difference helps explain why many Cantonese-Ll EAL
learners have a tendency not to release the syllable-final plosives of the words in a
verb phrase like pick it up. Instead, a glottal stop is inserted at the boundaries between
pick and it, and between it and up. Such a lack of awareness of liaison as a pronun-
ciation feature in English is one of the many problems related to non-native accents
mong Chinese EAL learners.
fhe post-alveolar fricatives
The production of post-alveolar sounds in English could be problematic fbr
Cantonese-Ll EAL learners. Although [J] is a possible sound in Cantonese, it only
occurs in very specific environments and is only produced by some speakers. For
those [J] speakers, the initial consonants of the words in (13) are all [JL while
for other speakers, they are [s]. This allophonic alternation only occurs if the alveolar
fricative /s/ is followed by a high front rounded vowel /y/. Since [J] is only available to
some speakers as an allophone, many Cantonese speakers tend to replace the English
/// sound with [s].
(13) O /	雪 /	算
[Jy]	[Jyt]	[Jyn]
syul	syut3	syun3
The matter is further complicated by the actual phonetic realization of the English /J7・
When producing the sound ///, native speakers of English typically protrude their
lips simultaneously. This is not a necessary requirement for /J7 in general but rather
a language-specific feature in English (e.g., Japanese /J7 is unrounded). As a result,
many Cantonese-Ll EAL learners tend to replace the vowel immediately following
/// with a rounded vowel, as in examples (14) and (15):
(14)	"she	/Ji/	t「sy]
(15)	'shallow' /'Jaeloo/ t [*'soelou]
Cantonese-English Contrastive Phonology
29
Deviations that arise from the differences in syllable structure
Syllable structure in Cantonese and English
Unlike English, a language written with an alphabet, Chinese is written in non-alpha-
betic or logographic characters。英字,hanzi, hon3 zi6). The written forms of most
of the Chinese characters today may be traced to Shi Huang Di of the Qin dynasty
(秦始皇帝,221-206 BCE) over 2,000 years ago. The Qin emperor was the first to
make an attempt to standardize the Chinese language, including the writing system.
Since the Chinese writing system is logographic, the relationship between the written
form and the pronunciation of a given character is often indirect, sometimes obscure.
Low-frequency characters are easy to forget. This is reflected in the Chinese proverb
cpen ready to write, but dont know how to?0 This has implications for literacy acqui-
sition, in that in general it takes more time for children to learn to read and write
Chinese than to read and write an alphabetic language like English (McBride, 2016;
for more in-depth discussion, see Li, 2017).
A Chinese character is normally pronounceable as a single syllable (音節).With
few exceptions, most characters have one or more meanings?1 As Duanmu (2007,
p. 3) puts it, a character is basically a monosyllabic word written as one graphic
unit' The smallest unit of meaning is known as a morpheme. Given that almost all
Chinese characters are monosyllabic and have a more or less well-defined meaning
(i.e.> morphemic), linguistically Chinese characters are also characterized as morpho-
syllables.
The structure of a Cantonese syllable is much simpler than that of an English
syllable. Take 飲茶 /jum tsha/30 31 32 33 and 點心 /tini sum/.33 There are four syllables in these
two expressions. With the exception of [tsha], which has a consonant-vowel (CV)
structure, each syllable carries the structure consonant-vowel-consonant (CVC).
Empirical tests with other Cantonese syllables suggest that these three structural
positions actually represent the maximal structure of a Cantonese syllable. In other
words, no Cantonese syllable is found to contain an additional vowel or consonant
position. Tliere is thus one fundamental difference with regard to the systems of
Cantonese and English consonants： Unlike English, Cantonese has no consonant
clusters. This contrastive difference may help to explain why Chinese learners of
English in Hong Kong tend to have difficulty pronouncing English words with con-
sonant clusters properly, as in the case of strengths /stJ£i)0s/. Its syllable structure,
CCCVCCC, is probably the most complex in English.
30.	執筆忘字 UW bi wang zilzapl bat I mong4 zi6t literally 'hold pen forget character*).
31.	Consider a disyllabic word like 琵琶(pfpCpei4 paa4): It is rare for K or Z to be used in isolation; similarly,
the first morpho-syllable of 蝴蝶(hii dielwuA dip2) is seldom used on its own.
)2. jant2 caa4
33. dun2 saml
30
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
The syllable [tsha] in the above example has the structure CV (notice that [ts] is one
single phonetic symbol representing the aspirated alveolar affricate, see Table 2.2).
It can be shown that some other syllables carry the structure VC, as in W [ap],
or just V as in 亞[a]. Hence there are four possible configurations or structures for a
Cantonese syllable：
V CV VC CVC
For the sake of convenience, the basic syllable structure in Cantonese has been sum-
marized as
(G)v(cj
where the parentheses signal that the consonants on each side of the vowel (nucleus
)f the Cantonese syllable) are optional. As noted by Duanmu (2007, p. 15), the
lucleus of a syllable is usually filled by a vowel; the part before the nucleus (CJ is
called the onset* (節首音)or initial (聲母)3 the part after the nucleus (C2) is known
as the coda (音節尾)，while the nucleus and the coda together make up the 'rime'
(also spelled 'rhyme；韻母).As discussed above, some sounds can cause difficulties to
Cantonese-Ll EAL learners because they occur in positions where the same sounds
will occur in Cantonese. In the rest of this section, we further discuss how these dif-
ferences in syllable structure between English and Cantonese give rise to EAL pro-
nunciation difficulties.
Consonant clusters (輔音音叢/輔音連綴)
Two English consonants that are frequently embedded in consonant clusters are the
two approximants /!/ and hl. In Cantonese, the lateral approximant /I/ occurs only in
the syllable-initial position. On the other hand, the alveolar lateral /I/ in English may
occur in the initial, medial, and final position of a syllable. The other English approxi-
mant /」/ has a very similar distribution pattern. Since there are no consonant clusters
in Cantonese (i.e.> CC or CCC is not a possible sequence in the syllable structure of
Cantonese), learners of English in Hong Kong, especially beginners, may experience
some problem with /!/ and /」/ when either of them forms part of a consonant cluster
(Chan 2006a, 2006b, 2010). One commonly used strategy is to simplify the pronun-
ciation by inserting an additional vowel—a process technically known as epenthe-
sis—to the consonant preceding the English approximant. Accordingly, monosyllabic
words like crown (/kraun/) and clutch (/klAtJ/) may be pronounced with two or three
syllables as [*ka'ra:n] and [*ka'lAtJ'y] (cf. Chan, 2006a, 2006b, 2010). By inserting *
34 When there is no (C,) to fill the onset position, the syllable in question is said to have zero onsef
Cantonese-English Contrastive Phonology
31
a vowel, the resulting pronunciation consists of syllables that resemble a Cantonese
syllable structure CV.CVC or CVCVCV (the dots indicate syllable boundaries).
Another strategy is to delete one of the consonants in the cluster. For example, the
word frog /£iog/ is sometimes pronounced as fog [fog] by Cantonese-Ll EAL learners.
Like epenthesis, deleting one of the consonants results in a CVC structure, which is a
plausible structure in Cantonese.
In addition to a simpler syllable structure, Cantonese also has more restrictions
as to what consonants can appear in the coda position of a syllable. In Cantonese,
only stops /p, t, k/ and nasals /m, n, i)/ are allowed to occur in the coda position,
as illustrated by the following morpho-syllables.
Coda position filled by a stop:	Coda position filled by a nasal:
/p, t, k/			'butterfly，	/m, 點	n, i)/ /dim/	dim2	'point'
蝶	/dip/	dip6					
跌	/dit/	dit3	Yair	電	/din/	din6	'electricity'
敵	/dik/	dik6	enemy,	訂	/dig/	ding6	'reserve
On the other hand, in English> all consonants, except for the glottal fricative /h/
(喉擦音)，may occur in the coda position. As a result, when Cantonese-Ll speakers
encounter codas other than stops and nasals in English (e.g., /s/ as in bus)y they tend
to insert a vowel after it to make its syllable structure approximate the syllable struc-
ture in Cantonese (i.e., CVCV as in 巴士 [basi])?5
Diphthong + coda
Even though both English and Cantonese have diphthongs, in Cantonese a diph-
thong is not followed by a consonant. For instance, while /ei/ is found in both
Cantonese (compare:美'beauty'; English: may, both pronounced as /mei/), there are
no Cantonese morpho-syllables where /ei/ is followed by a consonant as coda. This
is one possible reason why, for words like claim, game and gain, the target diphthong
/ei/ is often reduced and replaced with /e/ (i.e., /klenn/ —> [klem]; /geim/ —> [gem];
/gem/ — [gen]). A similar problem occurs with other diphthongs below.
	Cantonese diphthong	RP diphthong
(16)	/ou/ 奧[ou]	〜'code' /kood/	—>
(17)	/au/ 拗[au]	〜 count* /kaunt/ t
(18)	/ei/ 你[nei]	〜came /keim/ -»
(19)	/oi/ 愛[oi]	~ 'coin' /kom/ t
(20)	/ai/ 哎[ai]	~ 'kind' /kaind/ —>
EAL pronunciation
Wuk]
[*khai)]
[*kh£m]
pkfn]
[*khan]
35.	baa I si2
32
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
Non-target-like substitutions, such as those in (16)-(20), are commonly heard
among Cantonese-Ll learners of English. Another pattern of mispronunciation,
often produced by elementary learners of English, consists of reanalysing English
diphthongs such as (RP) ear (/io7), air (/eo7), more /mo:7, and poor (/po:7) as two
monophthongs	[*pu:a:]). In addition, the word lounge,
which contains a diphthong and whose target pronunciation is (/launds/), is widely
mispronounced by Cantonese speakers as	making it indistinguishable
from another word with that pronunciation: launch. This pronunciation error is
another salient example whereby a monophthong (/o:/) is used to substitute for a
diphthong (/au/).
Suprasegmental features
Word stress
Word stress in English is mostly unpredictable. Tliere is no explicit rule that can
predict which syllable within a word should be assigned the primary stress, although
we could speak of a tendency. Trisyllabic English words which are morphologically
related (i.e., sharing the same root) may not have the same stress pattern. This is the
case of the words summation and smnniative： In the case of summation, the primary
stress is placed on the second syllable [sA'meijAn], whereas the one for summative is
placed on the initial syllable ['sAinotiv]. In extreme cases, polysyllabic words forined
by derivational morphology may assign the primary stress to the first, second, or third
syllable. Compare:
analyze	analyst	analysis	analytical
/'sen.ol.aiz/	/'een.o.list/	/o'nsel.a.sis/	/.aen.o'ht.i.kol/
Although there are a few word-stress rules in English (Halle, 1973), the acquisition
of word stress, and stress assignment in general, is understandably challenging for
Cantonese-Ll EAL learners (Chen, 2013; cf. Chen, 2015). In sum, the difficulties
posed by English stress may be explained by both the absence of stress in Cantonese
and the complications of stress placement in English.
Rhythm (節奏、韻律)and intonation (腔調)
Up to now, the focus of our discussion has been mainly on pronunciation at the word
level. In this section, we will focus on connected speech. The most important differ-
ence is that English is a 'stress-timed' language, while Cantonese is a 'syllable-timed'
language. Syllable-timed means that every syllable is given roughly the same duration
but not necessarily equal stress, as can be seen in Putonghua：我學過法語(wo xue
Cantonese-English Contrastive Phonology
33
gud fayu) and Cantonese:我學過法文(〃go5 hok6gwo3 faat3 mcin2), both meaning
T have learned French' There is basically no reduction in vowel length or the intensity
(volume or energy) with which each syllable is pronounced. In contrast, in English,
the time given to each syllable varies: A stressed syllable is often given a longer dura-
tion than an unstressed syllable. This is understandable to the extent that most of the
English words are polysyllabic, and so it would be very uneconomical and tiring if
all the syllables in a word such as communication or international were pronounced
with the same amount of linguistic effort. Thus in an utterance like the match begins
at seven, stress is given on the underlined syllables. The real time assigned to the
pronunciation of unstressed syllables is reduced considerably; sometimes impercep-
tibly. One way to get a feel for the stressed pattern is to clap our hands rhythmically
while pronouncing the words aloud. This is particularly clear if each clap coincides
with the stressed syllable.
The vowels of unstressed syllables are usually reduced to [o], and they are often
deleted in casual speech. For example, the word camera /'kae.mo.jo/ (three syllables)
can be reduced to ['kh£em.jo] (two syllables), but the unstressed syllable can never
be pronounced with a full vowel: [*'khce.m0.ja] or [*'khce.ma.jQ]. This property of
the English phonology differs from that in Cantonese considerably because there
is relatively little reduction in the pronunciation of Cantonese syllables.36 Unlike
English, the duration for each syllable in Cantonese does not depend on the stress
assignment; rather, all syllables have roughly the same duration (with minor differ-
ences depending on the coda). Since the duration of each syllable is dependent on its
stress assignment, English is characterized as stress-timed, while Cantonese is gener-
ally regarded as syllable-timed.
There is evidence that Cantonese-Ll EAL learners in Hong Kong tend to transfer
the syllable-timed characteristic of Cantonese connected speech into English. This
happens when each of the syllables in a polysyllabic word such as international is
given the same amount of stress, in-ter-na-tion-al. How to help students overcome
such a cross-linguistic influence in English connected speech is one pedagogical chal-
lenge for teachers of English.
Word stress vs. contrastive stress
It is useful to make a distinction between word stress (also known as 'word accent')
and contrastive stress (Duanniu, 2007). When uttering a sentence like the match
begins at sevenor a noun phrase such as international conference, stress is normally
assigned to the underlined syllables as shown. Word stress is especially important for
36.	Although infrequent and uniypiail, reduction does occur in Cantonese. For instance,唔保呀瞬[m hai a ma]
(JyutPing. ni4 htii6 aa6 ntau5) is commonly reduced to 味Sfl [mat ma) (Jyutping: ntai6 maa5).
34
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
distinguishing between polysyllabic words which are spelt the same but which belong
to different word classes, as in import (v.) and import (n.)» refuse (v.) and refuse (n.).
Since most Chinese syllables are morphemic, word stress is not so useful or relevant
for analysing the pronunciation of morpho-syllables in Chinese, such as Mandarin
and Cantonese.
Contrastive stress occurs when the speaker makes use of stress to bring out a
contrast between the stressed unit and some other units that could have occurred
in the syntactic position of the stressed unit. Thus in the utterance Jim likes you, the
unmarked stress is the verb likes. But if the speaker wants to introduce a contrast
between the subject Jim and other possible subjects (e.g.» not John, nor George), the
speaker could place the stress on Jim (i.e., Jim likes you, with the additional meaning:
others). Of course, similar contrasts may be applied to the verb likes or the object
x—if the speaker wants to signal a contrast between likes' and some other verbs
g.» not loves you； as you may think), or an object other than 'you' (e.g., not *likes
as you are imagining).
Duanmu (2007) explains that all languages make use of the Information-Stress
Principle to mark contrastive stress. According to this principle, a word or phrase
that carries more inibrniation than its neighbor(s) should be stressed* (p. 144).
The reason is that contrasted words carry more information of interest and we give
more stress to words that have more information and less stress to words that have
less information (p. 144).
In articulatory terms, how is stress produced or realized phonetically? Research in
acoustic phonetics37 shows that, whether it is word stress or contrastive stress, a sylla-
ble may be stressed by using one of three linguistic means： (i) a higher pitch level (com-
parable to a higher musical note), (ii) louder volume (larger amplitude), or (iii) vowel
lengthening (longer duration), or any combination of these. For instance, to realize a
contrastive stress such as Jim in Jim likes you, we may pronounce Jim (i) with a higher
pitch, (ii) more loudly, or (iii) by lengthening the vowel [i], or do any of these in any
combination. According to our observation, compared with BrE and AmE speakers,
educated speakers of English in Hong Kong tend to make more use of a higher pitch
to produce or realize stress, while speakers of native varieties may make more use of
the two other linguistic means.
Tbg (聲調)
Tone and intonation are related but distinct concepts. Intonation refers to the speech
contour of a unit larger than a word. Both Cantonese and English can make use of
37.	Acoustic phonetics (噩學語齐學)investigates speech sounds by measuring their frequency; duration, inten-
sity, etc.
Cantonese-English Contrastive Phonology
35
a number of intonation patterns to express a range of interpersonal meanings (e.g.,
surprise, irritation, doubt; Lock, 1996). In English, one obvious example is the intona-
tion pattern used to realize a yes-no question, which may be characterized as "rising
towards the end' (e.g. cIs it true?1).
Unlike English, Cantonese does not make use of word stress, but it utilizes pitch for
another purpose—tones. Like other Chinese dialects, Cantonese is a tone language,
in that different pitch levels are used to differentiate lexical meanings. As is well
known, Putonghua has four distinctive tones, while Cantonese has six: three level
tones, two rising tones, and one falling tone. For example, the segmental in Cantonese
/fu/ has six distinctive meanings depending on the tone level：
high level	high rising
ful夫	fu2虎
('husband') ('tiger')
mid level low falling
fu3富	fu4符
(Tich')	("talisman)
low rising low level
ju5婦	九6父
("woman) (’fhtheF)
The Chinese characters here are stock examples only； we must bear in mind that
for practically every tone level, a given morpho-syllable may have one or more homo-
phones. Notice that the system used by Chinese phonologists is not quite the same.
According to traditional Chinese phonology, Cantonese has 九興('nine sounds):
six distinctive tone contours plus three entering tones'(入聲).An entering tone ends
with a consonant (stop) in the syllable-final position. For example:
Isikll 色 /sek3/ 錫/sik6/ 食
Because of this feature in Cantonese, Caiitonese-Ll speakers tend to assign tones
to English words. A stressed syllable in a word is often given the high level tone (1),
which has a high pitch level, whereas unstressed syllables are often given the low
falling tone (4) or the low level tone (6). For example, a word like national is often
pronounced by Cantonese EAL learners as [lek Jen loo](明唇奴/明唇勞)・村 As a
result, the pitch contour of a word or a sentence may rise or fall rather abruptly,
resulting in Cantonese-accented pronunciation.
English-Ll learners' problems pronouncing Cantonese sounds
The affricate sounds in English are /t]7 and /6z/, while those in Cantonese are /ts/ and
/tsh/. Not only are their voicing and aspiration realizations different, but their respec-
tive place of articulation also differs slightly. Whereas the English affricates are in the
post-alveolar region, the Cantonese counterparts are produced in the alveolar region.
Although English consists of both alveolar sounds/t/ and /s/> and the sequence of /ts/
38.	Notice that in scAJ, there is a difference in vowel quality as well as tone.
39.	lek I shcon4 nou4/lekl shcon4 lou4
36
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
is also phonotaclically possible in words such as cats [keets], /ts/ remains a difficult
sound for English speakers to produce when it occurs in the syllable-initial position
in Cantonese. As a result, it is common for English speakers to replace the Cantonese
aspirated affricate /tsV with /tJ7 (e.g., pronouncing /tsha/,茶，ctea as [*tja]). They also
tend to substitute /c!z/ or /z/ for the unaspirated affricate /ts/ in Cantonese. Thus the
high-frequency word 紙(/tsi/, paper) is often mispronounced by English speakers
as [^dji] or [*zi].
Nasals in Cantonese, /m, n, ij/, have one distributional characteristic in common
with stops in Cantonese /p, t, k/: They may occur in the final position of a Cantonese
syllable, as shown in the brand name 任天堂 /jem tin toij/；10 a Japanese company
vhich specializes in computer games products. Such a distributional characteristic,
)wever> is not shared between Cantonese and English nasals: Whereas all Cantonese
Isals may occur in the syllable-initial position (e.g„ the first-person singular
>ronoun 我 /i)o:/)» the velar nasal /i)/ in English as a rule is not found in that posi-
tion. Although /rj/ does occur as a syllable-initial consonant in Cantonese, there is
considerable variation within the Hong Kong Cantonese community, in that some
people treat /i)/ and the 'zero' phoneme in the syllable-initial position as variants,
while others simply do not have /i)/ in their 'dialect： For instance, depending on the
individual, the first person pronoun 我 in Cantonese is pronounced either as [ijoi]
or [□:]. For learners of Cantonese from an English-speaking background who are
unaccustomed to the syllable-initial velar nasal, it is conceivable that they will have
difficulty pronouncing Cantonese words like 我[ijo:].
Hong Kong English: A new variety?
Up to now, we have characterized Cantonese EAL learners non-native pronunciation
features as deviations, with the implication that they are IL errors in need of teacher
feedback and correction. Some scholars believe, however, that such deviations are
motivated by the speakers, desire to assert their Hong Kong identity, which may be
glossed as: ‘I speak English with a Hong Kong accent because I want to be seen as
a Hongkongen Regardless of whether English in Hong Kong is more appropriately
analysed as a new variety (HKE), Hung (2002) believes the phonological system of
English spoken by Cantonese-dominant Hongkongers should be investigated in its
own terms. In particular, whether the purpose is to ascertain the relative autonomy of
HKE, or to better understand how teachers can help them approximate the norms of
'native' pronunciation, there is a need for us to understand their EAL pronunciation
40.	jam6 tinl tong4
Cantonese-English Contrastive Phonology
37
patterns and features using rigorous research methods. To describe the phonology
or sound system of educated Chinese users of English in Hong Kong, Hung (2002)
points out the need to investigate three dimensions or components, as follows:
1.	An inventory of phonemes, or sound segments which contrast with
each other;
2.	Systematic variations in the phonetic realizations of these phonemes, i.e.,
alternation;
3.	The distribution of individual segments in relation to other segments.
(Hung 2002, p. 121, emphasis in original)
Whether such deviations from RP or Standard AmE pronunciation patterns are
more appropriately seen as 'deficit' (therefore, IL errors' in need of correction) or
mere differences indicative of the speakers intended identity (HKE) continues to
be debated. To the extent that English is not commonly used tor intra-ethnic com-
munication among Cantonese Hongkongers—unlike Chinese Singaporeans in this
regard—it may not be as appropriate to characterize HKE as a new variety. This is
also the reason why English in Hong Kong is variably seen as a second or foreign
language (Li» 2017). More research is needed to better understand Cantonese-Ll EAL
speakers, pronunciation features and EAL learners pronunciation difficulties in the
learning process.
Questions and activities
1.	Name the place of articulation of the following consonants represented by IPA.
(i)	[b]
(ii)	[k]
(iii)	[.i]
(iv)	[0]
(v)	[v]
2.	Name the manner of articulation of the following consonants represented
by IPA.
(i)	[f]
(ii)	[n]
(iii)	[j]
(iv)	[p]
(v)	[tj]
3.	Compare the following words in English and Cantonese. How do they differ in
pronunciation? Use as many of the features (e.g., place of articulation, voicing,
and vowel height) as you can in your answer. You may use a dictionary to
help you.
38
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
(i)	T) (diul) deal
(ii)	風(fungi) phone
(iii)	先(sinl) s/h
(iv)	鋪(poul) poll
(v)	蒸糕(zingl goul) jingle
4.	Explain why native Cantonese speakers tend to mispronounce the following
words according to syllable structure.
(i)	program —> ['poukw£m]
(ii)	like -» [lai]
(iii)	game —> [kcm]
(iv)	year-^ [ia]
>. The following is a transcription of an excerpt of the conversation between
Jimmy Fallon (J), an American comedian, and Hilary Clinton (H). Assume you
are one of them and read the lines aloud. Pay attention to word stress, intona-
tion, and rhythm while you read. Ybu can view the conversation at this link:
h ttps:〃 www. youtube. com/watch?v=PiDFL8tgnOQ
J： ..・ they don t just give this job, right? Ybu really got to work for this job.
H: Ybu really have to work.
J： And so I was just wondering this is the biggest job in the world, eh,
its almost like youre applying for this job.
H: Right.
J:	And were hiring you.
H: Its like a job interview.
J:	It really is.
H: It goes on for months, but it is a job interview.
J:	Well I was wondering if youcl like to do a job interview now.
H: Sure, sure.
J:	Like you're applying for a job.
H:	Absolutely. Absolutely.
J:	The biggest job in the world, the president of the United States.
H: Okay. Alright.
J： Eh, hey Hilary, thank you for coming down.
H: My pleasure. Thanks for having me.
J： Eh, howd you hear about the position?
H: Eh, fourth grade, social studies.
J： Why dont you tell us a bit about yourself?
H： Well, em, I think that I have the experience and qualifications, to tackle
the range of challenges this job presents, like economy, national security.
Cantonese-English Contrastive Phonology
39
foreign policy, health care, education. I've done lot of work, and eh, I have
references.
J:	Why do you want this job?
H: 'Cos I really care about what happens to our country. It means a lot to
me to make sure that we keep producing good opportunities for people,
how everybody have a chance to live up to their God-given potential.
And theres more we can do, and I want to try to make that happen for
everybody.
Further reading
Chan and Lis (2000) study of Cantonese-English contrastive phonology is accessible
and easy to follow, with many more examples of pronunciation difficulties commonly
encountered by Cantonese EAL learners of English. Hung (2002) is a highly read-
able article introducing how to research the phonology of a language variety like
HKE. To better understand the technical terminologies in the study of phonetics and
phonology, visit the website of the IPA (2015) and the Handbook of the IPA, which
is downloadable from https://www.internationalphoneticassociation.org/content/ipa-
handbook-downloads.
3
Transitivity and Syntactic Structures
Argument structure
Argument structure is one of the most important domains in grammar that L2
learners need to master before they can fbnn grammatical sentences in the target lan-
guage. The study of argument structure, in turn, is premised on a good understanding
of the concept of verb transitivity, because in many cases the verb determines what
kinds of phrase should (not) be present. The following sentences were produced by
students of the authors, and they all suffer from one problem of complementation
or another:
(1)	This essay discusses whether popular culture can enhance and motivate
second language learners.
(2)	The researcher proposed from the theoretical perspective.
(3)	Students can easily access to different kinds of cultures.
In (1), second language learners cannot be the object of the verb enhance, because
one can only enhance things such as language learning but not second language
learners. The problem of (1) is thus the wrong choice of object. In both (2) and (3)>
the verbs propose and access require a noun phrase to follow them, but they are fol-
lowed by the prepositional phrases from the theoretical perspective (2) and to different
kinds of cultures (3) instead. These two kinds of error are common among second
language learners of English. To help them deal with these problems, in the following,
we explain when a direct object, and what kind, can be used with a verb to fbrin a
grammatical sentence.
Transitivity in English
In this chapter, we compare two major types of sentence structure, transitive and
intransitive, and compare the ways they are used in English and Chinese. Before doing
so, we need to know what the terms transitive and "intransitive mean. Transitivity
is often seen as a property of a verb, of which the information is stored in the lexicon
Transitivity and Syntactic Structures
41
(Chomsky, 1981; Jackendo租 1990). Transitive verbs require a noun phrase as an
argument to follow the verb directly (Hartman & Stork, 1972; Kleiser, 2008; Richards,
Platt, & Weber 1985; Robins, 1964). Consider (4)-(6):
(4)	Peter broke the vase.
(5)	Susan bought a bicycle.
(6)	Mary scolded her son.
We can see from (4) to (6) that the verbs break, buy, and scold are all followed
directly by a noun phrase: the vase, a bicycle, and her son. We therefore call these
verbs 'transitive verbs* and the following noun phrases 'objects： If the noun phrases
are removed, these sentences would become unacceptable under most circumstances,
as in (7) to (9):
(7)	*Peter broke, (to mean: Peter broke something)
(8)	*Susan bought.
(9)	*Mary scold.
Some verbs, however, do not require any noun phrases to follow them. Look at
examples (10)-(12):
(10)	Peter ran.
(11)	She laughed.
(12)	Helen fell.
In each of these examples, no noun phrase is required after the verb to make the
sentence complete. In fact, if we add a noun phrase after the verb in (11) and (12),
the sentence will become unacceptable,1 as shown in (13) and (14). We therefore call
these verbs 'intransitive verbs (Carnie, 2006; Kleiser, 2008).
(13)	*She laughed me.
(14)	*Helen fell the ground.
Although noun phrases often cannot be added as complements after intransitive
verbs, prepositional phrases and adverbial phrases may be added, as illustrated in
(15)-(17):
(15)	Peter ran to the store.
(16)	She laughed at me.
(17)	Helen fell suddenly.
1.	For Example (10), some noun phrases can follow run. For instance, one can say Peter ran a mile. Even in this
case, however, run is not considered a transitive verb, because one cannot change it into a passive sentence,
such as ■ A mile mn by Peter.
42
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
In (15) and (16), to the store and at me are prepositional phrases, because they
are led or introduced by a preposition, to or at. Because they are not noun phrases,
we do not call them objects. Some English verbs can be both transitive and intransi-
tive depending on how they are used, as shown in (18) and (19):
(18)	Mary ate an apple.
(19)	Mary ate.
We can see that the object an apple in (18) can be omitted, as in (19), although the
meaning may be slightly different from (18). Now compare eat with the verb break.
We have shown above that break is a transitive verb. Like eat, break can be an intransi-
tive verb but not in the same way as eat, as shown in (18) and (19). Look at (4) and
7), reproduced below, and (20):
(4) Peter broke the vase.
(7) * Peter broke.
(20)	The vase broke.
We have seen that (4) is grammatical, but (7) is not. However, if we select the
object in (4) to be the subject, as in (20), the sentence becomes acceptable. Thus the
difference between eat and break is that, in the case of eat, no change to the subject
is required regardless of whether the verb is used transitively (18) or intransitively
(19), whereas in the case of break, the subject is a doer (i.e., Peter) when break is
used transitively, and is an object (i.e.» the vase) when the verb is used intransitively.
We will discuss this below using the concept of semantic roles'
One of the problems L2 learners of English face is to remember which verbs are
transitive and which are intransitive, and learners ability to do so is often influenced
by their first language. Chan (2004), for example, showed that Hong Kong secondary
students tend to use care as a transitive verb, as in * We should always more care old
mens health (p. 65), of which the corresponding verb in Chinese is a transitive verb.
Unfortunately, there is no universal rule about whether a given verb is transitive or
intransitive. In other words, a transitive verb in, say, Chinese, does not necessarily
mean that the corresponding verb is also transitive in English (see below).
There is, however, a cross-linguistic trend that, the more semantically transitive2
an event is, the more likely it will be described with a transitive construction (Hopper
& Thompson, 1980; Tsunoda, 1985). For example, across languages, it is more likely
for the act of killing somebody to be described transitively than is the act of liking
2.	Hopper and Ihompson (1980) proposed 10 parameters that measure transitivity semantically. Examples of
these parameters are kinesis, punctuality, and volitionahty. For example,/o/n/ killed Mary is semantically more
transitive than John likes beer because the act of killing is an action (kinesis), whereas liking is a state; killing
is punctual, whereas liking is stative; and killing is often volitional, whereas liking is often not.
Transitivity and Syntactic Structures
43
somebody, because the act of killing is semantically more transitive in the sense that
it involves a transfer of force from one participant to a second participant, causing
the second participant to change its state (from being alive to being dead). The act of
liking, on the other hand, does not involve any transfer of forces from one participant
to a second participant, and the second participant is usually not affected by the act of
liking. In English, since transitivity of a verb is often opaque, the best way is to look up
a good dictionary when unsure whether a verb is characteristically used transitively
or intransitively, or both.
Transitivity in Chinese
Let us turn to transitivity in Chinese. We noted above that transitivity is related to
whether a verb requires an argument to follow it. The same definition may be applied
to Chinese. Look at (21)-(23):
(21)	張三打破了您匝。
Zhangsan da pd	le	hudping
Zhangsan hit broken ASP vase
'Zhangsan broke the vase?
(22)	李四買了 一輛腳踏車。
Lisi	mai	le	yi	Hang	jiaotache
Lisi	buy	ASP	one	CL	bicycle
'Lisi bought a bicycle?
(23)	她罵我的兒子。
Ta ma	wo de	erzi
She scold my NOM son
"She scolded my son?
We can see from these examples that these verbs (打破,da pd, ’break';買,nidi.
'buy'; and ma, 'scold') allow a noun phrase to follow them. It should be noted that
了 (le) is a perfective marker and is part of the verb phrase. However, the situation
is more complicated in Chinese than in English. In English, subject-verb agreement,
word order, and case marking (eg, the use of him instead of he tells us the phrase
serves as an object in the sentence) give information on whether a verb is transitive
or not. In Chinese, however, identifying transitive and intransitive verbs is not as
straightforward as in English, for three reasons.
First, Chinese allows for a null argument. A null argument is understood to be
present but not included or pronounced. In other words, a language allows null argu-
ments if the language allows the subject, the object, or both to be omitted from a
sentence, lb illustrate how Chinese allows null arguments, we may use the sanie test
as we did for (7)-(9) to test whether the sentences in (21)-(23) become unacceptable
44
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
without the object in Chinese. We can see that, except for (23), the sentences are
acceptable without an object, for example, as a response to a question like (24):
(24)甲：那個花瓶呢？
Nd ge huaping ne
That CL vase Q
A: '(what happened to) that vase?'
乙：張三打破了。
Zhangsan	da pd	le
Zhangsan hit broken ASP
B： 'Zhangsan broke (it)：
One may argue that the object can be omitted because both interlocutors know that
they are talking about the vase. In fact, omission of an argument is very common in
Chinese but less so in English. If we compare the equivalent conversation in English
in (25), we can see that the pronoun it is still needed after broke. The reason is that a
null argument is not usually allowed in English.
(25)	A: What happened to the vase?
B: Peter broke it.
That Chinese allows a null argument thus poses a problem in identifying transitive
and intransitive verbs in Chinese. Because arguments can be omitted, it is sometimes
difficult to decide whether a verb is transitive or not.
Second, Chinese does not have as many prepositions as English does. Consider the
examples in (26) and (27):
(26)	靜香會去學校。
Jingxiang hui qii xuexiao
Jingxiang will go school
'Jing xiang will go to school?
(27)	靜香會去三個小時。
Jingxiang	hui	qii	san	ge	xiaoshi
Jingxiang	will	go	three	CL	hour
'Jing xiang will go for three hours?
In (26), it appears that 去(q认'go') is a transitive verb, because 學校(xuexiao.
schoof) follows the verb directly. However, if we compare it with (27), we can see
that 學校(xuexiao. schoof) may not be a direct object.學校(xuexiao, 'school') is a
location where 靜香(Jingxiang) went, but 三個小時(sange xiaoshi, 'three hours) in
(27) is the duration over which 靜香(Jingxiang) will be going. Both of them appear
directly after the verb. This is different from (24), for example, since 花瓶(huaping,
'vase') is the thing that was broken, any noun phrase occupying the same position
Transitivity and Syntactic Structures
45
must be a thing that was broken. The equivalents in English in (28) and (29) below
include the prepositions to and for respectively. In other words, given that Chinese
verbs and prepositions are often indistinguishable, the latter are often referred to as
co-verbs in Chinese, which is another reason why it is relatively more difficult to
decide whether a verb is transitive in Chinese than it is in English.
(28)	Peter went to school.
(29)	Peter went for three hours.
Third, compared with English, topicalization is more salient or commonly used in
Chinese. Topicalization will be covered in more detail in Chapter 7 (subject-prom-
inence versus topic-prominence), but we will briefly explain it here to show how it
causes difficulty in identifying transitive verbs in Chinese. We will briefly illustrate
how the identification of transitive verbs in a Chinese sentence may not be as obvious
due to topicalization.
When a phrase (e.g., a non-subject noun phrase (NP)) is moved to the beginning
of a sentence because the speaker/writer wants to fbcus on the phrase, that phrase is
topicalized. In other words, it is the topic of the sentence from the speakers or writers
point of view. Example (30) is a post on Facebook, in which a Mr Huang (黃先生)
was invited to donate money to a charity organization:
(30)	多謝黄先生的邀請，LV 一定要做！
Duoxie hudng xiansheng de yaoqing shanshi yiding yao zud
Thank Huang mister NOM invitation charity work must need do
'Many thanks to Mr Huang for his invitation. Charity work must be done：
We can see that 善事(shanshi, 'charity work') should be an object of 做(zud.
'do'). That is, the canonical (i.e., normal) order should be 一定要做善車' ('must do
charity'), but because the speaker wants to emphasize charity work, as opposed to
other deeds, it is moved to the beginning of the sentence. Topicalization, together
with null arguments, makes it technically more difficult for us to determine the tran-
sitivity ofa Chinese verb. Consider sentences (31 )-(33), which are possible utterances
said by the same speaker in the same situation. Note the position of 藥 in particular.
(31)	我吃了藥。
Wo chi le yao
I eat ASP medicine
T took medicine?
3.	Mandarin: yidingyiio zud shtinshk Cantonese: iatl ding6 jiu3 zou6 $in6 si6.
46
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
(32)	藥我吃了。
Yao wo chi le
Medicine I eat ASP
As for medicine, I took (it)：
(33)	藥吃了。
Ydo chi le
Medicine eat ASP
'As for medicine,⑴ took (it)：
Example (31) is a canonical word order in Chinese, in which 我(wo) T is the
ctor and the subject, and M (ydo) 'medicine' is the thing affected, hence the object,
n (32), the object 川。'medicine' is topicalized (i.e.» moved to the front or utterance-
initial position). This gives the meaning equivalent to ‘I have taken medicine and not
something else'. In (33), the argument wo T is removed. This is acceptable in Chinese,
because, as discussed earlier, Chinese allows null arguments. The resulting sentence
in (33) now contains only one noun phrase yao 'medicine' and a verb phrase chile
(卩乞 了) 'took； and this makes the sentence look like an intransitive sentence. So should
we say chi (吃)'take' is functioning like an intransitive verb?
Semantic roles
We have said that eat and break can be either transitive or intransitive, but they are
different. In this section, we introduce the concept of semantic role, which is useful
for explaining the syntactic difference between eat and break. Consider the sentences
with eat and break again (reproduced below)：
(18)	Mary ate an apple.
(19)	Mary ate.
(4) Peter broke the vase.
(20)	The vase broke.
The sentences in (18) and (19) have the same subject, Mary. Because Mary is a
person who initiates an action, we call Mary the "Agent： It is important to distinguish
between the terms "subject* and Agent： 'Subject' is a role determined by the sentence
structure. For example. Standard English grammar stipulates that an -s should be
added to the verb if (i) the subject is he, she, or it (or any singular noun or noun
phrase), and (ii) the sentence is in present tense, as in (34):
(34)	He cleans his cars every day.
The third-person singular morpheme (語素)-s on the verb suggests that he, and
not his cars, is the subject of the sentence. The position of the noun phrase in the
Transitivity and Syntactic Structures
47
sentence also suggests that it is a subject. In English, the subject of a sentence usually
occurs in a pre-verbal position (i.e., before the verb). The Agent, in contrast, is a
different concept. It is not determined by the sentence structure but by the meaning
of the sentence. The Agent and other semantic roles are semantic relations between
predicates and arguments (Frawley, 1992, p. 201). That is why we call them semantic
(i.e.)related to meaning) roles.
Returning to the break example in (4), the subject of the transitive verb break is
also an Agent. However, when it is used as an intransitive verb, as in (20), the subject
is no longer an Agent. In (20), the vase is not an Agent, because it is not an actor initi-
ating an action. Instead, it is the thing affected by the action. If someone or something
is affected by an action, we call it a Patient. The difference between break and eat
is summarized in (35a) and (35b). We call the break-type verbs unaccusative verbs,
whereas the eat-type verbs are unergative verbs (Levin & Rappaport Hovav, 1995).
(35a)	Subject		Verb	Object
Transitive	Mary		ate	an apple.
Semantic role	Agent	Patient		
Intransitive	Mary		ate.	（中）
(unergative)		f		
Semantic role	Agent			
				
(35b)	Subject		Verb	Object
Transitive	Peter		broke	the vase.
Semantic role	Agent			Patient
				
Intransitive	Vie vase			— (e)
(unaccusative)
Semantic role Patient
Similarly, a Patient is conceptually different from an object. Like the subject, the
object is a syntactic element. We determine the object from its structure. Typically,
in English, the object is the noun phrase in the post-verbal position (i.e., after the
verb). The Patient, in contrast, is a semantic role determined by the meaning of the
sentence. To further illustrate, consider sentences (36) and (37):
(36)	Bill killed Chris.
(37)	Chris was killed by Bill.
48
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
In (36) and (37), which NP is the subject/object, respectively? From the point
of view of semantic roles, which NP serves as the Agent/Patient, respectively? The
answers to these questions are elucidated in (38). See if you can work out the answers
before continuing reading.
(38)	Subject	Verb	Object	Oblique
Active	Bill	killed	Chris.	
Semantic role	Agent		Patient	
Passive	Chris	was killed	(0)	by Bill.
Semantic role	Patient			
There are many other semantic roles. They are summarized in Table 3.1 (adapted
from Saeed, 2003, pp. 149-151).
Table 3.1
Different semantic roles, their definitions, and examples
Semantic roles	Definition	Examples1
Agent	An entity that initiates an action or an event, which usually causes changes in another entity	Peter broke the vase. Bill killed Chris.
Patient	An entity that undergoes changes in an event	Peter broke the mse. Bill killed Chris.
Theme	An entity that changes in location in an event, or whose location is described	Bill sent the books to Mary. The ball rolled into the river. The books are now at Mary's house.
Percept	An entity which is perceived or experienced	John likes Mary. Chris angered Steve.
Experiencer	An entity that experiences a change in emotion	John likes Mary. Chris angered Steve.
Location	A place where an event takes place	Peter lives in Thailand. I bought it at the flea market.
Source	A place or person from which an entity originates	I got this ring front	srnndmother. She borrowed this book from the library. We heard about the accident from his family, (metaphorically) 	
(continued on p. 49)
4.	Semantic roles are not always as lypical as the examples in Table 3.1. Some linguists argue that a noun phrase
in 2 sentence can fulfil more than one semantic role (JackendofT, 1990). For example, in the sentence
threw the ball, Pete can be an Agent and a source.
Transitivity and Syntactic Structures
49
Table 3.1 (continued)
Semantic roles	Definition	Examples
Goal	A place or person to which an entity moves	Jill walks to 5如。/ every day. Bill sent the books to Mary. Jill told her kids a story, (metaphorically)
Instrument	An entity that is used as a tool	Peter goes to school by bus. Sarah broke the coconut with 以
Beneficiary	A person who benefits from an action or event	Keith washed the car for his father. I cooked her a dinner.
Note: Adapted from Semantics (2nd ed.), by J. I. Saeed, 2003, pp. 149-151.
Some common errors by Chinese learners of English
As we saw at the beginning of this chapter, there are two major types of error com-
monly made by Chinese learners of English: (i) selecting the wrong subject/object,
and (ii) omitting an argument. Some verbs in English are particularly difficult for
learners who speak Chinese or Cantonese as their first language. For example, the
verb concern is often misused. Concern is often taught to mean 關心(Li & Chan,
2001; cf. Li et aL, 2002, http://personaLcityu.edu.hk/~encrproj/eiror_types.htm). In
Chinese, we often say something like (39). Some Chinese learners of English would
produce (40) as an English equivalent of (39):
(39)	我關心她的健康狀況。
Wo	guanxin	ta	de	jiankang	zhuangkuang
I	care.about	her	NOM	health	condition
care about her health condition?
(40)	*1 concern her health.
However, the correct sentence should be (41). We can now explain the difference
between 關心 and concern by semantic roles. In Chinese,關心 takes the Experiencer
(i.eo the person who feels worried) as the subject, and the Percept (i.e., the thing
or person that causes worries) as the object. In contrast, English concern takes the
Percept as the subject and the Experiencer as the object. The resulting sentence in fact
sounds more like Example (42):
(41)	Her health concerns me.
(42)	她的健康狀況使我憂慮。
Ta	de	jiankang	zhuangkuang	shi	wo	youlii
her	NOM	health	condition	make	I	worried
'Her health condition worries me：
The second type of error is omitting an object. As we have seen, Chinese allows
null arguments. Given a rich context, such as when the subject or the object has
50
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
been previously mentioned in the discourse, the object, or the subject, or both,
can be omitted. More advanced learners in general do not omit the subject, but the
problem of omitting the object is still rather common among intermediate learners.
For example. Yuan (1997) reported that even very advanced L2 learners who speak
Chinese as their first language tend to accept the second sentence in (43), where the
object of repair is missing:
(39) Marys bike has gone wrong. Tomorrow I am going to repair for her.
According to Standard English grammar, the pronoun object should be added
fler the verb repair (i.e.,c... to repair it for her'). Learners of English should under-
tand that arguments in an English sentence cannot be omitted like in Chinese. Even
」fit is clear from the context what is being referred to in a conversation, a pronoun,
if not the full noun phrase, should be used.
How to avoid errors regarding transitivity
Confusion of verb transitivity is a problem confronted by many L2 learners of English
which often persists throughout their learning process. For example, Chan (2004)
interviewed 16 lower-intermediate and 26 upper-intermediate learners of English in
Hong Kong, and found that 75% of the lower-intermediate and 46% of the upper-
intermediate participants made errors in verb transitivity. It was also the most
common error for both groups of participants.
We believe a better understanding of semantic roles w川 help learners to become
more aware of the normative syntactic structures of English and Chinese, and, at the
same time, make them more conscious of the roles which are likely to occur in
the subject or object positions. This in turn will strengthen their ability to form gram-
matical sentences in accordance with the norms in Standard English.
If in doubt, learners are also encouraged to check the dictionary regarding how a
given verb should be used. For example, if one looks up the verb concern in Longman
Dictionary of Contemporary English (nd), one will find that one of the explanations
is 'to make someone feel worried or upset： One can insert the subject and the object
into the appropriate positions in the explanation, such as [her health] makes [me]
feel worried or upset (and not I make her health feel worried or upset). This in turn
will make it clear that her health should be the subject (and me the object) of the
verb concern.
In this chapter, we have looked at syntactic structures associated with transitiv-
ity in English and Chinese. We have shown that transitive and intransitive verbs are
relatively easier to identify in English than in Chinese. The lack of a common set of
criteria to identify transitive and intransitive verbs in Chinese and English may be
a source of learning difficulties encountered by Chinese learners of English when
Transitivity and Syntactic Structures
51
using English, often resulting in errors involving the wrong choice of transitivity
pattern. Tliese errors include (1) adding a noun phrase directly after an intransitive
English verb, (2) omitting a noun phrase in the object position of a transitive verb,
and (3) assigning the wrong semantic roles in the subject/object position of a verb.
It is hoped that, by introducing how sentences can be analysed syntactically (sentence
structures) and semantically (semantic roles), learners of English will find it easier to
make grammatical judgements about sentences in both English and Chinese.
Questions and activities
1.	Decide whether the following verbs in English are (a) transitive verbs,
(b) intransitive verbs, or (c) both. Make a sentence with each of these verbs to
justify your answer.
i.	borrow
ii.	wash
iii.	walk
iv.	trust
v.	melt
vi.	hang
vii.	smile
viii.	escape
2.	Decide whether the following verbs in Chinese are (a) transitive verbs,
(b) intransitive verbs, or (c) both. Make a sentence with each of these verbs to
justify your answer.
i.	踢
n.	委託
iii.	進去
iv.	死
v.	開始
vi.	微笑
3.	Ybu may have noticed when doing Exercise 2 that 死 can appear in a sen-
tence like 他死了父親.Do you feel comfortable calling 死 a transitive verb?
Why (not)?	.
4.	Identify the semantic roles of the underlined noun phrases.
i.	Brenda cried at her mother's funeral.
ii.	The painter put his paintings into a large bag.
iii.	I heard a loud noise and the glass door shattered.
iv.	Paul caught a rat in the kitchen.
v.	Fred saw a man with a telescope. (Be careful! There are two interpretations.)
vi.	Susan hates carrots.
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
5.	Apart from concern, can you think of another verb in Chinese and a cor-
responding verb in English that have the same meaning but select different
semantic roles as their subjects?
Further reading
Levin (1993) is a classic study that examines over 3,000 English verbs and shows
how a verbs syntactic behaviour is related to its meaning. Hale and Keyser (2013)
also provide a detailed discussion of three cases of transitivity alternation in English.
Readers who are interested in the issue of transitivity in Chinese can find a more
in-depth discussion in Zhao (1982).
4
Passive Voice
What is the passive?
In this chapter, we w山 discuss what the passive is and how it is used in English and
Chinese. To begin with, consider (1)-(3):
(1)	*1 am graduated from the Education University of Hong Kong.
(2)	*She has been suffered from cancer tor the past two years.
(3)	*The accident was happened five years ago.
In all of these sentences, the auxiliary verb be (i.e., am graduated, has suffered,
wns happened) should be deleted. The correct versions thus are (4)-(6):
(4)	I graduated from the Education University of Hong Kong.
(5)	She has suffered from cancer for the past two years.
(6)	The accident happened five years ago.
Tlie question that arises is： Why is it ungrammatical to passivize the verbs in (4)-
(6)? This has to do with the properties of the verb.
Transitivity and passive voice in English
Before discussing the issues regarding the passive, it is necessary to understand what a
passive sentence is. The passive construction is often misunderstood to be a construc-
tion that takes an undergoer as the subject (Liberman, 2009； Pullum, 2011). In fact,
the passive is a syntactic phenomenon (Haspelmath, 1990). In English, a typical
passive sentence1 has the auxiliary be and the past participle of a verb. Therefore,
He died is not a passive sentence, whereas He was killed is.
In Chapter 3, we discussed transitive and intransitive verbs. To recapitulate,
transitive verbs require a direct object, and intransitive verbs do not allow a direct
1. There is also the ^/-passive in English (e.g., the car got stolen).
54
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
object. These are closely related to the passive construction in English.2 Consider (7)
and (8):
(7)	Peter broke the vase.
(8)	The vase was broken (by Peter).
We can see that (7) is a basic active (as opposed to passive) sentence with the verb
break, which is a transitive verb, in this case because it is followed by a noun phrase the
wise. Example (8) is a passive sentence, as evidenced by the presence of an auxiliary
be before the main verb, which is in the past participle form broken. The difference
between (7) and (8) is that the object in (7)—the vase—becomes the subject in (8).
In other words, a passive sentence can be seen as a product of transformation*
from an active sentence. It thus follows that, if there is no direct object in the active
counterpart, the corresponding passive sentence (via transformation or otherwise)
will not be feasible. This is illustrated in ⑼ and (10):
(9)	Mary laughed [].
(10)	*[ ] was laughed.
Laugh is an intransitive verb. When it is used in an active sentence, the result
is Mary laughed, as in (9). In other words, after the verb laughs there is no noun
phrase following it. We saw in ⑺ and (8) that the passive is formed via moving the
object in the active sentence to the subject position (i.e., the beginning of a sentence).
However, there is no object in (9). The resulting sentence in (10) lacks a subject and
is thus ungrammatical.
Returning to the sentences in (1)-(3), the verbs graduate, suffer, and happen are
intransitive verbs. They all take either a Theme or a Patient as the subject, as shown
in(ll)-(13).
(12)
(13)
graduates
Because these verbs are intransitive, we do not need to, and in fact we cannot,
transform these active sentences into passive sentences. Verbs that can take a Theme
or a Patient as their only argument are called ergative or unaccusative verbs, and they
_________________________
2. In some languages, it is also possible to passivize intransilive verbs. For example, in Japanese, one can say
恩 f I二死—MX： fnu$uko nishin-arc-1a [(lit.) I was died by my son], in which the verb shinu 4die* is used with
the passive morpheme -are. lhe sentence means *my son died on me：
Passive Voice
55
are more susceptible to over-passivization than are other intransitive verbs such as
walk and run, which take an Actor/Agent as the only argument. Yip (1995) argues
that learners might have interpreted these verbs as "underlyingly transitive (p. 137).
Although a passive sentence involves a transitive verb,3 it should be noted that
not all transitive verbs can be passivized. For example, one can say he resembles his
father, but not ^his father is resembled by him. The explanation is beyond the scope of
this book.
The passive in Chinese
According to Li and Thompson (1981), the term passive in Mandarin Chinese is
often used to refer to sentences containing the word 被(bei). In syntactic struc-
tures, Chinese is similar to English, in that only transitive verbs can occur in passive
sentences. This is illustrated in (14)-(17).
(14)	張三殺了李四。
Zhangsan	sha le	lisi
Zhangsan	kill	ASP Lisi
'Zhangsan killed Lisi：
(15)	李四被殺了。
Lisi b^i sha le
Lisi BEI kill ASP
(16)
'Lisi was killed?
李四死
si
die
(17)
Lisi
Lisi
'Lisi died?
*[]被死了
bei si
BEI die
*[ 1 was died?
le
ASP
le
ASP
We can see in (15) that 殺(s/ni, 'kill') can occur in a passive sentence, because it is
a transitive verb, as shown in (14). On the other hand,死(s[ 'die') cannot occur in a
passive sentence, as shown in (17), because it is an intransitive verb, and there is no
object that can be moved to the subject position of the passive sentence.4
3.	Some passive sentences involve an intransitive and a prepositional phrase (e.g„ the bed has been slept in).
4.	In recent years* there has been a tendency to use bit with intransitive verbs such as 自殺(zb/iu, 'commit
suicide),辭職'quit a job'), etc.
56
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
Differences in using the English and Chinese passive
Using the English passive
According to Thompson (1987), the use of the passive is mainly for two reasons
(p. 497):
A： If the agent is not to be mentioned, use the passive.
B: If the agent is to be mentioned, then use the passive only when the non-
agent is more closely related than the agent either
Bl: to the 'theme' of the 'paragraph： or
B2: to the participant in the immediately preceding clause.
To elaborate, the passive is used ⑴ because the Actor (Agent) is unknown or
unidentifiable (corresponding to A above), or the Actor is either irrelevant or unim-
portant to the hearer (corresponding to Bl), and (ii) the discourse drives the use of
the Patient to be in the subject position (corresponding to B2). We will illustrate these
in the following.
The reader might have experience shopping online, and might have seen emails
like the one in (18)：
(18)	Your item has been shipped.
The use of the passive is motivated by the fact that the person who shipped the
item is not important to the receiver of the email. In fact, it would be strange if
the company sends you an email like (19), because the most important message is
the whereabouts of the item and not who took it to the post office:
(19)	K4ichael has shipped your item.
The use of the passive in (18) is therefore justified because the person who shipped
the item is not important, at least to the receiver of the email, and thus this in forma-
tion should not be included. On the contrary, if information about the shipper is
included, as in (19), the receiver of the message might find it confusing and wonder
why it is relevant.
Now consider another case involving the use of a passive sentence. Compare
the two paragraphs in (20) and (21). Example (20) is an excerpt from the novel
Harry Potter and the Sorcerers Stone (Rowling, 1998), and (21) is a slightly modified
version:
MWWMWWWW
Passive Voice
57
(20)	Albus Dumbledore didnt seem to realize that he had just arrived in a
street where everything from his name to his boots was unwelcome.
He was busy rummaging in his cloak, looking for something. But he did
seem to realize he was being watched, because he looked up suddenly at
the cat, which was still staring at him from the other end of the street.
(21)	Albus Dumbledore didn't seem to realize that he had just arrived in a
street where everything from his name to his boots was unwelcome.
He was busy rummaging in his cloak, looking for something. But he did
seem to realize (the cat/something/somaone) was watching him, because
he looked up suddenly at the cat, which was still staring at him from the
other end of the street.
Although (21) is possible, the reader will probably agree that the original excerpt
in (20) sounds better. The reason is that the whole paragraph is talking about Albus
Dumbledore. If we imagine the situation as if we are watching a movie, our eyes are
on Dumbledore from the beginning of the paragraph. If an active sentence is used
and the cat is mentioned, as in (21), our focus would have to shift to the cat, and
then back to Dumbledore (because the cat was watching him), and then back to the
cat again (because he looked up at the cat). This shift of focus would cause an abrupt
transition of attention from Dumbledore to the cat.
Consider another example of the English passive. The excerpt in (22) is a narrative
about how olive oil is made:
(22)	'the fresh fruit is collected into a weighting hopper along with some leaves
and twigs, but these can easily be removed later. A machine like this can
collect as many olives in an hour as it would take the traditional farmer
to collect in an entire day. When the harvest reaches the production plant
the fruit is washed to remove leaves and twigs in the collection process.
The more stubborn twigs and branches that remained are filtered out
using a grill, which only allows the fruit to pass through*
The use of the passive in (22) can be explained by both reasons discussed above:
(i) the excerpt is about olive oil production, focusing on the main ingredients—
olives—and so the doer(s) in the process is(are) unimportant information, and (ii) the
excerpt has been following the 'fate' of the olives： the olives, together with the leaves
and twigs, are collected, and then the leaves and twigs are removed and filtered, and
the olives are washed. By using the passive in this excerpt, the reader will not need
to attend to other entities that are seen to be 'peripheral' in the process. The excerpt
would look very different if the passive sentences were changed into active ones. The
reader might want to do it as an exercise.
58
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
Using the Chinese passive
Unlike English, the Chinese passive is traditionally used to express adversity (i.e.»
unfavourable situations) (Li & Thompson, 1981). Consider (23) and (24).
(23)	我的錢包被人偷走了。 Wo de	qidnbao bei ren	tou	zou	le
	I NOM wallet BEI people 'My wallet was stolen by someone：	steal	away	ASP
(24)	他的褲子被狗咬破了。 Ta de	kuzi bei gou yao	Pb	le	
	He NOM pants BEI dog bit	torn	ASP	
His pants had a hole bitten in them by a/the dog：
Examples (23) and (24) are typical unfavourable events from the subjects point of
/iew. Interestingly, when a neutral verb is used, the adversity meaning is still at play.
Examples (25) and (26) are adapted from Li and Thompson (1981, p. 496).
(25)	張三被人看見了。
Zhangsan bei	ren	kanjidn le
Zhangsan BEI people see	ASP
*Zhangsan was seen by someone?
(26)	我們的話被聽到了。
Women	de	hud	bei	tingddo	le
We	NOM	conversation	BEI	hear	ASP
"Our conversation was overheard?
In (25), although it is not clear under what circumstances Zhangsan was seen,
we can be sure that Zhangsan did not want to be seen. In other words, this is an
unfavourable situation for Zhangsan. It is also clear in (26) that the speaker was not
happy about the fact that their conversation was overheard.
Usage of the Chinese and English passive: Contrastive differences
Whereas the Chinese passive is often used to express adversity, there is no such ten-
dency in English. The mismatch in function in the use of the passive between Chinese
and English explains why many passive sentences in English cannot be translated into
Chinese using the passive. Consider the examples in (27)-(32):
(27)	The bridge was built in 1908.
Passive Voice
59
(28)	*這條橋於1908年被建成。 Zhe tido qido yu 1980 nidn		bei BEI	jian build	cheng complete
	this CL bridge in 'The bridge was built in 1908?	year			
(29)	這條橋於1908年建成。 Zhe tido qido yu 1980	nidn	jian	cheng	
(30) (31)	this CL bridge in 'The bridge was built in 1908： The bill has been paid. 才這賬單已經被缴付了。	year	build	complete	
(32)
Zhe zhang dan jijing	bei jiaofii le
This CL	bill already 'The b山 has been paid： 這賬單已經繳付了。	BEI paid ASP
Zhe zhang dan jijing	jiaofii le
This CL	bill already 'The bill has been paid?	paid ASP
We can see that (27) and (30) are legitimate passive sentences in English. However,
their directly translated passive counterparts in Chinese in (28) and (31) are unac-
ceptable. When 被(b3) is removed, as in (29) and (32), they become acceptable.
These examples show clearly that the passive in English functions differently from
that in Chinese. In Chinese, if the object of a verb is to be the fbcus of the sentence,
one only needs to place it at the beginning of the sentence. This is called topicaliza-
tion, which has been briefly discussed in Chapter 3 (see also Chapter 7). The freedom
to topicalize almost any noun phrase in Chinese allows Chinese to avoid using the
passive in most cases, and the use of the passive in Chinese (i.e., the bet-passive) is
traditionally reserved for expressing adversity, even though under the influence of
the English passive, the fen-passive is getting more and more widespread (for more
details, see Chapter 8, Europeanization).
Tlie non-adversity use of the passive 被(淀i) construction in Chinese is increas-
ingly popular (Li & Thompson, 1981). For example, many native speakers would find
(33) quite acceptable.
(33)他的工作表現被老闆賞識。
Ta	de	gdngzud	biaoxidn	bei	laobcin	shangshi
He	NOM	work	performance	BEI	boss	recognize
'His performance at work was recognized by the boss?
60
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
In addition to 被words such as 獲受到(shoudao), or 得到(dedao)
have passive meaning, which can be used in favourable situations. Example (33) can
thus be rephrased as (34):
(34)他的工作表現獲/受到/得到老闆賞識。
Ta de gdngzud biaoxian	huo/shdudao/deddo laoban shangshi
He NOM work performance receive	boss recognize
'His performance at work was recognized by the boss：
To summarize, the use of the passive in English is often driven by the demotion or
backgrounding of the Actor/Agent or the promotion or foregrounding of the Patient/
Theme. That is> in English the passive is used because the Patient/Theme is more rel-
evant to the conversation or in a written text than the Actor/Agent is. In contrast, the
passive in Chinese is often used to express adversity, although the use of the formal
passive using the passive marker 被(bei) to refer to neutral or even favourable situ-
ations is getting more and more common. If there is a need to focus on an object of
in active sentence in Chinese, the object will be placed in the topic position of the
sentence (i.e., the beginning of the sentence) without using any marker, such as bei.
As mentioned, the difficulty Chinese learners of English have with the passive in
English is partly related to topicalization. In fact, it is also related to other syntactic
properties of the Chinese language, including the serial verb construction and the
^-construction (把字句).
Over-passivization and how to avoid it
Over-passivization, which refers to passivization of intransitive verbs, is a type of
error often made by Chinese learners of English (Yip, 1995). In fact, over-passivization
is a common error among English learners of different LI backgrounds (Zobl> 1989).
In general, learners tend to over-passivize a certain type of intransitive verb called
'unaccusative verbs： Unaccusative verbs take a Theme or a Patient as the subject.
Examples are suffer, happen^ and disappear (see examples 1-3 above). On the other
hand, learners are less likely to over-passivize "unergative verbs*—verbs that take a
doer as the subject—such as walk, laugh, and play. In fact, all the examples given at
the beginning of this chapter involve unaccusative verbs.
Since the passive is closely related to transitivity, it is important for learners to
understand the syntactic patterns in which a given verb occurs, that is, whether a
verb is a transitive or intransitive verb, and what arguments it takes as the subject
and the object. Learners should also understand that the subject of a sentence is not
necessarily a doer or initiator of an action or event, as in the case of unaccusative
verbs. Looking up the transitivity pattern of a verb in a good, reliable dictionary is a
good practice.
Passive Voice
61
Questions and activities
1・ Decide which of the following verbs can be passivized. Make a sentence with
each of the verbs that you think can be passivized. Explain the meaning of the
sentence (N.B.: a verb can have many senses. Sometimes it can be passivized in
one sense, but not in others).
i.	think
ii.	call	.
iii.	slip
iv.	notice
v.	walk
vi.	give
2.	For the following verbs, decide how many arguments (e.g., subject, direct
object, indirect object) it can accommodate. Then describe the semantic role
of the arguments as in Examples (II)-(IZ). You may use a dictionary. Finally,
if they have two arguments, form a passive sentence with the verb. Are they
good passive sentences? Why or why not?
i.	suit
ii.	frighten
iii.	flatter
iv.	vanish
v.	lack
3.	Go to google.coni. Search for 被(bei\ and look at the first 20 entries where it is
used as a passive marker (ignore irrelevant entries such as 綿 被).How many of
them are associated with adverse meanings?
4.	Translate the following English text into Chinese. When translating, bear in
mind the differences between Chinese and English discussed in this chapter.
The World Health Organization recommended Tuesday that nations regu-
late electronic cigarettes and ban them from use indoors until the exhaled
vapor is proven not to harm bystanders. It also called for a ban on sales
to minors of the popular nicotine-vapor products, and to either forbid or
keep to a minimum any advertising, promotion or sponsorship.
The Geneva-based agency said the ^apparently booming* S3 billion
global market for more than 400 brands of e-cigarettes means appropriate
regulation is needed. Regulation "is a necessary precondition for estab-
lishing a scientific basis on which to judge the effects of their use, and
for ensuring that adequate research is conducted and the public health is
protected and people made aware of the potential risks and benefits^' the
report said.
(Adapted from NBC News. Retrieved from http:〃'、wwnbcne\vs・com/
health/health-news/who-urges-stiff-regulation-e-cigarettes-nl89176.)
62
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
5.	Look tor two signs, one in English and one in Chinese (e.g., on campus, near
your home, etc.) in which the passive is used. Can you explain why the passive
is used in each of the two cases?
Further reading
Brinton and Brinton (2010) discuss the syntactic structure of the passive construction
in English, and provides many examples of transitive verbs that cannot appear in a
passive sentence. Li and Thompson (1981) include an in-depth discussion of the vari-
ations in the use of the passive construction in Chinese. For more advanced readers,
Shi (1997) offers an informative overview of various syntactic features associated with
the Chinese passive.
5
Tense and Aspect
Introduction
Tense and aspect are two linguistic domains that are often treated as if they are the
same. In fact, they highlight different time-related meanings of an event. For example,
there are subtle semantic differences between (1) and (2):
(1)	I did my homework.	(past tense)
(2)	I have done my homework.	(present perfect tense)
Although the process is the same (i.e., 'do my homework'), notice that (1), with
simple past tense did, is expressed as an action in the past which is unrelated to the
present. By contrast, in (2), with present perfect tense have done, while the speaker
similarly considers the action ("doing homework') is completed as of now, the result
of that action (i.e., completed homework) continues to be relevant to the present
(e.g., the speaker makes a case to his mother that he now has the right to play com-
puter games). In this chapter, we will explain what tense and aspect are, how they are
expressed in English and Chinese, and the common errors made by Chinese learners
of English.
Tense and aspect in English
Before we explain what tense (時態)and aspect (時貌)are, let us consider the sen-
tences in (3) and (4). Example (3) is adapted from a novel, and (4) is a modified
version of (3).
(3)	The man was running so hard and it must have been cold because smoke
and foam were spewing from his mouth in puffs as it had from the horses
before, (van Dijk, 2006, p. 569)
(4)	The man ran so hard and it must have been cold because smoke and (bam
spewed from his mouth in puffs as it had from the horses before.
64
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
Both sentences describe a man-running situation. The event described in both
sentences happened in the past, as indicated by the past form of the verb be (i.e., wasl
were) in (3), and the use of past tense forms (e.g., ran) in (4).
But there is another obvious difference between (3) and (4). Example (3) uses
present participles such as running and spewingy whereas (4) uses the past tense
forms ran, spewed, etc. The 'tense' in (3) is often called 'past continuous tense； but in
linguistics, the continuous part is referred to as aspect. That is, Example (3) is in past
tense, and it has progressive* aspect. Example (4), on the other hand, is in past tense
but has perfective aspect.
Tense indicates when an event happens/happened (Comrie, 1976): whether it hap-
pened in the past, is happening now, or will happen in the future. Strictly speaking,
English has only three tenses: past, present, and future.1 One does not have a choice
of which tense to use when describing an event, because if the event happened in the
、ast, one is bound to use the past tense form, as shown in (5) and (6).
(5)	I was born in 1993, when my mother was 30 years old.
(6)	I was cleaning the floor when you called (last night/two months ago).
In contrast, aspect represents how the speaker views an event (Brinton & Brinton,
2010; Radden, 2007): whether he or she sees an event as a complete whole, or one
that is ongoing or developing. The situation described in (3), where the progres-
sive is used, is more vivid and may give the reader a sense that he or she has gone
back in time, looking at the event happening or unfolding in front of his or her eyes,
as illustrated in Figure 5.1. The bar in grey symbolizes the length or duration of
the event. With an imperfective (progressive) viewpoint, the event is viewed from
within. In other words, the event is seen as having an internal time frame. In contrast,
(4) may give the reader a sense of viewing that same event from the outside, as illus-
trated in Figure 5.2. The event is viewed externally as if it were a black dot, with no
attention to the 'inside' of the event. The event is not seen as having an internal time
frame. We call the viewpoint in (3) imperfective (or, specifically, progressive), and
the viewpoint in (4) perfective^ It should be noted that, regardless of the viewpoint
(i.e., perfective or imperfective) one takes, it does not change the fact that the event
happened in the past and past tense must be used.
1. Some linguists argue that there is no future tense in English. We are not going to elaborate on this because it
is beyond the scope of this book.
Tense and Aspect
65
[man run]
This is you.
Figure 5.1
The progressive (imperfective) viewpoint in a past event
Now
This is you.
[man run]
Now
Figure 5.2
The perfective viewpoint in a past event
As long as the man-running event happened in the past, both (3) and (4) are gram-
matical sentences. The only difference between the two versions is how the writer
presents the event to the reader. The writer/speaker thus has relatively more freedom
in choosing an aspect than in choosing a tense.
There is a recurrent past situation where both the progressive and perfective view-
points must be used (see, e.g., (7)). When two events are referred to, one serving as
the 'background' to the other 'foregrounded' event, the background event must be
expressed using the progressive aspect (e.g.» was cleaning), while the foregrounded
event has to be in perfective aspect (e.g., called). Compare (7)-(9):
(7)	John was reading when Mary entered.
(8)	Sue was going to the library when she met Tim.
(9)	We were watching TV when the telephone rang.
Such a type of situation has been characterized as 'incidence schema:
PERF + IMPF (foreground + background; main foreground event cutting into
background event) (Sasse, 2002, p. 228; cf. Li, 2011, p. 46)
It is important to make a clear distinction between tense and aspect when English
and Chinese are compared, because Chinese (and Cantonese), unlike English, does
not have tense markers; it only has aspect markers.
66
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
Aspect in Cantonese and Mandarin Chinese
Native speakers of Cantonese, when asked how pastness is expressed in Cantonese/
Chinese, often answer that 咗/了(zo2〃e) indicates an event that happened in the
past. However, this is a common misconception. Consider the sentences in (10)-(12)
below:
(10)我尋	晚睇	咗一齣	電影/我昨晚看	了一部	電影。
Ngo5	cam4	maan5	tai2 zo2 jatl	ceotl	din6 jing2
W5	zuo	wan	kdn le y\	bii	dianying
I	last	night	watch ASP a	CL	movie
*1 saw a movie last night?
(11)	I saw a movie yesterday.
(12)	你尋晚打比我喺陣我抹緊地/
你打電話給我的時候我在擦地板。
Nei5 cani4 maan5 daa2 bei2 ngo5 go2 zan2 以go5 maat3 gan2 dei6
You last night call give I	CL moment I	clean ASP floor
Ni da dianhua gei w de	shihdu wo zai	cd	diban
You call phone give I NOM moment I	ASP clean floor
‘I was cleaning the floor when you called*
In (10),咗/了(zo2/le) appears after the verb 睇/看.The time of the event is
yesterday, and it may lead us to think that 咗(zo2) functions as a past tense marker
like saw in (11). However, if we compare (12) and (6)» we will have a different conclu-
sion. In (12), the time of the event is still yesterday, but no 咗/了(zo2〃e) is used.
The past tense forms was and called in the corresponding English sentence (6) have
no equivalents in (12).
On the other hand,咗/了(zo2//e) can be used in non-past events (i.e., present or
future). Consider the sentence in (13).
(13)	下個星期五我已經去咗(了)英國啦。
Haa6 go3 singlkei4ng5	ngo5 ji5gingl	heoi3	zo2	jinglgwok3	laa3
Xia ge xlngqiwii	wo yijing	q心	le	y^igguo	le
Next CL Friday	I	already	g。	ASP	England	SFP
T will have gone to England next Friday?					
The sentence in (13) describes an event (going to England) in the future (next
Friday). If 咗/了(zo2〃e) was a past tense marker corresponding to the regular past
・ed in English, we would not expect 咗/了 (zo2/le) to appear in (13)> because it is
an event in the future. However, (13) is perfectly acceptable. This further shows that
咗/了(zo2//e) is not a past tense marker. In fact,咗/ 了 (zo2/le) is a perfective
marker which is used to indicate the completion of an event in relation to a point in
Tense and Aspect
67
time (e.g., next Friday). The completion point can be in the past, as in (10), or in the
future, as in (13).
Chinese thus has no tense markers. Consider (12) again. Although the events
(me cleaning the floor and you calling) happened in the past, there is no marker such
as ・ed that signifies this past tense meaning. Rather, ngo5 maat3 gan2 dei6/wo zai cd
di ban I am/was cleaning the floor' are both compatible with situations happening at
present, in the future, or in the past as in (12).
A friend of one of the authors, who is a native speaker of English, once asked how
Chinese speakers know whether they are talking about a past event or not if Chinese
does not have past tense markers such as ・ed. Although sometimes clarification is
necessary, in general Chinese native speakers have little problem understanding
when an event happens/happened while interacting in Cantonese/Chinese. We have
other linguistic devices, such as phrases of time serving as adverbials (yesterday.
Inst Monday^ etc.). Even without these adverbial phrases, often we can deduce time-
sensitive information from the context at large. For example, in (14), despite a lack of
tense marking, we can still easily infer that the two persons are talking about things
that happened in the past:
(14)
甲：我星期日去咗海洋公園慶祝母親節。你呢？
Ngo5 singl kei4 jat6 heoi3
I Sunday go
hing3 zukl niou5 canl zit3.
celebrate Mothers Day.
A: T went to Ocean
Park to celebrate
zo2	hoi2 joeng4 gungl jyun2
ASP Ocean Park
Nei5 nel
Ybu Q
Mothers Day on Sunday. What
about you?'
我朝早飲茶'下午睇戲，夜晚就煮飯俾畀媽媽食°
B:
Ngo5	ziid zou2	)am2 caa4,	haa6 ng5	tai2	hei3
I	morning	yum-cha	afternoon	watch	movie
je6 rnaan5	zau6	zyu2	faan6	bei2	maa4 maal	$ik6
evening	then	cook	rice	give	mother	eat
CI had yum-cha in the morning, saw a movie in the afternoon, and
cooked dinner for my mother in the evening?
In fact, the utterance by B in (14) can also be an answer to the question 'What are
your plans next Sunday?* and in this case, the events will happen in the future.
Past tense in English and perfective marker in Cantonese/Mandarin
Chinese
Although the past tense marking function in English (i.e.» regular past -ed and
irregular past) and the perfective marker in Cantonese/Chinese 咗/ J (zo2/le)
68
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
are conceptually distinct, functionally they overlap in meaning to some extent. The
reason is that the past tense form in English also has perfective as part of its meaning.
In other words, English past marking has two functions: indicating an event that
happened in the past, and viewing the event externally. For example, (15) would be
unacceptable if the man is still running a marathon at the time of speech.
(15)	The man ran a marathon.
The logical next question to ask is whether a past tense marker can be imper-
fective. That is, can we view an event that happened in the past as if it has not yet
ended? The answer is yes. In Example (6), the verb form was cleaning is progressive
(i.e., imperfective). Jn other words, we can 'pretend, that we are in the past and look at
the event as it unfolds from within (as shown in Figure 5.1). In many languages, such
as Spanish and French, there are two kinds of past tense, perfective and imperfective.
Perfective and perfect
In English, perfect *tense refers to the form to have + past participle, as shown in (16).
(16)	I have sent her an email about the exam.
Perfect 'tense' seems to be very similar to simple past tense in that both denote
a completed event, but they have rather subtle differences. Compare (16) and (17).
(17)	I sent her an email about the exam.
Out of context, it is difficult to tell which utterance is correcf or more appropri-
ate. In fact, either of them can be correct, depending on the speaker's focus. The use
of have in (16) suggests that the sentence is in the present tense ('present perfect,).
It might seem odd at first to use the present tense when the event is obviously com-
pleted, but the use of the present perfect in fact indicates the relevance of the event to
the present time. Example (16) can be rephrased as (18):
(18)	I am currently in the state of having completed the action of sending her
an email about the exam.
This state of current relevance helps explain why (16), using the present perfect
tense, is more appropriately used as a response to a question like 'Are you sure she
knows about the exam?* rather than 'What did you do?' The latter would be more
appropriate as a response to (17).
This can be further illustrated in (19) and (20). There are two verbs in example
(19), which are both in the past tense: one simple past (came), the other past perfect
(had sent). Example (20) is a paraphrase of (19):
Tense and Aspect
69
(19)	I had sent her an email about the exam before I came.
(20)	I was in a state of having completed the action of sending her an email
about the exam.
We can tell clearly that (17) is in the present tense, whereas (19) is in the past tense.
Example (17) signifies the present state of the speaker, whereas (19) signifies the state
of the speaker at a time in the past.
So what is the difference between (16) and (17)? Example (17) is a simple descrip-
tion of what the speaker did, as in the conversation in (21).
(21)	Mary: What did you do on Sunday?
Peter: I sent Susan an email about the exam.
It would be very unnatural fbr Peter to answer Marys question in (21) with the
response (16): T have sent Susan an email； because Mary was asking him about what
he did in the past and not the relevance of that completed action (the sending ot the
email) to the present. The same explanation applies to (1) and (2) in the beginning of
this chapter. Thus, (1) is a description of what T did at a certain point in time in the
past, and the action has little relevance to the present, whereas (2) is an expression
to show the relevance of the completed action (i.e.» doing homework) to the present
(e.g., in a situation in which the boy asks his mother if he can play computer games).
Other aspect markers in Chinese
Although Chinese lacks tense markers, it has more aspect markers than English has.
For instance, aspect markers in Mandarin Chinese include 過(gi/。)(experiential)
and 著(zhe) (continuous).過(gud) is used to highlight the experience, as shown in
(22)	and (23).
(22)	大雄去過台灣。
Daxiong qu guo tai wan
Daxiong go ASP Taiwan
'Daxiong has been to Taiwan?
(23)	我愛過他。
Wo di	gud	ta
I	love ASP he
‘I was once in love with him：
過(gud) is similar to 咗/了 (zo2/le), in that they both highlight the endpoint of
an event. However, their meanings are completely different. Compare (24) and (25)：
70
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
(24)	大雄去了台灣。
Ddxiong qii le tdiwan
Daxiong go ASP Taiwan
'Daxiong went to Taiwan：
(25)	*我愛了他。
Wo ai gub td
I love ASP he
‘I have loved him?
It is unacceptable to say (22) if Daxiong is still in Taiwan (Li & Thompson, 1981).
It is only acceptable when Daxiong went to Taiwan and then came back. In (23) and
(25)> we can see that we can attach gud to 愛'love'), but le is not compatible with
the same verb.
著(zhe) (continuous aspect) is used with durative verbs. Durative verbs describe
actions/events that have duration. For example,等(deng) cwaif is a durative verb,
unlike 爆炸(bao zhd explode1) and 畢業(bi ye "graduate) verbs which are per-
ceived as not having any internal time frame or duration (hence the oddity of *爆
炸著(％初 zha zhe exploding) and *畢著業zhe ye graduating,).著(zhe) in
Mandarin Chinese or 住｛zyu6) in Cantonese, is very similar to 在(zdi) (Mandarin
Chinese) or 緊(gn”2) (Cantonese) respectively.在(zdi) and 緊(gan2) are used to
mark imperfective aspect, but 著(zhe) and 在/緊(zdi/gn〃2) are used with different
verb types.在(zdi) can only be used with activity verbs (i.e., dynamic action verbs)
(Li & Thompson, 1981). Other verb types, such as stative verbs, are not compatible
with zdi, as shown in (26)-(28):
(26)	李四在跑步。(activity verb)
Lisi zdi paobu
Lisi ASP run
*Lisi is running?
(27)	*李四在愛他的妻子。(stative verb)
Lisi	zdi	ai	td	de	qizi
Lisi	ASP	love	he	NOM	wife
'Lisi is loving his wife?
(28)	*李四在門口 在站。(verb of posture)
Lisi zai minkou zdi	zhan
Lisi at	door	ASP stand
cLisi is standing at the door?
Zhe (著),on the other hand is compatible with most verb types, as shown in
(29)-(31).
Tense and Aspect
71
(29)	李四跑著步。
Lisi pao zhe bit
Lisi run ASP step
'Lisi is running?
(30)	李四愛著他的妻子。
Lisi	di	zhe	ta	de5	qizi
Lisi	love	ASP	he	NOM	wife
cLisi is in love with his wife?
(31)	李四在門口站著。
Lisi zdi menkou zhan	zhe
Lisi at	door	stand ASP
"Lisi is standing at the door?
However, you may notice that there is a slight difference between (26) and (29).
Whereas (26) can occur on its own, (29) would sound better if it is attached to another
clause, as in (32).
(32)	李四跑著步去學校。
Lisi	pao	zhe	bit	qu	xuexiao
Lisi	run	ASP	step	go	school
cLisi is running to school?
In (32),跑著步(pao zhe bit, 'running') functions as a means for 去學校(4"
xuexido, going to school'). Thus 著(zhe) fulfils a function of backgrounding a clause
(Li & Bowerman, 1998).
There are also verbs to which both 在(ztii) and 著(zhe) can be attached, but they
produce different meanings. Consider (33) and (34):
(33)	她在穿和服。
Ta zdi chuan hefu
she ASP wear kimono
'She is putting on a kimono.'
(34)	她穿著和服。
Ta chuan zhe hefii
she wear ASP kimono
'She is wearing a kimono. / She is in a kimono?
While (33) and (34) may both be translated as 'She is wearing a kimono' in
English, (33) describes an action of putting on traditional Japanese attire, whereas
(34) describes a state in which the girl is in traditional Japanese attire. These examples
clearly distinguish the different functions of the two aspect markers: zHii is a progres-
sive aspect marker, whereas zhe is a continuous aspect marker.
72
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
Misuse of English tense and aspect among Chinese EAL learners
Many L2 learners of English do not think that past tense is particularly difficult,
because they started learning the function of past tense at a young age, and by and
large they are able to produce past tense forms, including the irregular forms that they
have memorized. The difficulty, however, does not lie in whether a learner knows if a
verb is regular or not or is able to produce the correct fbrm> but to supply past tense
marking in appropriate contexts.
Indeed, past tense marking is often omitted by Chinese learners of English, espe-
ially when speaking. One reason is related to processing. Our cognitive resources are
mited, and speaking a second language usually requires more effort than does speak-
ing our first language. Research has shown that L2 learners tend to be less sensitive
to morphological marking in the target language than are native speakers (Clahsen,
Felser, Neubauer, Sato, & Silva, 2010). Learners tend to compromise inflections,
because they tend not to severely affect the meaning of a sentence. They are not used
to paying attention to inflections, especially when their first language lacks them.
In the case of past tense marking, because Chinese does not require any tense marking
and the time of the event is often conveyed through the use of time adverbials (e.g.,
yesterday, last Sunday^ Chinese EAL learners of English tend to neglect English tense
marking when making sense of English input or producing English output.
The second reason is related to a tendency to dissociate past tense with events
that lack an endpoint (i.e.» atelic events), especially stative verbs. This is one of the
predictions of the Aspect Hypothesis (Andersen, 1991; Robison, 1990; Shirai, 1991).
Even if learners have sufficient time to think (e.g., when they write in English), they
sometimes make the wrong judgement about which tense should be used. The supply
of past tense is usually easier when the event being described has an endpoint, such
as the one in (35):
(35)	She left the room a few minutes ago.
Example (35) is a clear case of past tense： The act of leaving started and ended a
few minutes ago. But in (36), many learners may have difficulty deciding what tense
is more appropriate:
(36)	I saw a movie yesterday, and it was about the Second World War.
Be is a stative verb. That is, we tend to perceive that the property of being about
the Second World War continues without an endpoint. Therefore, it is relatively dif-
ficult for us to decide whether past tense should be used in (36). But the use of past
tense here only indicates the speakers recalling of the movie. The speaker is viewing
a past event from the present time, as illustrated in Figure 5.2. In short, it is perfectly
acceptable to use present tense in reference to the Second World War, as in (37), but
Tense and Aspect
73
the meaning is slightly different. The speaker, instead of recalling what the movie was
about, simply expresses the content of the movie.
(37)	I saw a movie yesterday, and it is about the Second World War.
This tendency to dissociate past tense marking and atelic verbs may come from
two sources. First, it may be natural to do so due to a distributional bias (Li & Shirai,
2000). That is, in the linguistic input past tense marking is more frequently used with
telic verbs than with atelic verbs. This also affects native English-speaking children in
their language development. Second, it may be due to LI influence. Native speakers
of Chinese, which does not have tense markers, tend not to rely on tense markers to
signal the time of the event, especially when the event is a state and the state holds
true even at the time of speech.
Questions and activities
1.	Go to the EMCJ Multimodal Parallel Corpus at http://corpus.eduhk.hk/EMCJ/
index.php. Search for the verb called in the movie Hes Just Not That Into You.
Look at the results. How many of them were actually translated with 了 (le) in
Chinese?
2.	Search for 在 in the movie '失戀 33 天'in the EMCJ Multimodal Parallel
Corpus. Look for instances of '在 + verb： What are the verbs that are used
with 在？
3・ You might want to work with a partner on this task. Take note of a Cantonese/
Chinese conversation of about 100 words long that occurs around you (e.g.,
when you are at a restaurant, on the school bus). Analyse the conversation
according to the following:
(a)	The event being referred to in the conversation： When did it happen?
(b)	Were there any aspect markers used? If so, what are they, and what verbs
were used?
(c)	Translate the conversation into English. What tense/aspect markers
would you use?
4.	Past tense is sometimes not used even when describing events that happened in
the past. This is called "historical present： Have you observed any instances of
historical present? When is it usually used? What effect does historical present
have in meaning? (Hint: Make use of the notion of how an event is perceived
when past tense is used as shown in Figures 5.1 and 5.2.)
5.	Both the door is unlocked and the door was unlocked are grammatical sentences,
but they have subtle differences. What grammatical aspect is used in each sen-
tence? (Hint: Ybu can say the door was unlocked by the owner, but not the door
is unlocked by the owner.)
74
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
Further reading
For readers who want to have a more in-depth understanding of the semantics of
English aspect, Langacker (1982) will be a good choice. For a discussion of the actual
use of aspect marking in Mandarin Chinese, readers can refer to Xiao and McEnery
(2004). The study also briefly discusses the differences in aspect marking in Chinese
and English.
Determiners
Articles and Demonstratives
Misuse of articles
The grammatical subsystem of articles is one of the most difficult areas for Chinese
EAL learners of English in general (Luk & Shirai, 2009). The sentences in (1)-(3) are
utterances produced by Chinese-Ll learners of English, and each of them has an error
related to the misuse of articles or determiners.
(1)	*1 graduated from EMI school.
(2)	* Apple is my favourite fruit.
(3)	* Learning language at young age is good.
In (1), there should be an indefinite article an in front of EMI school. In (2),
it should be The apple is my favourite fruit or Apples are my favourite fruit. The sen-
tence in (3) should be Learning a language at a young age is good. Although language
can be countable or uncountable, countable should be used here because the sentence
is about learning a modern language such as English, Japanese, Korean, etc. In this
chapter, we describe the functions of articles in English and distinguish them from
demonstratives in English and Chinese. We also attempt to provide Chinese learners
of English with a way to systematically identify errors related to the misuse of articles.
Articles in English: Definiteness
The definite article: The
Most Cantonese-speaking learners of English in Hong Kong come across the func-
tions of the articles alan and the in primary school. They are often taught that a/an is
used when something is mentioned for the first time, and the is used fbr things that
have been mentioned previously.
This explanation is related to what is called 'hearer's knowledge or definiteness.
If the speaker mentions something which he or she believes that the hearer also
knows about, the definite article should be used; on the other hand, if the speaker talks
about something that he or she believes the hearer does not know about, an indefinite
76
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
article should be used. The <indefinite, and 'definite' cases are illustrated in (4) and (5)
respectively.
(4)	(Background: Mary is talking to Peter about her experience at a French
restaurant. Peter has not mentioned to Mary that he knows any French
restaurants.)
Mary: I went to a French restaurant in Tsim Sha Tsui, and it was so good.
Peter: Where is it? Yd like to give it a try.
(5)	(Background: Mary is talking to Peter about her experience at a French
restaurant. Peter has recommended a French restaurant in Tsim Sha Tsui
to Mary.)
Mary: I went to the French restaurant in Tsim Sha Tsui, and it was
so good.
Peter: I knew youH love it.
In (4)> Mary used the indefinite article a because Peter had never mentioned
anything about French restaurants and she did not expect Peter to know about the
restaurant. In contrast, in (5), Mary knew that Peter was aware of the restaurant,
because he recommended it to her, and therefore she used the definite article the. The
conversation would be very awkward if Mary used the in (4), as shown in (6).
(6)	(Background: Mary talked to Peter about her experience at a French
restaurant. Peter has not mentioned to Mary that he knows any French
restaurants.)
Mary: I went to the French restaurant in Tsim Sha Tsui, and it was
so good.1
Peter: What restaurant?
While the explanation of mentioning for the first time or not is not incorrect,
it fails to characterize many other usages of the definite and indefinite articles. In the
following, we attempt to give a more detailed account of how the definite article the
in English is used.
Vnobvious cases of definiteness
The above examples illustrate probably the most common usages of a/an and the.
Advanced learners of English in general have little problem with them. However,
if we read an authentic English text, such as a newspaper article or a novel, we would
1. This sentence would be correct if there is only one French restaurant in Tsim Sha Tsui. However, this is not
the case.
Determiners: Articles and Demonstratives
77
notice that most of the cases of the are different. Consider the excerpt in (7), which
is adapted from the very beginning of the novel Harry Potter and the Sorcerers Stone：
(7)	Mr. and Mrs. Dursley, of number four, Privet Drive, were proud to say
that they were perfectly normal, thank you very much. They were (a) the
last people youd expect to be involved in anything strange or mysterious,
because they just didnt hold with such nonsense.
Mr. Dursley was (b) the director of a firm called Grunnings, which made
drills. He was a big, beefy man with hardly any neck, although he did
have a very large mustache. Mrs. Dursley was thin and blonde and had
nearly twice (c) the usual amount of neck, which came in very useful
as she spent so much of her time craning over garden fences, spying on
(ci) the neighbors. The Dursleys had a small son called Dudley and in
their opinion there was no finer boy anywhere. (Rowling, 1999, p. 1)
There are four instances of the in this excerpt. In (a), the is used with last people.
In (b), the is used in front of director of a firm called Grunnings. The in (c) is used with
usual amount of neck, and finally the in (d) is used with neighbors. None of these noun
phrases has been mentioned before their appearance in the excerpt. For example,
there is no mention of the word director before (b), nor is there any mention of neigh-
bors before (d).
These usages of the in (7) are quite different from that in (5). The question is thus
why the is used when these noun phrases are mentioned for the first time. In fact,
these usages are also cases of hearers (or readers, in this case) knowledge (i.e.» defi-
nite). Tliat is, the author assumes the reader of the novel has knowledge about these
noun phrases. Take the director as an example. It is probably common knowledge that
there is a director, or a boss, in a company. Readers, therefore, do not feel particularly
confused when we read the director of a firm called Grunnings. This explanation can
also be applied to instances (c) and (d): In (c), part of our world knowledge includes
knowing how long peoples necks usually are, so that we have this common percep-
tion of the usual/typical length of peoples necks; in (d), our world knowledge tells us
that people usually live in a community where other people live, and therefore it is
common that we have neighbours. That is, we can "infer the existence of a director
when talking about a firm, and the existence of neighbours when talking about a
home or family (Birner & Ward, 1994; Lyons, 1999).
The use of the in (a) can be explained by uniqueness (Birner & Ward, 1994). There
is only one person or group of people (that are perceived as acting as one unit, as in
this case) that comes last. This is the same as the first, the second, the third, the second
last, etc.
Marking uniqueness is another sufficient condition for being definite. When some-
^ing is unique, there is no ambiguity and it is identifiable by the hearer (Hawkins,
78
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
1991). Uniqueness can account for many uses of the, such as The Queen of England
and The Prime Minister of Japan.
The fact that the is used with unique reference may explain why some proper names
incorporate the definite article. Examples are The White House, The Eiffel Tower, and
The Louvre. Incorporating the definite article makes these buildings sound unique.
The notion of uniqueness also helps explain the use of the + noun (in general,
the + NP) to bear a generic sense. An expression is said to be generic when it refers
to the type and not a specific entity in the world. Consider the sentence in (8), which
has two readings.
(8)	The lion eats everything.
In the first reading, the lion refers to a lion that is known to the hearer. The speaker
uses the to direct the hearers attention to that lion, as opposed to any other lions. This
is illustrated in Figure 6.1.
All the things in the world
This is the lion I am
talking about.
Lion
Figure 6.1
Using the lion to refer to a lion that is known to the hearer
In the second reading, the lion has a generic sense,2 meaning that the lion here does
not refer to one lion that exists in this world but to all the lions in the world, or as
representative of lions in general. This is illustrated in Figure 6.2.
2 ]( should be noted that indefinite singular (e.g.» a lion) and indefinite plural (e.g., lions) can also be used lor
generic use. For details see Lyons (1999).
79
Determiners: Articles and Demonstratives
All the things in the world
Tiger
Lion
Elephant
This is the type (lion) I am
talking about.
Figure 6.2
Using the lion to refer to a type of thing
In this case, the contrast is not made among indhidual lions； instead, the contrast
is made among different types: the lion versus the tiger, the lion versus the elephant,
the lion versus ice cream, and so forth.
But how can uniqueness explain the use of the to express a generic sense? When
we are making a contrast between types (of people, things, etc.), we view all the lions
in the world as one group, all the tigers as one group, all the ice cream as one group,
etc.〉and each of these groups is unique (Lyons, 1999; Roberts, 2003). Since we are
referring to the group, and not a member in the group, the definite article is used.
To summarize, the definite article the is used in the following cases:
(a)	Referring to persons or things that have been mentioned;
(b)	Referring to persons or things that can be inferred from persons or things
that have been mentioned (e.g.> th£ director of afinn)\ and
(c)	Referring to persons or things that are unique (e.g.. The White House.
generic sense of the apple).
Demonstratives in English: Pointing (deictic)
In the previous section, we discussed the functions of English articles. Artides belong
to a larger group of function words called 'determiners： In this section, we will talk
about another category in English under determiners: 'demonstratives：
Demonstratives refer to words such as this, that, these, and those. These words
are often understood by Chinese learners of English to have similar functions as the
English articles, especially the definite article the. Although there is some overlap in
meaning and functions between demonstratives and articles, they are not identical.
We will first explain the most basic functions of demonstratives.
Demonstratives are used to refer to things by pointing. Consider (9) and (10):
80
Chinese^English Contrastive Gramnar
(9)	I saw that man in the cafe last night.
(10)	I saw the man in the cafe last night.
When reading (9), readers probably have an image in their mind, in which the
speaker is pointing at a man who is not in the proximity of the speaker. However,
the feeling of relative distance disappears when the is used, as in (10). Now the
interpretation of the man relies on whether he has been mentioned previously in the
conversation or whether there is a known person shared by the interlocutors who is
identifiable given the context. The most basic function of demonstratives is thus to
give some indication of the distance between the referent (e.g., the man being referred
to) and the speaker. The use of that and this is therefore not related to the hearer's
knowledge, or definiteness, but the actual physical context (i.e., deictic). Deictic
expressions are those linguistic elements whose interpretation in simple sentences
makes essential reference to properties of the extralinguistic context of the utterance
in which they occur' (Anderson & Keenan, 1985, p. 259).
In colloquial speech, demonstratives in English are also used to 'point at' referents
mentioned in conversation (Radden, 2007). For example:
(11)	I looked out of the window, and there was this woman, and she was going
to back up the car, and forgot to open the gate, and ...(Radden, 2007,
P.95)
According to Radden, this in this case is used to highlight the woman. It also
creates a sense of greater immediacy and vividness (Radden, 2007, p. 95), inviting
the hearer to visualize 'this woman while the speaker is saying something about her.
Demonstratives in Chinese
Unlike English, Chinese does not have articles (i.e., words that encode definiteness),
but it has demonstratives. Consider the sentences in (12) and (13):
(12)(望出窗外)你看到班幢大度嗎？張三就住在那裡。
(wang	chii	chuang	wai)	ni	kan	dao	na zhuang
Look	out	window	outside	you	see	that	CL
ddsha	ma?	zhangsan	jiu	zhu	zdi	nali
building	Q	Zhangsan	then	live	in	there
'(Looking out of the window) Do you see that building? Zhangsan
lives there?
Determiners: Articles and Demonstratives
81
(13)	(在電器店內)這台電視機是最新型號，還在打折。
(zai	dianqt	dian	nei)	zhe	tai	didnshiji	shi
In	electronics	store	inside	this	CL	TV set	is
zui	xln	xinghdo	hdi	zai	dazhe
most	new	model	and	is	on sale
c(Inside an electronics store) This TV set is the latest model, and its on sale.
In (12) and (13), the speakers are pointing at a building and a TV set, respectively.
The speakers do not assume that the hearers know about the existence of the building
or the TV set before the sentences are uttered. The existence of these entities can be
made known to the hearer at the time of the utterance. Recall that definiteness has
to do with the hearers knowledge: If the speaker believes something is known to the
hearer before the utterance is made, the entity is definite; otherwise, it is indefinite.
Therefore, we can conclude that the usages of 那(nd) and 這(zhe), asin(12) and (13)»
illustrate the typical function of demonstratives rather than of articles.
Another difference between demonstratives and articles is that articles in English
are obligatory, whereas in Chinese, demonstratives are not. In English, a/an is used
with indefinite singular referents, and the is used with definite referents (singular,
plural, or uncountable). Only indefinite plural or uncountable referents have zero
article' (i.e., no article precedes the noun phrase, e.g.> we are university students).
However, demonstratives in Chinese are not obligatory even if the referent is definite.
Consider the excerpt in (14), which is taken from a Chinese novel called xin nian
'New Year (衛斯理,1997, p. 2):
(14)	所有人都繁忙，王其英是例外'他斜穽在。欄上，型|在人行罐
道的出口處，各種各樣的人，像潮水一樣湧出去'只有他懒洋洋
地靠着被解］，甚至還有空打上幾個呵欠。
Stioyo	u r6n	dou fdnnidngy Wangqiying		shi liwait
All	people	also busy	Wang Qiying	is exception
ta xiekao zai		tie Ian	Shang,	
he lean at		iron railing	on	
tii	Ian	zai	renxing	suld(io de	chukou chu,
iron	railing at	pedestrian	subway NOM	exit	place
g©	zhong ge	yang de	ren,	
every	kind every type NOM people			
xiang	chaoshui	yi yang ydng chu qii,		
like	tide	one face rush out go		
zhi	you ta	Idnyangydngdi	kdo zhe	tie ldnt
only	have he	lazily	lean against	iron railing
shenzhi hdi you kong da			shdng	ji	ge heqidn。
even	also have time hit		complete some CL yawn	
82
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
We can see that 鐵欄(tie l&n) 'metal railing* has been mentioned three times,
and all of them refer to the same entity: the railings against which Wang leant. Ihe
reader should have known to which railing the second and third mention of the term
海 Ian "railing refers. In other words, the referent (i.e., the railing) is definite. Despite
this, no determiners (i.e., articles or demonstratives) are used in the second and third
mention of the railing. This shows that it is not obligatory to mark definiteness in
Chinese. In contrast, if it is in English, a definite article is needed, as shown in (15).
(15)	Wang leant against a railing, which was located at the entrance of the
subway. While everybody was rushing out of the subway like flowing
water, he was lazily leaning against the railing. He even had the time to
yawn a few times.
Although we have said that demonstratives in Chinese are different from articles
in English, it has been observed that cases in which demonstratives in Chinese are
used for definite referents are increasing (Li & Thompson, 2009). Consider the use of
那(诵)in Example (16)：
(16)你上次跟我説你多了兩張演唱會的門票。现兩張門
票你給了誰？
Ni	shang	ci gen wo shud	ni dud	le
you	last	time with I say	you more	ASP
liang	zhang	yanchdnghui de	menpiao	
two	CL	concert	NOM	ticket	
nd	Hang	zhang menpiao ni	gei le	shei
that	two	CL ticket you	give ASP	who
cYou	told me	last time that you had two extra tickets for the concert		
Whom did you give the tickets to?'
Apart from demonstratives, definiteness can be signalled by word order (Lyons,
1999). For example, noun phrases in the pre-verbal position are often definite (17a)
and those in the post-verbal positions are often indefinite (17b).
(17) Mandarin (Li & Thompson, 1981)
a.	人來了。
Ren lai le
people come ASP
'The person has come：
b.	來人了。
Lai rin le
Come people ASP
A person has come：
Determiners: Articles and Demonstratives
83
(18) Cantonese (Matthews & Yip, 1994)
a.	隻貓走咗入黎。
	zek3 maaul zau2 zo2 yap6 lai4
b.	CL cat	go ASP enter come 'The cat came in： 走咗隻貓入黎。
	zau2 zo2 zek3 tnaaul yap6 lai4
	go ASP CL cat	enter come A/The cat came in：
Cases where the cannot be translated into nd (那)
We have seen that the definite article in English can be used in the following
three cases:
Case 1	Referring to persons or things that have been mentioned
Case 2	Referring to persons or things that can be inferred from persons or
things that have been mentioned (e.g., the director of a firm)
Case 3 Referring to persons or things that are unique (e.g.» The White House,
generic sense of the apple)
We have also explained that, in Chinese, demonstratives are sometimes used like
definite articles. However, the use of demonstratives as definite articles may not be
叩plicable to Cases 2 and 3. Consider the sentences in (19) and (20):
(19)	He is the CEO of Apple.
(20)	他是蘋果公司的總裁。
Ta	shl	pingguo	gongsi	de	zongcdi
He	is	apple	company	NOM	CEO
'He is the CEO of Apple?
What Example (19) illustrates is the use of the to refer to an entity that can be
inferred (i.e., Case 2). When the sentence is translated into Chinese, as in (20), we do
not find any demonstratives before the term 總裁｛zongcdi, ^EO').
Now consider (21)-(23):
(21)	The lion eats everything.
(22)	獅子什麼都吃。
Shlzi shenme dou chi
Lion what also eat
'Lions eat everything?
84
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
(23)那頭獅子什麼都吃。
Na	tou	shizi	shernne	dou	chi
That	CL	lion	what	also	eat
'That/the lion eats everything?
We have said that (21) has two readings： a specific lion, and the lion as a type of
animal. When we translate it into Chinese, these two readings may be rendered into
two rather different sentences. Example (22) refers to the type of animal (i.e., generic
sense), and the speakers intended meaning is that this type of animal eats everything.
On the other hand, (23) refers to a specific lion (i.e., the speaker assumes the hearer
knows which one is referred to). We can see that, when the is used in the generic
sense, no demonstratives are needed in the Chinese version.
Using articles correctly
We have seen some of the differences in the way referents are referred to in Chinese
and English. These differences often lead Chinese students to misuse articles when
speaking or writing in English. We have seen some of these errors at the beginning
of this chapter. Articles are notoriously hard for L2 learners of English whose native
language does not have a comparable system (DeKeyser, 2005; Luk & Shirai, 2009).
To improve the accuracy of using articles, it may be helpful to understand how English
noun phrases are formed. Consider the sentence in (24)：
(24)	*Boy kissed girl.
It should be obvious that (24) is ungrammatical. There should be something pre-
ceding the noun phrases boy and girl, as in (25).
(25)	That boy kissed that girl.
By adding the words tint, the hearer knows where to locate the referent. Articles
have the same function. For example, the definite article suggests to the hearer that
the speaker is talking about something that the hearer knows about; in contrast,
an indefinite article suggests to the hearer that what the speaker is talking about is
new to the hearer.
In English, it is necessary to use some linguistic forms (i.e., words) to make explicit
the connection between a noun phrase and its referent. Therefore, it is necessary that
noun phrases with a countable noun as the head normally be used with a determiner5
so that they become referential (Stowell, 1991). This is further illustrated in Figure 6.3.
3. There are exceptions, though. Some idiomat记 patterns may bear no determiners (e.g.» I now pronounce
husband and wife / go to school by bus).
Determiners: Articles and Demonstratives
85
Noun Phrase (NP)
director
Determiner + Noun Phrase
a director
the director
this director
my director
Type of determiner
article
article
demonstrative
possessive pronoun
Figure 6.3
Transformation from a noun phrase to a noun phrase with different determiners
However, sometimes we do see noun phrases without any determiners, as in (26).
(26)	Dogs are not allowed in restaurants.
The reason is that dogs and restaurants are indefinite and plural. In English, articles
or demonstratives are not used with indefinite plural noun phrases.
Another case has to do with uncountable nouns, as shown in (27):
(27)	I dont like cheese.
Here, cheese is uncountable, and it is indefinite. We cannot say P cheese, because a
is reserved for indefinite, countable, and singular noun phrases.
To summarize, EVERY noun phrase in English should have a determiner UNLESS
the noun phrase is (a) countable, plural, and indefinite, or (b) uncountable and indef-
inite. Table 6.1 is a summary of the normative usage of n and the.
Table 6.1
A summary of the normative usage of a and the
	Definite	Indefinite
Countable and singular	the	a
Countable and plural/uncountable	the	zero (i.e., no article)
We will demonstrate this with example (28):
(28)	*We live in village.
We have two noun phrases in (28), we and village. We by itself is a determiner of
some sort, because it is clear who the speaker is referring to (i.e.> referential): to himself/
herself and some other people. Village is a countable noun. We said that only plural or
uncountable noun phrases can stand on their own without any determiners. Village,
being a countable noun, is neither. So> a determiner is needed. Technically speaking,
it is possible to avoid using any determiners by making it plural. The sentence would
then become we live in villages, in which villages is plural and indefinite.
86
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
So, let us assume the people represented by we live in one single village. In fact, any
determiner will make the sentence grammatical. Which is the best sentence depends
on the intended meaning. Look at the sentences in (29)-(32):
(29)	We live in a village.
(30)	We live in the village.
(31)	We live in that village.
(32)	We live in his village.
Sentence (29) is used if the speaker wants to indicate that a village where he or she
lives is unknown to the hearer (i.e.» indefinite); (30) if he or she wishes to indicate that
il is the village that the speaker believes is known to the hearer, or wants to distinguish
the village1 as opposed to *the city' or *the suburbs'; (31) if the speaker is physically
pointing at the village, or has been talking about a village and wants to put emphasis
on the village; and (32) if the village belongs to a man whom both the speaker and
the hearer know.
To summarize, below are the steps one should take to ensure the correct use
of art 记les：
Step 1: Identify the noun phrase(s) in a sentence.
Step 2: Determine whether the noun phrase(s) is (are) definite or indefinite.
Step 3: Determine whether the noun phrase(s) is (are) singular, plural,
or uncountable.
Step 4: If a noun phrase is ① indefinite and plural or (ii) indefinite and
uncountable, no determiners are needed. If a noun phrase is indefi-
nite and singular, use a. If a noun phrase is definite, use the.
(It should be noted that it is also acceptable to provide other determiners such as
possessive pronouns or demonstratives, but each of these would change the intended
meaning.)
Figure 6.4
A flowchart or decision tree for ensuring the correct use of articles
Determiners: Articles and Demonstratives
87
Questions and activities
1.	Read the fbllowing text. Look for instances of the. Which case does the belong to?
Case 1:	Referring to persons or things that have been mentioned.
Case 2:	Referring to persons or things that can be inferred from persons or
things that have been mentioned (e.g., the director of a firm).
Case 3: Referring to persons or things that are unique (e.g., The White House,
eneric sense of the apple, the lion)
The young woman in this photograph is me when I was writing The House
on Mango Street. Shes in her office, a room that had probably been a child's
bedroom when families lived in this apartment. It has no door and is only
slightly wider than the walk-in pantry. But it has great light and sits above
the hallway door downstairs, so she can hear her neighbors come and go. She
posed as if shes just looked up from her work for a moment, but in real life
she never writes in this office. She writes in the kitchen, the only room with a
heater. (Adapted from The House on Mango Street, Cisnero, 2013.)
2.	Read the excerpt in Exercise 1 again. Now look fbr instances of a. Can you
explain why a is used fbr each of these instances?
3.	Read the excerpt Exercise 1 again. Now look fbr instances in which the noun
phrase has no determiners. In each of these instances, explain why. Also, look
fbr determiners other than the and a.
4・ Read the excerpt below.
一九六一年的春天，我們村子裡的小學校裡拉來了一車亮晶晶的煤
塊，我們孤陋弈聞，不知道這是什麼東西。一個聰明的孩子拿起一
塊煤，咯喇咯咖地吃起來。看他吃的香甜樣子•味道肯定很好，於
是我們一擁而上，每人拾一塊煤，略唬咯喇地吃起來了。我感到那
煤塊越嚼越香，味道的確是好極了。看到我吃得香甜，村子裡的大
人們也撲上來吃，學校裡的校長出來阻止，於是人們就開始哄抢。
(莫言，《蒼蠅•門牙＞ »2005,p.5)
Find two instances in which the noun phrases are definite (to the reader).
Find two instances in which the noun phrases are indefinite.
Further reading
Classifiers sometimes are said to have a definite meaning in Chinese. Wu and Bodonio
(2009) provide a comparison between classifiers in Chinese and a definite article, and
argue that Chinese classifiers do not function as definite articles. Lyons (1999) pro-
vides an in-depth but reader-friendly discussion on definite/indefinite articles and
other related concepts.
7
Subject-Prominence and Topic-Prominence
Introduction
In this chapter, we compare Chinese and English according to how information
is organized in a sentence, or how information is structured at the sentence level
(Lambrecht, 1994). In Chinese, many sentences are structurally similar to (1)-(3)
below.
(1)	昆明有個nr通寺。寺後就是四通山。從前是一座荒山，現在是一 個公園，就叫bi通公園。(李廣田，《丽S) Kunming	you	ge	yudntong si	si	hou	ji" Kunming	has	CL	yuantong temple	temple behind then shi yudntong shan is yuantong mountain Cdngqidn	shi	y\	zud huang	shan	xidnzai	shi before	is	one	CL deserted	mountain	now	is yi	ge	gongyuan	jiii	jiao	yuan tong	gongyudn one	CL	park	then	call	yuantong	park
(2)	到南京時，有朋友約去遊逛，勾留了一日；第二日上午便須渡江 到浦口……(朱自清，《背影》) Dao	ndnjing	shi	you	pengyou yue	qu youguang arrive	Nanjing	moment has	friend ask	go travel gouliu	le y\ ri	dier	ri shangwii	biiin xu stay	ASP one day	next	day morning	then must dii jiQng ddo pukou cross river to Pukou
(3)	像貓這種動物'咱們中間誰沒有認清？(葉紹釣'《以4 為喻》) Xiang	mao	zhe	zhong	dongwu	zannien	zhongjian	shei like	cat	this	type	animal	we	within	wh° mei you renting not have recognize
Subject-Prominence and Topic-Prominence
89
Look at the underlined parts, which are placed at the beginning of the sentences.
Are they 'subjects' in these sentences? Sentences in (4)-(6) are meant to be free/idi-
omatic (as opposed to literal or word-for-word) translations of (1)-(3) respectively.
(4)	In Kunming, there is a temple called Yuan Tong Temple. Behind the
temple is Yuan Tong Mountain. It used to be a deserted mountain, but
now it is a park, and it is called Yuan Tong Park
(5)	... I needed to cross the river and be at Pukou the next morning
(6)	Who wouldn't recognize an animal like a cat?
In (4),從前(c6ngqidn9 'before') is translated into the verb phrase used to. The
subject is It, which refers to Yuan Tong Mountain. In (5), the underlined phrase N
二日上午 is translated into a determiner phrase the next morning (i.e.» determiner +
noun phrase), but it is located at the end of the sentence, and the subject is /. In (6),
the underlined phrase 像貓這種動物 is an object in the English version. By word
order, therefore, the Chinese sentences are very different from the corresponding
English sentences. The question that arises is: What is a subject in Chinese?
Subject in English
Before turning to the answer to this question, it is necessary for us to be clear about
what a subject is in English. In English, a subject is typically a noun or noun phrase
that ① appears before the finite1 verb1 2 and (ii) agrees with the verb in number and
person. In Standard English, an -s is added to the verb when the sentence is in the
present tense and the singular subject is a noun (phrase) with a singular meaning
or a third-person pronoun: he/she/it. The adding ot the -s is what is called subject-
verb agreement. Conversely, the presence of -5 in the verb suggests that the subject
is singular. In fact, in some languages such as Spanish, one can omit the subject and
simply say the verb with the appropriate agreement, and the hearer will know who the
subject is, as shown in (7) and (8).
(7)	habl-o
C(I) speak'
(8)	habl-as
'(you) speak'
Although we said that a subject agrees with the verb, not all noun phrases can
occupy the subject position. Recall, in the chapter on transitivity (Chapter 3)» that
verbs select specific semantic roles to be the subject. For example, eat selects an
1.	Finite verbs are verb forms that carry tense information. For example, ate is finite because it is a past tense
form, while eating is not because -ing only indicates aspect and does nol (ell us what tense eating carries.
2.	There are exceptions. For example, the subject of the construction Here comes X appears after the verb.
90
Chinese-English Contrastive Gramnar
Actor/Agent (i.e., a person or an animal that intentionally puts food into his/her/
its mouth, chews it and swallows it) to be the subject, whereas the intransitive break
selects a Patient to be its subject. Therefore, for eat. only a person or an animal can
appear right before the finite verb. This is illustrated in (9) and (10):
(9)	The cow ate all the grass.
(10)	*A11 the grass ate the cow. (To mean: 'the cow ate all the grass')
Another feature regarding subject in English is that it is compulsory. For example,
//in (11) does not refer to any entity, whereas in (12) it refers to an object, although
from this simple sentence we do not know what it refers to. We call the subject in (11)
a ‘dummy subjecf or an expletive'
(11)	It rained.
(12)	It broke.
We therefore call English a subject-prominent language； because in English a
subject must be present and is often the first element to appear in a sentence.
‘Subject’ in Chinese
The notion of a subject, as shown above, is not applicable to Chinese. This is partly
evidenced by the fact that there is no subject-verb agreement in Chinese. Example
(13) compares French and Chinese.			
(13) Je	paries	我説	(wo shuo)
Nous	parions	我們説	(women shuo)
II	parle	他説	(ta shuo)
Ils	paiient	他們説	(tamen shuo)
Vous	parlez	你們説	(ni(men) shuo)
We can see that, in French, the verb forms (e.g., of the verb parley ‘to speak)
vary depending on the subjects, but the equivalent verb in Chinese 説(shud, ’speak')
does not. Not only does Chinese have no requirement for subject-verb agreement,
but Chinese also allows nouns phrases of different thematic roles to be placed before
the verb, as illustrated in (1)-(3) at the beginning of this chapter.
Because there is no linguistic form (i.e., agreement, position of a noun phrase,
etc.) that would suggest that a noun phrase is a subject, a different term is needed to
characterize the linguistic unit that appears in the sentence-initial position in Chinese,
which is called 主語(z沛 yfi).
The Chinese term 主語(zhii yii) is generally used to translate and is often held to
be functionally equivalent to the Western grammatical concept of subject. Strictly
Subject-Prominence and Topic-Prominence
91
speaking, however, zhii yu is closer to what is called a 'topic' in linguistics (LaPolla,
2009). Consider the sentences in (14)-(16):
(14)	那些舊衣服已經扔掉了。
Naxie	jiu	yifu	颁ng	reng	dido	le
those	old	clothes	already	throw	away	ASP
4Those old clothes, (I) have thrown them away already?
(15)	那些舊衣服我已經扔掉了。
Naxie	jiii	yifu	wo	yijhig	reng	diao	le
those	old	clothes	I	already	throw	away	ASP
4Those old clothes, I have thrown them away already?
(16)	下個星期才去吧。
Xia	ge	xmgqi	cai	qu	ba
next	CL	week	then	go	SFP
'(Let's) go next week；
Using the notion of zhii yuy we can analyse (14)-(16) in the following way.
主語	(topic)	謂語(comment)
14a.	那些舊衣服	已經扔掉了
15a.	那些舊衣服	我已經扔掉了 —	f
		主語謂語
16a.	下個星期	才去吧 			
We thus call Chinese a 'topic・prominent language； because a topic is often the first
element to appear in the sentence.
Subject = Topic?
Are the terms Subject and Topic different names for the same thing? The answer is
no. A subject in English is always a participant required by the verb. For example,
steal normally requires at least two participants, one who does the act of stealing, and
another, usually an object, which is the thing taken away by the first participant (see
Chapter 3). Of course we can add a time to the sentence to indicate when the stealing
happens or happened, but this is not a participant required by the verb. Theretore,
the time of stealing can never be a subject of a sentence with steal as the main verb,
as shown in (17):
(17)	*Yesterday stole an orange, (to mean *1 stole an orange yesterday)
92
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
In English, the subject is not limited to the Actor/Agent/Doer. A Patient can
also be the subject. This again depends on the verb, as shown in (18) (see Chapter 3
tor details):
(18)	My ice cream is melting!
A topic, in contrast, accommodates a much larger range of semantic roles. A topic
is not something that is required by the verb but something the speaker wants to
focus on and wants ljoint attention* with the hearer (Tomasello, 1995). Matthews and
Yip (1994) explained that the effect of a topic is comparable to that of the English
construction as for or as far as ... is concerned1. Consider an example like the verb
偷(tdut steaf)： A noun phrase expressing time can be the topic, and not the person
who steals, as shown in (19)：
(19)前天偷了一個橙，昨天偷了一個 Qidntian	tou	le	yi the.day.before.yesterday steal	ASP	one zuotian	ton	le	yi yesterday	steal	ASP	one	西瓜。 ge cheng CL orange ge xlgua CL watermelon
The day before yesterday, (I) stole an orange. Yesterday, (I) stole a
watermelon?
On the other hand, in subject-prominent languages like English, a subject is
necessary even it the verb does not require one. We have seen that in (11). In topic-
prominent languages such as Chinese, however, a subject is not obligatory; for
example, (20):
(20)下雨啦。
Xia yii la
go.down rain SFP
'It's raining?
In (20), there is only the verb 下雨(xia yii, crain); there is, however, no need to
insert a dummy subject like 'it； as in the corresponding sentence it is raining.
Topicalization in English
We have seen that the topic-comment structure is a fundamental word order principle
when composing Chinese sentences. English also allows for topicalization, but to a
lesser degree than Chinese does. Green (1991) gave (21) and (22) as examples (p. 56):
(21)	With regard to education, Tony likes Smiths ideas.
(22)	As for Tony, he likes Smiths ideas on education.
Subject-Prominence and Topic-Prominence
93
Sometimes the subject is also the topic, as shown in (23):
(23)	Tony likes Smiths ideas on education.
Although topicalization is acceptable in English, Green (1991) noted that these
structures are 'marked； meaning that they are unusual. That is to say, they are only
used when the reader/writer really wants to draw the readers or listeners attention
to a particular entity.
Chinese EAL learners' problems with topicalization in English
The difference between English and Chinese/Cantonese—subject-prominence as
opposed to topic-prominence—often misleads learners into producing ungrammati-
cal or unnatural utterances. Less proficient EAL learners may produce sentences like
the one in (24) to mean T am the responsible person regarding that matter/issue:
(24)	*That matter I am responsible person (Green, 1991, p. 53)
More advanced learners may not produce ungrammatical sentences, but the
sentences they produce may sometimes sound clumsy and unnatural. Green (1991)
and Yip (1995) showed that Hong Kong students tend to produce sentences like (25)
and (26):
(25)	According to research evidence, it shows that more Asian couples are
getting divorced nowadays. (Green, 1991, p. 58)
(26)	For Julia, she was a troop leader in the spies. (V ip & Matthews, 1995, cited
in Yip, 1995)
Yip (1995) argues that, while (26) is marginally grammatical, it is highly unnatu-
ral. Green (1991, p. 58) points out that (25) can be rewritten in at least three ways,
as in (27)-(29), which would sound more natural to native speakers.
(27)	According to my research, more Asian couples are getting divorced.
(28)	More Asian couples are getting divorced nowadays, according to my
research.
(29)	My research shows that more Asian couples are getting divorced
nowadays.
Example (30) is another example given by Green (1991, p. 60):
(30)	For the Western women's concept of freedom,it can allow them to make
their own decisions who to marry.
Yip and Matthews (1995) described the underlined structure in (30) as a peri-
phrastic construction (cf. Kwan, Chan, & Li, 2003), which is not preferred in Standard
94
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
English given that the topicalized phrase is the subject of what is reported. The pre-
ferred version is shown in (31).
(31)	The Western concept of freedom allows women to make their own deci-
sions [about] whom to marry.
How to form grammatical sentences and avoid over-topicalization
To deal with these problems when writing in English, learners of English can try the
following steps:
Step 1: Determine what the verb takes as its argument(s).
As discussed in Chapter 3 and earlier in this chapter, what may be inserted in
the subject position depends on the argument structure of the verb. Many verbs in
English take an Agent/Actor (Doer) as the subject, but there are other semantic roles
that a verb can take. Look at Examples (32)-(36)：
(32)	The cup broke.	[Patient]
(33)	Mary fears dogs.	[Experiencer]
(34)	The dog frightened Mary.	[Percept]
(35)	John angered his father.	[Percept]
(36)	The ball rolled into the river.	[Theme]
One should always bear in mind that the subject role depends on the verb. Even
if one wants to focus on his father in (35), it is ungrammatical to say *his father John
angered or * his father angered. In this case, either the passive or another word (verb or
adjective) should be used (e.g., his father was angered by John; his father was angry).
Step 2: Always ask whether using a non-subject phrase to start a sentence is
necessary.
We have seen that (25) and (30) are considered unnatural by native English
speakers. Look at (30) again. Try rephrasing it in different ways. Following the para-
phrases in (27)-(29), (30) may similarly be paraphrased, as in (37)-(39):
(37)	In the Western concept of freedom, women can make their own deci-
sions on whom to marry.
(38)	Western women can make their own decisions on whom to marry in
their concept of freedom.
(39)	The Western womens concept of freedom allows them to make their own
decisions on whom to marry.
Subject-Prominence and Topic-Prominence
95
These sentences no longer have a prepositional phrase (PP = P + NP) co-
referenced with it in the same sentence, as in (40):
(40)	In the second paragraph, it reported that the three-day conference pre-
ceded a large-scale education fair on study in the US. (Kwan et al., 2003,
p. 92)
Kwan et al. (2003, pp. 89-91) also propose a set of procedures for teachers to help
learners overcome the problem of overusing the topic-comment structure in English.
The steps are outlined below.
Step 1 Assess learners' awareness of the problem.
Step 2 Illustrate and correct the problem by directing learners* attention to
the source of the information and reminding them that the source of
information should not be repeated.
Step 3 Reinforce learners' knowledge with an exercise that involves asking
them to analyse the source of information and rewrite sentences in
which the source of information is repeated.
Questions and activities
1.	Identify the subject in the following English sentences. Explain what agreement
is used.
i- I don t like English.
ii.	English is my favourite subject.
iii.	The house was owned by the heirs of the Royal Family.
iv.	Sam and Teresa were disappointed by their sons behaviour.
v.	Today Jennifer has one million followers on Twitter.
vi.	The dog quickly jumped into the water.
vii.	John F. Kennedy was supposedly assassinated by a man called Oswald.
2.	Read the following excerpt. Then, find cases in which 主語(zhii yii, 'topic) is
not a participant of the event described by the verb. What should the partici-
pants be?
庭院無蝉。枕婿生涼。溫暖的陽光，穿過華谎•照在淡責色的壁
上。濃密的樹影，在微風中徐徐動搖。街外不時的有好烏飛嗚：
這時此上一切，都已拋棄隔飽，一室便是宇宙,花影樹聲'都含
妙理。是一年來最難得的光陰呵，可惜只有七天！黄昏時，弟弟
歸來，音樂聲起，靜境便者然破了。一塊暗绿色的綢子、蒙在燈
上，屋裏一切都是幽涼的，好似悲劇的一幕。鏡中照見自己玲瑜的
96
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
白衣，竟悄然的世得空靈神秘。當屋隅的四弦琴，顫動著，生澀
的，徐徐奏起。兩個歌喉，由不同的調子，漸漸合一。由悠揚，而
宛轉；由高吭，而沈緩的時候，怔忡的我，竟感到了無限的悵惘
與不寧。小孩子們真可愛，在我睡夢中，偷偷的來了，放下幾束
花，又走了。小弟弟拿來插在瓶裏，也在我睡夢中，偷偷的放在床
邊幾上。——開眼瞥見了，黄的和白的，不知名的小花，襯著淡緣
的短瓶。……原是不很香的，而每朵花裏，都包含著天真的友情。
(冰心，《閑情〉)
3.	Translate the following excerpt into Chinese. Did you have any difficulty
regarding topicalization?
The last hour of Eddies life was spent, like most of the others, at Ruby Pier,
an amusement park by a great gray ocean. The park had the usual attrac-
tions, a boardwalk, a Ferris wheel, roller coasters, bumper cars, a taffy
stand, and an arcade where you could shoot streams of water into a clowns
mouth. It also had a big new ride called Freddy's Free Fall, and this would
be where Eddie would be killed, in an accident that would make news-
papers around the state, (Albom> The Five People You Meet in Heaven, p. 1)
(Ferris wheel:摩天輪;taffy:太妃糖)
Further reading
Data from other languages often help clarify linguistic concepts such as topic. Gundel
(1988) discusses the topic-comment structure in various languages from a typologi-
cal perspective. Some linguists argue that topic and subject are diachronically related.
Readers who are interested in this issue may wish to read Shibatani (1991), who
argues that subject is a product of the grammaticalization of topic.
8
Europeanization
Influence of English on Chinese Grammar
Contact between Chinese and English: Historical background
Contact between English and Chinese speakers may be traced to the late sexenteenth
century, when British merchants and sailors, and later missionaries, came to China
for commercial, trade-related, and religious reasons (see, e.g・，Ansaldo, Matthews,
& Smith, 2012; Bolton, 2003; Zhang, 2009). During the Qing dynasty (1644-1911),
for practical purposes some Chinese merchants and interpreters learned and used
English to communicate with the "red-haired barbarians. According to van Dyke
(2005), there are historical records indicating lthat merchants in Canton [：oda)s
Guangzhou] were already using 'pidgin English by about 1715 (p- 80) and by the
1730s, pidgin English appears to have gained a solid tooting among both merchants
and linguists [i.e.> interpreters]* (p. 81). Similarly, Ansaldo (2009) observes that, uhile
the presence of the British along the China coast was growing starting roughly from
the last decades of the seventeenth century, they encountered great difficulties com
municating with the local Chinese. In particular, *the use ot a mixture of English and
Portuguese in the interactions with local Chinese was common until well into the
middle of the eighteenth century, (Ansaldo, 2009, p. 189). The red-haired barbar
ians were largely confined to the province ot Guangdong and had limited freedom of
travel. In addition, they were prohibited from learning the Chinese language, while
few Chinese had heard of or were interested in learning their language, English.
At the same time, since Chinese products such as silk, tea, and porcelain were great!,
in demand in Europe, British traders and successive governments of the British
Empire were displeased with unfavourable trading terms dictated to them. Backed
by gunboats and advanced weaponry, the British decided to force open Chinas doors
with their superior military strength. This was the background to the two Anglo-
Chinese Wars (1839-1842 and 1860-1861), also known as the Opium Wars, which
among other things led to the opening of 14 treaty ports on the China coast. The
island of Hong Kong, a sleepy barren rock in southern China at the time, was also
ceded to the British as a result of the unequal Treaty of Nanking (1842). By the early
20th century, contacts with Europeans and their languages were no longer rare. Apart
98
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
from trading and commerce, the activities of British and American missionaries
intensified; witness the opening of many colleges in different parts of China, where
English was taught to local people (Adamson, 2002, 2004; Zhang, 2009).
Since the Opium Wars, Western ideas and products gradually became available
in China, some involving alien practices that challenged the old social order and
traditional values, including Confucian ethics (Lo Bianco, Orton, & Gao, 2009).
During the reign of the emperor Guangxu (光緒),a movement was championed by
the late Qingofficial ZhangZhidong (張之洞，1837-1909) and a few liberals. In 1898,
Zhang Zhidong designed the curriculum of the Imperial Peking University by mod-
elling it on the curricula of Tokyo and Kyoto Universities and incorporating the
teaching of foreign languages at 同文館(Tbngwen guan), which had been set up
in 1862 for Chinese students to learn foreign languages from Western missionaries
and to be trained as translators and interpreters (Kirkpatrick & Xu, 2012, p. 145).
Zhang Zhidong further called for studying Chinese for its essence, while studying
ie West for its practical usage (emphasis added).1 The ti-yong (體用)movement
on the support of many intellectuals who were eager to bring about change and,
or that reason, embraced Western progressive thinking. To them, it was the ultimate
solution to the countrys sociopolitical problems (humiliating unequal treaties dic-
taled by Western powers, social instability, health hazards, unemployment, poverty,
etc.). Some extremists even advocated total westernization,1 2 3 including replacing
logographic Chinese characters with an alphabetic script (Kirkpatrick & Xu, 2012;
Li, 2017).
From the last decades leading to the demise of Imperial China and the beginning
of the Republican era (1912), the Chinese language was also undergoing tremendous
change. Traditionally, written Chinese followed a literary style known as wenydn
我〃(文盲文,hereafter wenyan), which is modelled on classical Chinese texts. This
writing style was very different from the speech style, regardless of the speaker's
dialect or local vernacular (compare, e.g., the first-person singular pronoun:吾(wiil
vs.我(wd/ngoS). Many young critics, especially those who had the opportunity
to learn one or more foreign languages, including Japanese, blamed the countrys
social woes and economic backwardness on a lack of alignment or correspondence
between the ways one writes and speaks. To resolve this problem, it was widely
believed that writing and speech should be aligned? The intellectual at the forefront
of the New Culture Movement4 promoting vernacular Chinese (白話＞ bdihuci, "plain
1.	中學'西學.用(zhdngxu^ wci ft xixui whydngt Lo Bianco et al.. 2009).
2.	全盤西化(qudnpdn xihua/cyun4 pun4 sail faa3t Lo Bianco et al., 2009).
3.	我手■我 口(3 $ 伽 xii	literally niy-hand-writc-my-mouth； or * write as one speaks).
4•新文化運動(xin wcnhuti yundonglsanl man4 faa3 wan6 dung6).
Europeanization: Influence of English on Chinese Grammar
99
speech') as the written medium of modern literary language was Hu Shi (UN, 1891-
1962), a returnee from the US who had earned a PhD at Columbia University. Later,
in his official role as member of Imperial Peking Universitys Chinese Language and
Literature Department, Hu Shi further championed the course of replacing wenyan
with baihua as the educated discourse. This view was generally welcomed and soon
proved to be very popular in society.
From the beginning of the 20th century onwards, therefore, written Chinese
gradually became vernacularized as more and more writers chose to adhere to the
norms of baihua. New ideas across a wide range of topics and genres written in
foreign languages were introduced to Chinese readers via translation, fbr example,
novels, short stories, poetry, essays, dramas, and literary theories. Aspiring young
intellectuals took advantage of burgeoning newspapers and magazines as platforms
to reach out to the general public. This encouraged the experimentation of literary
writing in as well as translation into baihua. Many young writers who were hungry
for and fascinated by Western ideas found inspiration in their reading of literature
written by foreign writers. Educators, literary writers and critics, and leaders ot social
movements called fbr concerted efforts to breathe new life into the Chinese language
which, they argued, had to change in order to keep up with the changing times.
They saw the need fbr innovations in the Chinese language so that it could carry or
express novel ideas, in keeping with the spirit of and advances in the modern era. Thus
various stakeholders in society, from literary writers and translators to educators and
reform-minded intellectuals, were all eager to experiment with new vocabulary and
morpho-syntactic features that were inspired by their reading and appreciation of
original works written in various foreign languages, notably English.
It should be noted, however, that prior to the bailiua movement, there was already
a sizable body of literature written in a quasi-vernacular style, including the four liter-
ary classics.5 In other words, vernacular-style writing was not entirely new before the
May Fourth nioveinent6 in 1919, but there was general consensus among scholars that
the language of the Vernacular classics was largely inadequate tor giving expression
to new ideas in modern times. This sentiment is clearly reflected in the following
critique:
5.	四大名苫(si d(\ nitng zhiilsei3 daaiS ming4 zyu3): The Romance of the Three Kingdoms (《三国演黄》.
San guo yiln yilSaaml gwok3 jin2 戸6), Heroes of the Marshc^Outlaws of the	Star^in ((穴済
傳〉〉Shu! hu zhudnlScoi2 wu2 Journey to the West/Vie Monkey King (《西应記〉, Xi you jil Sai I jau4
gei3), and Hie Drcam of the Red Chamber (《紅樓夢〉»Hong lou men^Hun^ MH mung6), These works were
□II essentially based on Northern Mandarin (Wang, 1958b, p. 37).
6.	丘四運動(VVu si yunddng/Ng5 $ei3 wan6 dung6).
100
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
翻譯——除出国c］能夠介紹原本的內容給中國讀者之外——還有一個很重
要的作用：就是幫助我們創造出新的中國現代言語。……
中國言語不精密，所以要使它更加精密；中國言語不清楚，所以要使
它更加清楚；中國言語不毀富，所以要使它更加毀富。7 （瞿秋白，cited in
Tse, 1990, pp. 18-19）
In sum, at the dawn of the 20th century, the Chinese language was undergoing drastic
change. Norms ofboth speech and writing were being reshaped and redefined. Thanks
to the mass cultural awakening among writers of the New Literature Movement7 8
and the intelligentsia,9 foreign languages which entered into contact with Chinese
were looked upon as models for refashioning the Chinese language of the future.
Of the foreign languages which had considerable impact on Chinese, English proved
to be the most influential. Such influences are generally referred to as Europeanization
（歐化，6” hua/aal also known as Anglicization （英語化,jingyu hud/jingl
jyu5faa3） in recognition of English being the principal model for imitation. In the
process of experimenting with new words and structures from English, various out-
°mes were produced. In the rest of this chapter, we will critically examine different
ypes of Europeanized structure and assess the outcomes of transference at the lexical
and morpho-syntactic levels.
Europeanized features
Languages tend to influence one another when they enter into contact via their
speakers. In the case of contact between Chinese and European languages since the
turn of the 20th century, through translation and vernacular writing where lexical
and morpho-syntactic features of foreign languages were imitated, Europeanization
has left a clear imprint on Modern Chinese, standard or non-standard. One of the
clearest indicators of this trend is the creation and proliferation of new words of
foreign origin, typically via transliteration before being replaced by translation. For
instance, the word grammar was first transliterated as ge lang ma （葛朗瑪）,before
being translated as yiifa （語法）and wenfa （文法）.Similarly, sofa was rendered as
7.	'Translation—apart from introducing the content of original works to Chinese readers—has another impor-
tant function, namely, to help shape a new, modern Chinese language.... The Chinese language lacks preci-
sion, so there is a need to make it more precise; the Chinese language lacks clarity, thus enhanced clarity
is needed; the Chinese language is not so rich, hence the need to enrich it* （Qu Qiubai, cited in Tse, 1990,
pp. 18-19; our translation）.
8.	新文學運動wenxu^yunddng/sanl man4 hok6 wan6 dung6）.
9.	Traditional vernacular writing was linguistically inadequate to express and carry new ideas. In contrast.
Europeanized literature and essays received high praise and became increasingly popular. The following were
among the most prominent thinkers and writers in the decade before and after the May Fourth movement
（1919）: Hu Shi （胡［）• Lu Xun （舛迅）,Zhou Zuoren （周作人）,Xu Zhimo （徐志摩），Wen Yiduo （，一多）,
Yu Dafu （郁達夫）,Guo Moruo （郭沫若）,Ba Jin （巴金）,Lao She （老舍）,Mao Dun （牙:折）,Cao Yu （曹禺），
and Qian Zhongshu （錢籟*）•
Europeanization: Influence of English on Chinese Grammar
101
shafd (沙N), gallon as jialun (加侖),logic as ludji (邏輯)(see Tse, 1990, pp. 36-39).
At the same time, existing monosyllabic Chinese verbs or adjectives were combined
to designate new word meanings that were inspired by their corresponding English
nouns; for instance,約見(yue 网,literally arrange-see： meaning 'appointment')
and 沉寂(chen ji, 'deep-lonely； meaning 'stillness'):
取消了他的約見
quxiao le ta de yuejidn
cancel ASP his NOM appointment
canceled his appointmenf (Tse, 1990, p. 15)
他終於打破了沉寂
ta zhongyu dapd le chenji
he finally broke ASP stillness
*He finally broke the stillness? (Tse, 1990, p. 15)
Until the 1940s, as a result of extensive imitation and the publication of modern
Chinese grammars,10 some linguistic features that previously did not exist in Chinese
gradually caught on and subsequently became widely accepted (Tse, 1990,
Wang, 2012; see below). Other linguistic features, which already existed, were either
made more precise or used more widely. Tse (1990) lists seven conducive features
which, used judiciously, would help tighten up the structures and functions 縁
modern Chinese, and so they were categorized as 'beneficial Europeanization (良性
歐化)(Tse, 1990, pp. 104-IN)."
Beneficial Europeanization (良性歐化»liangxingdii hua)
Creation of new affixes (bound morphemes)
Affixes like -者(-z膈，e.g„ 消費者，xiaofei zh^ ■consumer),-家(洲，eg： Mil
家，yinhdng-jia, 'banker'),-性(-xing, e.g.,可行性，kexmg-xing, 'feasibility'),-化
i0.旳建忠(Ma Jianzhong) (1898),《馬氏文通,Mtlshi ^ntdng [Basic principles tor writing dearly and
coherently by Mister Ma];黎錦熙[Li Jinxi] (1924)《新源國語文法〉Xin zhuguoyu wenfl (NewChinese
grammar]; and 呂叔湘[Lu Shuxiang] (1943)《中國文法要略〉Zhdnggud wenfi yaolue {Essentials of
Chinese grammar]. According to Tse (1990, p. 27), these grammars of modern Chinese were largely inspired
by linguistic studies of Chinese phonology and grammar, for example: Bernhard Karlgren [髙本沌 1 (1926),
^udes sur la phonologic chinoise 1915-26 [Studies of Chinese phonology 1915-26],趙元任、李方桂、
珥常培譯-《中音飯研究〉(1948); Henri Maspero [馬百樂](1934), La langue chinoise [The Chinese
language), Conference de flnstitut de Linguistique de VUniversite de Paris, 1933, Paris; and John Collinson
Ncshcld (1908). Manual of English grammar and composition, Macmillan.
H. Ises (1990) preterred terminology is * 淬性歐化'(see Tse, 1990, pp. 104-111), which is opposed to 悪性家化
xing on hud, pp. 113-136). The terminology adopted in this book follows Wangs (2012) contrast between
R ,歐化(litiHg xing du huAt beneficial Europeanization) and 非 R 性歐化(Ri lidng xing du hud. 'adverse
Europeanization).
102
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
(JmC, e.g.» 現代化,xiandai-hua, modernize),反-(Jan-, e.g.,反傳統9fan-chudntdng.
anti-traditionaK) proliferated in translations and creative writing. Over time, words
containing multiple bound morphemes became more and more popular. For instance:
fan-faxisi zhiiyi-zhe	反法西斯主義者
anti-fascism-doctrine-z/ze
'antifascist'
fan-zichanjiejiziyou-hud	反資產階級自由化
anti-bourgeois-liberal-hi/a
anti-bourgeois liberalization
Such a tendency was also extended to function words such as using the plural marker
們(-men) to express the meaning 'more than one； and using existing verbal suffixes
or aspect markers J /著/過(le/zhe/guo) to mark perfective aspect, imperfective
aspect, and experiential aspect, respectively (Tse, 1990, 2001; Wang, 2012). Compare:
1・a.她穿了和服
ta chuan le hefu
she wear ASP kimono
she has put on a kimono'
b.她穿著和服
ta chuan zhe hefu
she wear ASP kimono
she is wearing a kimono,
c-她穿過和服
ta chuan gud hefu
she wear ASP kimono
she has worn kimono [before]J
The plural marker and the aspect markers were already widely used in Mandarin-
speaking areas. Exposure to European languages, mainly through literary writing
and translation since the 1910s> facilitated their spread in the written vernacular or
baihua. Similarly, under the influence of European languages, three discrete syntactic
functions gradually evolved and were mapped onto the same character, pronounced
almost identically as [-de] (examples below adapted from Tse, 1990, p. 47)：”
12 In Modern Written Chinese, these three markers (-de) arc often expressed by the same character 的.
jn cantonese, however, their respective functions and exponents are distinct (Tang, 2015, pp. 9-10).
Europeanization: Influence of English on Chinese Grammar
103
定語、的(dingyu .de> 'nominalizer ・de‘)：
2. 他必須規規矩矩，才能對得起將來的老婆
th bixil gtdguljuju cdi ndng dui.de.qijiangldi-de Idopo
he must well-behaved so that not-let-down future-NOM wife
'He must behave himself so as not to let his future wife down：
[or: 'He must behave himself so as to be worthy of his future wife?]
(老舍，〈駱駝祥子〉)'3
狀語'地 (zhuangyu ・de, adverbial marker -de):
3・ 梅樹確是不少，密密地、低低地整列著。
tneishu que shi bu shao mimi-de didi-de zhenglie zhe
plum tree certainly be not few densely lowly line up ASP
'Plum trees are certainly a lot, densely and lowly lining up?
(朱自清，〈看花〉)"
補語 ' 得' {buyu ・de, post-verbal complementizer -de):
4.	這深紅的東西，忽然生了奪目的光亮，
zhe shenhong-de dongxi furan sheng-le duomii-de giiangliang
this deep red-NOM thing suddenly emit-ASP dazzle-NOM lights
射得人眼睛發痛。
she-de ren yanjlngfa tong
flash-COMP person eye get painful
'This deep red thing suddenly emitted dazzling lights,
making peoples eyes hurt with pain?
(巴金，〈海上的日出〉)i5
Induced use of clause-combining conjunctions
Traditionally, Chinese makes more use of parataxis 億合法顶展何 than of hypotaxis
(形合法,xtnghefa). The linking of clauses without using a connective is known as
parataxis ('method of combination by meaning] Kirkpatrick & Xu, 2012, p. 119), for
example, 'You jump, I jump' (source: the film Titanic). Here, even though the logical
relationship between the two clauses is not explicitly stated, in context, viewers of the
film should have no problem arriving at a Conditional' interpretation, as intended by
the protagonist (i.e., 'If you jump, I'll jump； rather than, say, cBecause/Until you jump.
I'll jump ). In a complex sentence involving a combination of main and subordinate
clauses, the use of a connective or conjunction (e.g.» because, ift provided, as long ns,
13.	Ludtud Xidngzi. 'Camel XiangzC by Lao She.
14.	Kan ””日,'Watching (lowers* by Zhu Ziqing.
15.	Hat shang de ri chut 'Sunrise on the sea, by Ba Jin.
104
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
though, unlessy until, whether) to mark the subordinate status of a clause is known as
hypotaxis ('method of combination by form\ Kirkpatrick & Xu, 2012, p. 119).
Prior to extensive contact with European languages, Chinese clauses tended to
follow their logical or natural sequence without marking the logical relationship
with a conjunction (連詞)lidnci). Consider the following examples adapted from
Kirkpatrick and Xu (2012, p. Ill), where the logical relationships一cause, conces-
sion, and condition—are deduced from the placement of the subordinate clause
before the 'main clause： respectively：
風太大，比賽改期了	(cause and efl
feng tai da bisai gaiqi le
wind too big match change time ER
'(Because) the wind was too strong, the match was postponed：
風(是)有點大，比赛不能改期 (concession)
feng (shl) you dian da bisai bunanggaiqi
wind (be) a little big match cannot postpone
(cause and effect)
(concession)
(Although) the wind is a little strong, the match cannot be
postponed?
7- a.強風停息，比突(就)可以繼續進行(condition)
cjidngfeng tingxi bisai (jiii) keyijixit jinxing
strong wind stop match (then) can continue take place
The strong wind stops, the match can continue?
In (5a)> the first clause (風太大,feng tai ddy *too windy') is naturally understood as
the cause for the effect stated in the second, main clause (比赛改期了, bisaigaiqilet
the match was postponed'), despite the absence of a connective like 因為(yhiwei9
because) that marks the causal relationship explicitly. Likewise, in (6a) and (7a), the
first clause is naturally interpreted as a concession and condition, respectively, for the
following (main) clause. In English, however, the hypotactic pattern is more cominon;
the main-subordinate sequence (偏句後置,Tse, 2001, p. 18; see, e.g., 5b, 6b, and 7b)
is more often encountered than the subordinate-main sequence (e.g.> 5c, 6c, and 7c):
5.	b・ The match was postponed, because the wind was too strong.
c. Because the wind was too strong, the match was postponed.
6.	b. The match cannot be postponed, although the wind is strong.
c. Although the wind is strong, the match cannot be postponed.
7.	b. The match cannot continue, unless the strong wind stops.
c. Unless the strong wind stops, the match cannot continue.
As a result of extensive exposure to European languages, notably English, users of
Modern Chinese tend to mark such logical relationships explicitly using conjunctions
Europeanization: Influence of English on Chinese Grammar
105
like 因為(yinw^i, *because,),雖然(suiran, although'), and 除非(chiifei, unless').
Compare:
5-	d.因為風太大，(所以)比赛改期了
yinwei feng tai da (suoyi) bisaigdiqi le
because wind too big, (therefore) match change time F.P.
'Because the wind was too strong, (so) the match was postponed?
5-	e.比赛改期了，因為風太大
bisai gaicji le	yinwei feng tai da
match postpone F.R because wind too strong
'The match was postponed, because the wind was too strong?
6-	d.雖然風有點大，(但是)比賽不能改期
suirdn feng you dian da (danshi) bisai bunanggaiqi
although wind a little big (but) match cannot postpone
Although the wind is a little strong, the match cannot be postponed?
6-	e.比族不能改期，雖然風有點大
bisai bundng gaiqi	suirdn feng you dian da
niatch cannot postpone although wind a little big
"The match cannot be postponed, although the wind is a little strong?
7-	ci.除非強風停息，(否則)比賽不可以繼續進行
chufei qiangjeng tingxi (jouze) bisai bit keyijixii jinxing
unless strong wind stop (otherwise) match cannot continue take
place
'Unless the strong wind stops, the match cannot continue?
7-	e. 比賽不可以繼綃進行，除非強風停息
bisai bu key! jixu jinxing	chufei qidngfeng tingxi
match cannot continue take place unless strong wind stop
'The match cannot continue, unless the strong wind stops?
Praditionally, therefore, Chinese tends to prefer linking clauses by following the
natural temporal sequence, or what Janies Tai (1985) calls the Principle of Temporal
Sequencing (PTS), whereby "the relative word order between two syntactic units is
determined by the temporal order of the states they represent in the conceptual world'
(Tai, 1985, p. 50). Ihus, whereas 到圖杳館拿書(ddo tiishiiguan nd shu) means going
10 the library to get a book, in 拿書到圖書館(nd shu dao tiishugudn), the sequence
of actions would be reversed: 'taking a book to the library, (Kirkpatrick & Xu, 2012,
P- 1 】2). As Kirkpatrick and Xu (2012) have shown, Tais PTS is compatible with other
unmarked or preferred 'frame-main sequences in Chinese, such as topic-comment,
big-small (e.g., presenting details of a physical location or address), whole-part,
modifier-modified, and subordinate-main (p. 141). This is why, according to the
106
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
famous linguist Wang Li (王力)(Wang, 1958a)> 'in Chinese conditional, concessive
and cause-and-effect sentences, the subordinate clause traditionally came before the
main clause (Kirkpatrick & Xu, 2012, p. 112). For this reason, explicit connectives
are usually unnecessary in paratactic sentences in Chinese.
By contrast, Wang (1958a) points out that the paratactic pattern in English
(e.g.，’You jump. I jump?) is relatively uncommon. Instead, the logical relationship
between clauses tends to be marked explicitly by using a connective, hence hypotaxis.
Regarding sequence, Wang observes that 'the so-called “if” clauses, the “because”
clauses, the "though" clauses and the "when” clauses can go before or after the main
clause (Kirkpatrick & Xu, 2012, p. 112). This is clearly borne out in our examples (5d)-
(5e), (6d)-(6e)> and (7d)-(7e) above. In general, however, English prefers the salient1
sequence, whereby the main message stated in the main clause is foregrounded. For
instance, while Standard English grammar allows for both the main-subordinate,
as in (56), (66), and (76), and subordinate-main structures, as in (5e), (6e), and
(7e), it is the main-subordinate sequence which is preferred and more commonly
】sed. This is why hypotaxis is the unmarked clause combining pattern in English
.Kirkpatrick & Xu, 2012).
Traditionally, parataxis—a subordinate-main structure without a connective—
used to be the preferred clause combining strategy in Chinese. Massive translation
of written works from English and other Western languages since the early 1900s,
however, has popularized the use of the hypotactic, main-subordinate pattern so
prevalent in these languages. The use of the hypotactic pattern, known in Chinese as
偏正複句，is made possible by the explicit marking of the subordinate clause using a
connective (e.g., (5d)-(7d), (5e)-(7e)). Many more examples cited from literary works
during this period may be found in Tse (1990). Such an influence of Europeanization
is characterized as Cbeneficiar because the insertion of an explicit connective such as
因為(yinwei, 'because'),如果(rugud. 'if') / 若然(rudrdn, 'if'),要是(ydoshk pro-
vided'),只要(zhiyaOj as long as),雖然(suiran9 'although'),除非(chufei, 'unless)
often helps to disambiguate intended speaker/writer meanings. Consider a paratactic
sentence like 你辦事，我放心(ni ban shi, wo fdngxln). While the unmarked para-
tactic subordinate-main structure seems to be clear, the exact logical relationship is
ambiguous and compatible with at least three interpretations (8a)-(8c) depending on
the context:
8.	a.如果你辦事，我就放心(~ if)
ruguo ni ban shi wo jiii fangxin
if you do thing	I then be at ease
'If you are handling things, I will be at ease?
(More idiomatically: ‘I will have confidence if you are in charge?)
Europeanization: Influence of English on Chinese Grammar
107
8. b.要是你辦事，我就放心(-provided)
yaoshi ni ban shi	wo jiu fangxin
provided you do thing I then be at ease
'Provided you are handling things, I will be at ease?
(More idiomatically: *1 will have confidence provided you are in
charge?)
8. c. 只要你辦事，我就放心(-as long as)
zhiydo ni ban shi	wo jiu fangxln
as long as you do thing I then be at ease
As long as you are handling things, I will be at ease.
(More idiomatically: I will have confidence as long as you一and not
anyone else—are in charge?)
As shown in these examples, the use of an explicit connective such as 如果(riigud,
8a),要是(yaoshi 8b), or 只要(zhiyao, 8c)-all marking a condition but differ in
modal force, (8c) being the most strongly worded—has the advantage of making the
intended speaker/writer meaning more precise. It also allows for an alternative rnain-
subordinate word order, as in (8d)-(8f) (Kirkpatrick & Xu, 2012):
8. d.我放心，如果是你辦事的話
wo fangxln riiguo shi ni ban shi de hua
I be at ease if be you do thing in case
T will be at ease, if you are in charge?
8. e.我放心，要是你辦事的話
wo fangxln yaoshi shi ni ban shi de hua
I be at ease provided you do thing in case
T will be at ease, provided you are in charge?
8. f. 我放心，只要是你辦事的話
wo fangxln zhiyao shi ni ban shi de hua
I be at ease as long as you do thing in case
T will be at ease, as long as you—and you only—are in charge.
The induced use of connectives to combine clauses in Chinese resulted in a shift
from parataxis to hypotaxis as the unmarked clause combining pattern. As a correlate
of this shift, the order of the clauses becomes less rigid, because there is no risk of
semantic confusion postposing the subordinate clause after the main clause, as shown
in (5e), (6e), (7e), and (8d)-(8f). Examples such as ⑼ also became more and more
common：
108
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
9.	是的，我一定會來，要是明天不下雨
shi de yvo yiding hui lai yaoshi mingtian biixidyu
yes F.R I certainly will come provided tomorrow not rain
<Yes, I'll certainly come, provided it doesnt rain tomorrow? (Tse, 1990,
p. 15)
Creation of pronouns
There used to be only one all-purpose third-person singular pronoun ta (他). Other
homophonous pronouns were coined after the model of English: M (he/him),她
(she/her)t 牠(//-animate),它(ft-inanimate), and 祂(He in reference to God) (Tse,
1990). In speech, these are all pronounced [ta]; in writing, however, thanks to these
distinctive pronoun forms after the European model (compare: he9 she, and it in
English), referencing in SWC has become clearer. The same is true of the coinage of
他們(tcimen, tthey7cthem,—male) and 她們｛tameny <they7<them,—female). Further,
two pointer pronouns—前者(qidnze) and 後者(houze)—were created after the
lodel in English： the former and the latter. With these newly created pronouns,
xtual meanings in writing have become much clearer.16
At the same time, a new structure gradually became widespread： the use of a pre-
modifying clause before a pronoun. For instance, the title of a recent, popular Korean
TV drama series is called 來自星星的你(Idi zi xingxing de 朮),which is almost
directly translated from Korean 理0(literally star-from-come-NOM-
you). While the spread of this structure—using a clause to premodify a pronoun—
in Modern Chinese is generally attributed to Europeanization, it should be noted
that it is more commonly found in two East Asian languages, Japanese and Korean,
especially in writing. This structure may have become popular in written Chinese as
a result of extensive translation of Japanese literary works and acadeinic texts into
Chinese since the end of the 19th century.
Inserted expressions (插語法,chayufa)
This feature allows the writer to provide additional information parenthetically like
an aside. For instance:
16. According to Hsu (1994), under the influence of English, the use of a third-person pronoun tn is increasingly
considered acceptable in Taiwanese Mandarin, as in：在場的人都説 > 位是廣束來的月餅，只姑(I不敢
吃 M。('People over there just looked at the moon cake, exclaiming "this is from Canton； without daring to
eatlt： Hsu. 1994, p. 177.)
Europeanization: Influence of English on Chinese Grammar
109
10.	恰巧有蛹剛打好的車——定作而沒錢取貨的一一跟
所期望的車差不甚多。”
(老舍，〈駱駝祥子〉)
The types of inserted expression vary; the use of short phrases such as 特別(tebie,
'in particular)尤其是(yduqi shiy especially*),首先(shouxidn, 'firstly'),至少
(zhishao^ 'at least') helps bring out the speakers/writers emphasis or contrast more
clearly (Hsu, 1994).
Using two or more verb phrases (VPs) to govern the same object
Structures such as (11) and (12) used to be rare in Chinese (Tse, 1990, p. 108):
11.	過去是、現在是、將來仍然是我們的學習榜樣
gudqu shi xianzai shi jidnglai rengrdn shi women de xuexi bdngyang
past be now be future still be our learning model
'[He] was our role model in the past, is our role model now, and will
remain so in the future?
12.	進行了並正在進行著建設
jinxing le bing zhengzdi jinxing zhe jidnshe
carry out ASP and currently carry out ASP construction
"Construction that has been and is being carried out.
As there is no tense in Chinese, this structure helps make the temporal meaning more
precise (see Chapter 5).
Induced use of de (的)to create pre-modifying NPs
English noun phrases niay be premodified (e.g., the full fnoon) or postmodified
(e.g.» the full moon that we saw) by one or more constituents, and the structure can be
rather complex. The induced use of the nominalizing function of de (的)in Chinese
allows for the possibility of premodifying (but not postmodifying) subjects. For
instance, from 賣東西(mdi dongxi, sell things), one can derive 賣的東西(El de
ddngxiy 'things being sold') and 賣東西的人(〃沛 dongxi de rent person[s] selling
things'). The expressive power of Chinese has thus been enhanced considerably.
】7. Qiaqido ydu UAnggdng dahiio de die—ding zud ir mci qidn qu hud	suo qiwang de che chd bu shhi duo
( It so happened that there was a ready-made vehicle—down payment paid but no money to collect—not so
ditlerent compared with what is expected! Luotud Xiangzi, 'Camel Xiangzi： by Lao She； cited in Tse, 1990»
p. 24; our translation.)
110
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
Induced use of expressions that help enhance preciseness and logicality
In English, it is customary for speakers/writers to use some expressions, typically
adverbs or PPs, to project their views more objectively, logistically, and/or precisely
(e.g., one of the NP, under certain circumstances, as a matter of fact, to some extent,
from a particular perspective, in comparison with NP, basically). Under the influence
of such expressions, Chinese writers have evolved corresponding expressions such as
the following (Tse» 1990, p. 109):
Europeanized expressions (beneficial)		Meaning
……之一	・・・zhi yi	one of the .・:
就若干情況而言	jiu rudgan qingkuang er yan	"under certain circumstances*
在一定程度上説	zaiyiding chengdii shang shud	'to a certain extent'
從某一個角度來看	cd ng niou yige jidodu lai kan	'from a certain point of view'
事實上	shishi shang	actually,
基本上	jiben shang	'basically'
比較來説	bijiao lai shud	comparatively speaking
/he expressive power of Modern Chinese, in preciseness and logicality, has thus been
enhanced considerably.
Adverse Europeanization (非良性歐化tfei liang xing du hua)
Europeanization refers to the influence of European languages on local languages at
the lexical and morpho-syntactic levels. The influence may be perceived as benefi-
cial (良性歐ft, Hang xing du hud) or adverse (非良性歐fidng xing du hua),
depending on the extent to which the nature of the influence conflicts with syntactic
and rhetorical terseness in Chinese (Tse, 1990). By design, Chinese shows a strong
preference fbr parataxis. This is manifested in its paucity of grammatical redundan-
cies or function words. Consider the following title of the editorial in the mid-1990s
concerning a British-based company's withdrawal of capital from Hong Kong (Next
magazine [ 1 April 1994])：
13.怡和撤退——情有可原於理不合
Yihe chetui---qingyou ke yuan yii li bii he
Jardines withdraw understandable unreasonable
*Jardines withdraws: understandable but unreasonable.*
The predicate following the topic (怡和撤退，Yihe chetui, 'Jardines withdraws) con-
sists of two four-character idioms. Without reading further into the text, the reader
Europeanization: Influence of English on Chinese Grammar
should have no problem identifying the stance of the editor(s), which may be glossed
as although it is understandable (情有可原),it is unreasonable (於理不合)'・ In other
words, the sequence of these two four-character idioms conforms to the frame-main
structure (Kirkpatrick & Xu, 2012). Notice that the stance of the magazine would have
been altered if their sequence was reversed:於理不合情有可原(yw li bii he qtngydu
keyuan) would mean although it is unreasonable, it is understandable^ This example
supports Wangs (1958a) analysis that, in the absence of a connective, the unmarked
sequence of the clauses in a paratactic sentence is subordinate-main. No connectives
are necessary. Regarding the terseness of the Chinese language, Lee and Tse (1994)
point out that:
漢語的意合性，容許語言單位在語意能夠搭配的原則上互相结合.免受形
態成分的約束，使語言表現形式富於弾性'語意細緻毀富。
省略和隠含表現了漢語的簡潔性。一般來説，在準確無誤的前提下•能用
越少的言辭表達越多的信息，傳意的效率也就越高。漢語不注重語法形式
的完整，只求辭達而已；漢語的簡潔性，便讓句子的各種成分'在不妨礙
意義的理解下，能不用的便盘量省去不用。西洋語言雖然都岀現省路和恳
含，但不如漢語這般普遍。(李家樹、謝耀基,1994,pp.12,13-14)18
As illustrated above, if the Europeanized structure or linguistic feature fills a func-
tional gap or extends the expressive power in Chinese, that influence tends to be
perceived as beneficial. On the other hand, where the meaning expressed by a gram-
matical marker or function word is subsumed elsewhere in the linguistic and/or
communication context, overt grammatical marking is typically dispreferred. This is
why, to ensure healthy development of the Chinese language, Europeanized linguistic
features should be carefully assessed, using syntactic redundancy as the yardstick
to determine their desirability. Those morpho-syntactic features that are wordy and
semantically redundant, leading to convoluted structures, should be discouraged
through language education. Tse (1990, pp. 113-136) lists ten such morpho-syntactic
features; we will briefly discuss and exemplify seven of those features below.
18. "lhe paratactic nature of the Chinese language allows syntactic units to be connected in accordance with their
collocation patterns. This frees the Chinese language from fbrmal morpho-syntactic constraints, and makes
ils structures syntactically agile and variegated, and its expressions semantically rich and fine-grained. •…
lhe Chinese language is characterized by terseness, which is made possible by ellipsis and the avoidance ot
syntactically redundant expressions. Generally speaking, under the premise of semantic precision, the smaller
the number of words used to optimize lhe highest information load, the greater the degree of communicative
efficacy In Chinese, the formalism of syntactic structures is valued le^s compared with the succinct expression
of meaning. Thanks to the characteristic of terseness in Chinese, various sjntactic units that may be omitted
can safely be ellipted, provided meaning is not adversely aflccted. Similar features of ellipsis and the avoidance
of redundant morpho-syntactic units may also be found in Western languages, but not as common as in
Chinese (Lee & Tse, 1994, pp. 12, 13-14； our translation).
112
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
Overuse of certain suffixes, e.g.，■性(・xi，ig) and -們(-men)
14.	這本書具很高的可耕性。
zhe ben shu ju hen gao de ke du xlng
this CL book has very high NOM can read xing
'This book has a high degree of readability? (Tse, 1990, pp. 116-117)
15.	犯了嚴重性的錯誤
fan le ydnzhbng xing de cudwii
commit ASP serious xing NOM mistake
committed a mistake of a serious nature (Tse, 1990, pp. 116-117)
In (14), instead of using the Europeanized nominal structure (可讀性，ke du xing}^
the same meaning may be more succinctly expressed by an adjective phrase:彳艮有
味(hen you wei), literally "very have taste, which sounds more idiomatic in Chinese.
In (15), the use of -xing is redundant and unnecessary. In some cases, the suffixation
of -xing to words like 傾向(qingxidng, 'tend to/tendency to'),影響(yingxiang, influ-
ence), 爭論(zhenglitn, 'dispute') is open to debate. In still other cases, where the use
of xing may lead to ambiguity, its use should arguably be avoided. For instance:
16.	一次性經驗
yi ci -xing jingyan
one CL sex/xing experience
one sexual experience/one-off experience'
No wonder in his work《翻譯研究》(A study of translation), Frederick Tsai (思果)
remarks:
「性」是個枢可怕的字。「積極性」、「消極性」、「髙尚，性」等，全不是中
國話。中國人不很喜歡用「性」字，英國的-ty, ・ity, -ness倒是無往而不宜
的 o 20 (Tsai, 1987, p. 165)
Traditionally, the use of -men (•們)to express the meaning "more than one was
limited to nouns with the semantic feature [+ human]. For example: * *
，9- A7rding；° 可鷲 95*P. 232). the potion of-ft as a suffix in Chinese may be traced to Japanese
.nfluence (e.g the English nouns posMty. importance, and impen,.eability were first translated into
鷲源 '	不㈤浅透性 5ct%y, which were subsequently adopted ,n
20.	•絳 is a t*b蝸。聃蜜罕七硕羿:F岫将 and 5顿呃” d。not sound like Chinese a,
小 Compared 曲靈 whurh, dispreferred by Chinese speggiy Ty, -lty. 一心 are ub.quitous and
sound very natural in fcngbsh (Tsai, 1987, p. 165; our translation).
1 Europeanization: Influence of English on Chinese Grammar
113
我們	women	'we' / cus
你們	nimen	'you'
他們	tamen	'they'
學生們	xuesheng-men	'students'
客人們	keren-men	guests
Under the influence of the obligatory marking of English plural countable nouns
using the suffix -s or -es,們(-men) was extended to refer to nouns with non-human
referents as well; for example,鼠子們(shiizi-nten, 'mice'),雞們chickens),
蝦兒們(xiaer-men9 shrimps), and 小動物們(xiaodbngwii-men^ little animals).
This is not a welcome trend and should be discouraged. But even in nouns referring
to humans, the affixation of -men often results in a Europeanized structure, which
should be avoided (17-19 are adapted from Yu ［余光中L 2002, p. 62):
17.	女性們的服裝每年都有新的花樣。
mixing -men de fuzhuang nieinidn dou you xlnde huayang
women PL NOM fashion every year all have new NOM style
'There's a new look in womens fashion every year?
18.	童子軍們的座右銘是日行一善。
tongzijun -men de zudyduming shi ri xingyishan
scouts PL NOM motto be do a good deed every day
'The Scouts' motto is "do a good deed every day"
19・醫生們一致認為他已經康復了。
yisheng -men yizhi renwei ta yijing kangfii le
doctors PL unanimous regard he already recover ASP
'The doctors are unanimous that he has already recovered?
As Yu (2002) remarks, in all of these cases (17-19), -men is syntactically redundant21
and should be left out. He further echoes Tsais (1987) axioms of good translation
practice as follows:
翻譯是譯句，不是譯字。句是活的，字是死的，字必須用在句中'有了上
下文，才具生命。歐化分子的毛病是，第一，見字而不見句；第二，以為
英文的任何字都可以在中文裏找到同義詞；第三，以為把英文句子的每一
部分都譯過來後，就等於把那句子譯過來了。事實上•英文裏有很多字都
沒有現成的中文可以對譯，而一句英文在譯成中文時、往往需要刖去徒亂
文意的虛字冗詞，壊滿文法或語氣上的漏洞，甚至需要大動手術•凋整文
詞的次序。所謂“勿増、勿刪、勿改”的戒條，應該是指文意•而不是
21.	Ihat is, the meaning more than one is subsumed or expressed in some other word(s) in the sentence. e.g.» the
collective noun 童子审(tongzijun). and the adverbs 都(dou) and —致(yizhi).
114
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
指文詞。文詞上的直譯、硬譯、死譯，是假精確，不是真精確。(Yu, 2002,
p. 61; cf. Tsai [思果],1987)22
Similarly, suffixing 著(-zhe) to mental verbs like 愛(曲'love'),恨(加払'hate'),害怕
(hciipa, 'fear'),相信(xiangxin, 'believe'), and 需要｛xuyao^ 'need') would result in
syntactic redundancy, so it should be avoided. Many examples of such a Europeanized
usage may be found in Tse (1990, pp. 118-119). To render the equivalent of English
-/y> the adverb marker del di 地 was similarly overused after adverbs like 忽然
(hurdn) and 突然(furan), both meaning suddenly'; reduplicated adverbs such as
剛剛(g。瓏啊ig, just),漸漸(jianjidn, gradually),慢慢｛manman^ slowly), and 悄悄
(c]icio(]iaOy quietly). This trend was also extended to adverbial phrases ending with
然("〃)，樣and 般(ban), such as 依然(yirdn), MW (zhaoydng), 一般
(yiban). In all of these adverbs or adverbial phrases, the affixation of de/di 地 adds
nothing to the meaning. Being syntactically redundant, it should be avoided.
Overuse of personal and possessive pronouns
Where the meaning is contextually clear, personal and possessive pronouns are pref-
erably not used. Under the influence of English and other foreign languages, however,
many writers felt that they should be used, resulting in convoluted structures that
violated the terseness of Chinese. For example:
20.他不管有多傷心，他都會生活下去。
biigudn you dud shangxin, ta dou hui shenghuo xiaqii
3sg no matter have much upset 3sg also will live on
'No matter how upset he is, he will live on： (Tse, 1990, p. 129)
21-快把你的槍放下。
kuai bd ni de qiangfangxia
quick DISP your gun put down
'Put down your gun quickly： (Tse, 1990, p. 129)
22.	'Io translate is to translate sentences, not words. Sentences arc full of life, but not words, which must be
used to form sentences. Words come alive when their meanings are articulated with those of other words
embedded in sentences. The main problem with those under the spell of Europeanization is threefold. First,
they see words but not sentences. Second, they are under the false impression that for every English word,
there is a synonym in Chinese. Ihird, they wrongly believe that as long as every part of an English sentence is
given a translation, then that sentence has been translated. In fact, there are plenty of English words fbr which
there is no ready-made Chinese equivalent； when an English sentence is rendered into Chinese, more often
than not there is a need to purge superfluous function words and syntactic redundancies that interfere with
a good translation. lb fill those gaps manifested in the grammar or the tone of the writer, sometimes a major
operation like word order alteration is required. Hhe widely known axiomatic advice, “don't add, dont delete,
and dont alter" should bear on textual meaning, not on words. Direct, stilted or rigid translation of words may
appear to be precise, but such a “precision" would be far off the mark* (Yu, 2002, p. 61; our translation).
Europeanization: Influence of English on Chinese Grammar	115
As shown in the English translation of (20), the use of the highlighted pronoun 'he in
the main clause is a grammatical requirement, without which the sentence would be
ungrammatical. The same cannot be said of its Chinese counterpart, where the inser-
tion of 他(■) in the second clause is grammatically unacceptable. In (21), strictly
speaking the Chinese sentence is grammatically well formed. However, in those con-
texts where there is only one gun, and the meaning of'your' is contextually under-
stood (i.e., the interlocutor being the obvious gun bearer'), it is better to omit the
possessive pronoun 你的(nr de). In extreme cases, it may be misleading, as a different
meaning is produced. Compare the following (Tse, 1990, pp. 121-122):
22.	瑪莉説她將會結婚。
malt shud ta jiang hui jiehun
Mary said she will get married
(a)	*Mary said she would get married? (she - Mary)
(b)	“Mary said she would get married? ('she' = another person)
23.	約翰回家後，他立刻就睡覺。
yuehdn huijia hou, ta like jiu shuijiao
John return home after he immediately then sleep
(a)	'John went to bed as soon as he came home? ('he = John)
(b)	'John went to bed as soon as he came home? ('he' = another person)
In English, it would be ungrammatical to leave out the pronoun (see Chapter 7).
In Chinese, however, if the referent is the same as the subject in the first clause, the
pronoun should not be used. The reason is that, as shown above, using a pronoun in
the second clause (她/他，ta) would suggest another person is getting married (22)
or going to bed (23). As Tse (1990) has rightly pointed out:
依照漢語習慣，主語和所有格代詞本可因承説而省去'但歐化文章並不如
此；這樣，往往就容易破壞了語言的經濟性。23
Likewise, Cheung (2011) echoes Frederick Tsais (1987) viewpoint and comments that：
中文的習慣是，可省則省。如果大家都知道一句話所指的人是誰,就不
用重複。……中文不用代名詞，從頭到尾都用同一個名字也沒有問題’
如果不重複名字的話，中文裏便常常用關係或身分來代皆，如「叔」、
「伯」等。"(Cheung, 2011, p. 29) * 24
23 'According to syntactic conventions in Chinese, subject pronouns and possessive pronouns in context nuy be
ellipted, but not so in Europeanized Chinese texts. Such a Europeanized feature tends to spread at the expense
of the terseness of the language, (Tse, 1990, p. 129; our translation).
24.	'In Chinese, what can be ellipted is conventionally ellipted. If the referent of a given expression is known or
identifiablek then there is no need to repeat it.... It is normal if no pronouns are used; adhering to the same
name from beginning to end is also fine. Where no names are repeated, often words denoting relationships or
identities are used instead, e g., **unclew (Cheung, 2011» p. 29; our translation).
116
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
Overuse of coordinating conjunctions (連詞，lidnci)
Unlike in English, which tends to use coordinating conjunctions to link words of
the same word class (e.g., husband wife; rich but unhappy; sing md dance; slowly
but surely), in Chinese, coordinating conjunctions are often unnecessary, especially
in chunks which appear as set phrases or idioms such as the following (Tse, 1990,
p. 123):
男女老幼
士瑕工商
禮義廉恥
nan nu l(io you
shi nong gong shang
li yi lidn chi
詩詞歌賦
shi ci ge fu
'men and women, old and young
'scholars, farmers, artisans, and merchants
sense of propriety, justice, integrity, and
honour
'verses, ditties, odes, and songs
Or, different coordinating conjunctions are used depending on the units being linked
together：
及
並
而
以及
ya
P
bh】g
er
yi"
linking nouns and pronouns
linking nouns, but units different in status
linking verbs
linking adjectives
linking nouns, verbs, phrases, sentences (Tse> 1990, p. 123)
One consequence of Europeanization is that 和(he) was overused, while other
coordinating conjunctions or linking devices were neglected. For example:
24.	爸爸和媽婿都很高興。
baba he mama dou hen gdoxing
father and mother both very happy
'Father and mother are both very happy?
25.	做善事無分貧與富，亦無分你和我。
zud shanshi wu fen pin yii fu, yi yvufen ni he wo
do good deeds irrespective rich and poor also irrespective you and me
'Good deeds should be done irrespective of the doer being rich and poor,
you and me?
In both (24) and (25), however, all the coordinating conjunctions (和,he and 與,
yii) are better left out, without affecting the grammaticality of the two sentences. The
three coordinated units—爸爸媽媽，無分貧富，無分你我一are all established
four-syllable idioms, whose syntactic integrity would be lost if a conjunction was
added between the noun phrases. Regarding this trend, the famous writer, poet, and
literary critic Yu (1987) points out that:
Europeanization: Influence of English on Chinese Grammar
目前的不良趨勢，是原來不用連接詞的地方，在and意識的教唆下-都裝
上了連接詞；而所謂連接詞都由「和」、「與」、「及」•「以及」包辦•
可是靈活而宛轉的「而」、「並」，「而且」等詞，幾乎要绝跡了。(Yu,
1987, p. 6户
Overuse qf—個(yige) and 一種｛yizhong)
When reference to a noun or NP is indefinite, European languages require the use
of an indefinite article (e.g., English a!an\ French uniune\ German ein/eine). Largely
25 a result of translation, the obligatory marking of indefinite reference in Western
languages has led to the overuse of 一個(yigR) and 一種(ytzhong). For instance,
Yu (1987) points out that a convoluted title of a student composition like (26)
26.	關於一個河堤孩子的成長故事
guanyu yige hedi haizi de chengzhdnggiishi
about a CL riverbank child NOM grow up story
a story about a riverbank child's coming ot age
may be simplified by removing three disyllabic words—關於(gudnyii)t 一個
and 故事(gushi). Yus point is that there is minimal risk of confusion in a more
succinct title like 河堤孩子的成長,for, by reading into the story, the reader will
discover whether it is about one riverbank child or more than one. Below are some
more examples of the redundant use of ―個(y姣)and —種(yizhong) (Tse, 1990,
p. 58,124):
27.	我像是一個溺在水裡的兒童。
wo xidng shi yige ni zai shut ll de ertdng
I seem be a CL drown in water NOM child
*1 seem like a child drowning in water?
28.	北京是華北的二個重要城市。
beijing shi hudbei de yige zhongyao chengshl
Beijing be northern China NOM a CL important city
"Beijing is an important city in northern China?
29.	這是一.不怕風險積極進取的精神的表現。
zhe shi ytzhong bupa fengxian jljijinqii de jingshen de biaoxidn
this be a CL dauntless aggressive NOM spirit NOM behaviour
'This behaviour reflects a dauntless, aggressive spirit?
25.	'Currently, under the adverse influence of [English] "and" there is a (rend to insert a conjunction where no
conjunction is needed. The so-called conjunctions consist of only fll (相，與(y。).及(ji), and U 及
while their semantically more nuanced counterparts such as dr (而)• blng (並)• crqi^ (iftj 且)are hardly visible'
(Yu, 1987, p. 6; our translation).
118
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
Even worse, sometimes 一個(yige) is used like the detenniner of a noun with plural
meaning (e.g.» 人renniln, people,群眾，qunzhdng, 'the masses). Such a colloca-
tion is semantically odd and should be avoided.
Overuse of prepositions (介詞,jieci)
English, like other European languages, makes more use of PPs than does Chinese.
Under Western influence, English prepositions were rendered into Chinese, often
resulting in convoluted structures. For instance, at 16 (years of age)' was rendered as
a PP using 當,which was also typically used to translate "as* and <when,:
30.a.當她十六歲的時候，就從鄉下到了上海
dang ta shiliiisui de shihom jiii cong xiangxia dao le shanghai
when she 16 years old NOM time then from countryside reach ASP
Shanghai
At age 16/When she was 16 years old, she went from the country-
side to Shanghai?
This was rightly criticized as syntactically clumsy, and may be simplified as:
30.b.她十六歲就從鄉下到了上海
苗 shiliusul jiii cong xiangxia dao le shanghai
she 16 years old then from countryside reach ASP Shanghai
'When she was 16 years old, she went from the countryside to
Shanghai?
These two contrastive examples26 show clearly that the version without the discon-
tinuous structure 當...的時候(dang... de shihou) (30b) sounds much better than
does the Europeanized version (30a).27
Another problem with this discontinuous structure 當...的時候(dang... de
shihou) is that the elements embedded within this structure are sometimes very Iong»
making the sentence difficult to parse. Tse (1990, pp. 127-128) cites an example from
the May Fourth writer Ba Jin (巴金),in which the clause structure embedded between
'疝...的時候(ddng ...de shihdu) contains 37 characters.28 Still another problem is
that the second part of this discontinuous structure is sometimes dropped or acci-
dentally omitted, leaving 當(dang) dangling in the first part of a complex sentence.
_____________
26.	These two examples were adapted from Lii Shuxiang and Zhu Dexis (1952) 'Notes on syntax and rhetoric
(呂淑湘、朱德熙'〈語法修辭胡話〉,cited in Ee, 1990, p. 127).
27.	Regarding this trend, Yu (1984) made the following criticism:［公式化的翻譯 ，既然見'when'就當，五
步_當'十步 Y，當當之聲-遂不飽於耳了。J (Yu, 1984. cited in Tse, 1990, p. 127).
28.	「當他們站在徵板上面，機器旁邊、一面管理機器，一面里白茫茫的江面，看見输船慢慢驶近岸
臨的時候，他們心裡的感世'如有人能夠XI實地寓出來，一定是一首好詩- J (巴金，〈機器的詩〉,
cited in Tse, 1990, pp. 127-128).
Europeanization: Influence of English on Chinese Grammar
119
Similarly, the need to translate PPs involving concerning, with regard to9 regarding,
with respect to, about, etc. led to the overuse of 有關(youguan) and 關於(guanyu).
For example:
31.	今天我們討論有關臺灣交通的問題，
jintian women taoliin youguan taiwan jiaotong de went!
today we discuss about Taiwan traffic NOM problem
'Today, we discuss Tai wans traffic problems? (Yu, 1987, p. 6)
32.	關於他的申請，你看過了沒有？
guanyu ta de shenqing, ni kdn gud le meiyou
about his NOM application you see ASP not
'About his application, have you seen it?' (Yu, 1987, p. 6)
In both (31) and (32), leaving out 有關{youguan} and 關於(guanyu), respectively>
would make the two sentences syntactically terser, while meaning is completely
unaffected.
Overuse of the passive (被動句,beidongjii)
In Chinese, traditionally verb phrases with passive meaning tended to express some-
thing unfavourable to the person or thing affected (Chapter 4). For instance:
33.	他 忠 而被謗	(word with passive meaning: U» bei)
ta zhong er bii bdng
he loyal yet PSV defame
'He was loyal but was defamed by slander?
34.	農 田受風 雨侵喔	(word with passive meaning:受，时汕〔)
nongtidn shou fengyu qinxi
farmland receive wind-rain batter
The farmland was battered by (strong) wind and (heavy) rain.
35.	做事要小心，否則就要捱罵(word with passive meaning： L.ai)
zuo shi yao xidoxin,fduze jiii ydo di mil
do things must careful otherwise then will get scold
'Be cautious when doing things, or [you] will receive a scolding.
36.	他出身寒微，遭人譏諷(word with passive meaning:遭,zao)
ta chushen hdnwei, zao ren fifing
he family background modest suffer ridicule niock
'His modest family background was ridiculed and mocked by others.
To a certain extent, this adverse meaning continues to be found when bei (被)col-
locates with verbs of perception such as see and hear. For instance, while the English
sentence She was seen playing in the garden does not necessarily suggest that the act
120
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
of being seen is considered something unpleasant to the subject 'she； such a meaning
is strongly suggested in the Chinese translation (see also Chapter 4):
37.她被人看見在花園裏玩
ta bei ren kanjian zai huayuan li wan
she PSV person see in garden inside play
'She was seen playing in the garden?
Nevertheless, as a result of Europeanization, the adverse interpretation associated
with 被(bei) has been diluted since the 1920s.29 Today,被 is used freely to denote pro-
cesses with clearly positive meanings, as in the following cases, among many others
(cf. Wang, 2012, p. 34):
被讃賞	bei	zanshang	'be	praised'
被提名為代表	bei timing wf ddibiao	*be	nominated, as representative
被選為議員	bei xuan yvdiyiyudn	*be	elected as councillor*
There are two tendencies associated with the overuse of the passive that are consid-
ered undesirable and should be avoided. First, after 被(bei) has evolved as the overt
passive marker in modern Chinese, the use of other function words with a similar
passive meaning such as 叫(jiao),教(jiao), M (rang),給(get), and the discontinuous
structure 為...所(wei ・..sud) has been neglected, the last mentioned being histori-
cally attested since the Han dynasty (206 BCE-CE 220, Wang, 1958a, pp. 424-425).
Where appropriate, these function words could break the stylistic monotony of
被(bei). Second, where the passive meaning is subsumed in the larger context, then
the overt passive marker 被(bei) need not and should not be used. For instance:
38.	犯人已被押到
fanren yi bei ya dao
convict already PSV escort arrive
4The convict has been escorted here? (Tse, 1990, p. 133)
39.	你們都該被罰
nitnen dou gai bei fa
you all should PSV punish
'You should all be punished? (Tse, 1990, p. 133)
In both (38) and (39), the passive meaning is contextually clear without using the
passive marker 被(bei), making it syntactically redundant. In accordance with the
characteristic of terseness in Chinese, it is better left out. The following example,
adapted from Yu (1979),30 is strongly suggestive of such an unwelcome trend:
29.	Compare, e.g.,水被喝乾f ；文件被放在抽屈裡.錢包被丢了 (Tse, 1990, p. 133).
30.	Source:〈從西而不化到西而化之〉，Yu (1979, cited in Tse, 1990, p. 132).
Europeanization: Influence of English on Chinese Grammar
40.這本新書正被千千萬萬的讀者搶購著。3：
zhe ben xin shu zheng bei qianqianwanwan de diizhe qidnggdu zhe
this CL book currently PSV thousands and thousands NOM reader panic
buying ASP
4This book is currently the target of panic buying by thousands and thou-
sands of readers?
Apart from checking whether an alternative function word or marker with passive
meaning could be used, the redundant use of 被(bei) should be avoided (for contras-
tive differences between the English and the Chinese passive, see Chapter 4).
The overuse q/'是(shi)
Practically all European languages have the equivalent of the verb to be (also known
as the copula; e.g., French etrey German sein). In modern Chinese, the function word
which is closest in meaning to the verb to be is 是(shi). Over time, a discontinuous
structure 是..的(shi... de) evolved, which is characterized by Chinese linguists
as 描寫句('descriptive sentence') or 判斷句(Judgement/opinion sentence). In other
words, this discontinuous structure is used typically to describe something or state
the writers opinion about a certain issue. For instance, in his critique of the overuse
of Europeanized linguistic features, Wang (1958a) said that:
西洋語法所要求的形式，並不一定是中國語所要求的。所以描寫句用繫詞
..
在西洋是合語法的，在中國卻是不合語法的。……若以為西洋語法比中國
語法更合理，這種錯誤的觀念仍是必須矯正的。(王力，1958a, cited in Tse,
1990, p. 134)32
It is interesting that in four of the six clauses in Wangs (1958a) critique cited here,
he found it useful or even necessary to use the 是..的(shi •.• de) structure. The
main problem is that, if such a structure is repeated many times in a sequence, the
text would sound stilted and monotonous. One such saniple text collected during
the May Fourth era may be found in Tse (1990).” Another problem is that some
______
31.	For an alternative, more idiomatic way to express the target meaning in (40), consider: !-> 木计侔* 歓
迎'千千萬萬的就者正在瘦狂推購著。
32.	'What is needed in the grammars of Western languages may not be needed in Chinese. Hence in the West
using the copula in descriptive sentences is grammatical, but not in Chinese.... The belief that Western
syntactic structures are more rational than their Chinese counterparts is mistaken and must be rectified
(Wang, 1958a, cited in Tse, 1990, p. 134; our translation).
33.	i自然是要親近的.人生是要觀察的、生活压要經驗的.同時間也是要M的，豊児不一定要至少M
度纟少•卷°許多的天才是不用誼M麼否的，可是更多的天才是博览群普的•并考的天才足沒肓経員
小智畤期的，可是更多的天才是花了多少年的心血才逐漸成熟的♦況且天才向來越収角最少以
的-大多數以天才自負，或是被朋发以天才見訐的人也，并不過野積也虎角ZS(吧■ J (陳西泠-
再鹼裝杏〉，cited in Tse, 1990, pp. 134-135).
122
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
authors would omit the second part... de (...的),as illustrated by the following
examples (cited in Tse, 1990, pp. 133-135):
41.麻炸機頭上有兩三個發動機，
hongzhaji tou shdngydu Hang san ge fadongji
bomber head on have two three engine
發出來的聲音是很沉重。
chillai de shengyin shi hen chenzhong
emit NOM sound be very heavy
On top of the bomber were two to three engines; the sound they pro-
duced was very heavy： (Source: newspaper; cited in Tse, 1990, p. 134)
Owing to frequent and extensive translation into Chinese, therefore, there was a ten-
dency to overuse 是(shi). This is another unwelcome trend to guard against. In his
treatise of the history and types of Europeanization of modern Chinese, Tse (1990)
reminds us that we cannot copy European language features blindly rather than select
those that suit our needs. This is crucial for maintaining the strengths of the Chinese
language. In sum, when the Europeanized feature adds nothing to the meaning of the
original structure and is thus semantically and syntactically redundant, it is generally
regarded as an unwanted, adverse development that should be avoided.
Questions and activities
1.	Io render foreign concepts from English into Chinese, what linguistic means
were used? Can you work out the corresponding English words of the following
Chinese words (examples based on Tse, 1990, pp. 36-39)?
Group 1:
i. 瓦特3d te),馬達(ma dd),歐姆(du mu),伏特{fu te)
ii- 吉普(jipul 尼古丁 {nigu dingl 凡士林(fan shi //n),歇斯底里(xie si
dili)
i".開末拉(kai mo la),煙士披里純{yan shi pili chun),懷娥鈴(huai eling),
基達爾3&er)
Group 2:
iv.	馬克思主義(nid ke si zhu yi),浪漫主義(lang man zhu yi)> 芒果
guo),酒吧(jiU ba),啤酒(pijiu)
v.	沙丁魚(sha ding yu\ 吉普車(ji pu che),維他命(Wf ta ming\ 幽默
{you mo),模特兒(tn6 ter)
vi.	咖啡粉(炫feifinl坦克車(苗〃 ke che),沙發(s济fa\奥林匹克村(Ao
Un pi ke ciln)
2.	Between transliteration and translation, which method is preferred? Why?
justify your answer with the help of the following examples (Tse, 1990, p. 36).
Europeanization: Influence of English on Chinese Grammar
123
Group 3:
vii.	麥克風{mdi ke feng)
viii.	愛康諾米(di kang nub mi}
ix.	德律維雄(彪 lii wei xiong)
x.	德謨克拉西(d8 mo ke la xi)
擴音器(kudyinqi)
經濟(jingji)
電視(diansht)
民主(min zhu)
In Chinese, which noun suffixes denoting a person who ・・：are particularly
productive (e.g., English ・ist> as in artist,藝術家[yi shu jia]\ pianist,鋼琴家
[g布g jid]; scientist,科學家[ke xue Use the following English words
to help you.
・er farmer, lawyer, messenger, newcomer, passer-by, reader, teacher,
traveller, worker, writer...
-or	actor, sailor ...
accountant, protestant...
-inn	magician, musician...
•eer	engineer, auctioneer...
4.	There are other English nouns which denote 'person' but which are not derived
from a related verb or noun (see below). How are they rendered into Chinese?
Which Chinese suffix is used to render that meaning?
actuary, architecty author, bachelor, doctor, gourmets martyr, master^
member^ passenger^ priest, revolutionary, samurai, staff
Can you think of others?
5.	Can you simplify the following Europeanized structures while keeping the
meaning more or less constant? In each case, which function word is semanti-
cally redundant and better left out?54
(a)	各位女士先生們，總理和各與會代表們
(b)	他們已把他們的心事吿訴給神明，他們已把一年來的罪過在神前
取得了寬恕。於是他們像修完了一勝業，他們的臉上帶著微笑'
他們的心裡更非常輕卷° (李廣田'〈山之子〉，cited in Tse, 1990,
p. 129)
(c)	我們漸漸沒有這種受欺的度量，但我們也很欣快沒有這種奴隸的
根性；我們正有我們自己的工作在，我們的手段與目的是一致
的!(顧頡剛'〈古史辨自序＞,cited in Tse, 1990. p. 129)
(d)	如要停車，乃可在此(see Tse, 1990, p. 130)
(e)	在春節期間
(f)	關於這個問題，我們下次再談
34.	Some ot the items below are adapted from Chan (1993).
124
tv
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
(g)	對於她的決定，我們都很關注
(h)	我有一個問題，想跟你談談
⑴日本是一個島國
(j)	應不應被浪費掉，應被提出來討論
(k)	那本書被我喜歡
(l)	你被我愛
(m)	紅樓夢被我讀
(n)	當然地不能算數
(0)我完全地明白了
(?)我們是已註冊了的團體
(q)	這有著很多優點
(r)	她從來沒有承認過
'i.
Further reading
Tse (1990) is a highly readable and comprehensive introduction to various language
contact phenomena that we have been referring to as 'Europeanization* A concise
summary of that (1990) monograph may be found in Tse (2001). The two articles and
monograph by Yu Guangzhong (1979, 1987, 2002) are also highly recommended.
Frederick Tsai, better known in Chinese as 思果，has published several influential
books on English-Chinese translation (Tsai 1982, 1987, 2002)—all highly readable
and instructive regarding ill-advised as well as good translation practices. For an
overview and critique of Tsais approach and contributions to the field of translation,
see Cheung (2011). Liu (2006) is a well-conceived, comprehensive, and systematic
contrast between Chinese and English structures. Pinkham (2000) provides plenty of
useful examples of what she calls 'Chinglish： showing how texts authored by experi-
enced Chinese translators working in such diverse fields as journalism, foreign affairs,
business, tourism, and advertising may sometimes suffer from stylistic anomalies of
one kind or another that may be traced to their first language, Chinese.
Being Chinese, Speaking English
Pragmatic Norms and Speaker Identity
Understanding context in the study of pragmatics
In this chapter, we will go beyond graminar proper to understand what sorts ofcom
munication problem EAL learners are likely to encounter when interacting wi
native speakers (NSs) of English or among themselves. To do this, we will loo ' into
some of the well-known findings in pragmatics, a research area uithin linguisti
which is generally defined as the study of language in use.
Unlike the study of grammar, which is often decontextualized, a study in 幻agmat.
ics requires the researcher(s) to specify the context of social interaction.:
context may not be easy to define, but there is a simple way to understan
a context consists of. In a seminal article devoted to this topic, the sociolinguist
Joshua Fishman (1965) points out that the context of a given situation or sp
event may be specified if we have the answer to a general question.
*Who speaks what language to whom and when?
For instance, the context of a lecture in a particular course may be specified as 罕
ofa lecturer lecturing to students of that course where contextual details such as the
level of the course (undergraduate or postgraduate), the time of the da), ‘ e a)
the week, teaching venue, and language of instruction are known to both lecturer
students. The language use is usually formal. After the lecture, if students are to or er
something to drink at the university cafeteria, they will most likely be addressing t e
employees informally in the local vernacular, although the item(s) ordere maY
in English. In Hong Kong, for example, students ordering food and drin，s at t
university cafeterias would typically be 'mixing' Cantonese with English (or, argua y,
Italian), as follows:
(1)	唔該一杯 cappuccino
ng4goil jatl buil cappuccino
please one cup cappuccino
"One cappuccino please'
126
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
In the above contexts, formal versus informal, the speakers in question would know
intuitively, if subconsciously, which language at what level of formality is considered
appropriate by their interlocutors, or participants engaged in context-specific social
interaction.
Another sociolinguist, Dell Hymes (1976), proposed using the acronym
SPEAKING to capture all the information required for specifying the context of a
conversation, as follows (see Turther reading' for more details):
"京
s	Situation	Scene and setting (e.g., lecture theatre, tea room, church, court, restaurant, supermarket)		
p	Participants	People present, and the roles they play (e.g., teacher-student, peer-peer, salesperson-customer, father-son)	_
E	End	Goal of communication (e.g.» to provide information or service, to maintain collegial relationship, to buy a bus ticket)
A	Act	Speech acts (e.g., to explain, extend an invitation, make a compliment, request, apologize, and the like)	_
K	Key	Tone of speech (e.g., friendly, harsh, ironic)
I	Instrumentality	Channel (e.g.» face-to-face, by phone, WhatsApp, Skype)
N	Norms of communication	Rules of speaking (e.g., formal or informal? Is code-mixing appropriate? Is slang acceptable?)
G	Genre	Culturally defined speech event (e.g., lecture, prayer, debate, consultation, court trial, small talk)
Figure 9.1
Hymess (1976) acronym, SPEAKING, used to capture all the essential information pertaining
3 the context of social interaction
ipeech act
Our focus in this chapter is on speech acts, which are concerned with 'How to do
things with words' (Austin, 1962). A speech act is defined as an act performed when
producing an utterance, e.g., giving a warning or making a request, a promise, or a
claim (Paradis, 2004, p. 245). Austin (1962) shows that human language—English,
Chinese, Japanese, Korean, or any other natural language—is used not only to refer
to people or to talk about things. Rather, what is said sometimes amounts to a verbal-
ized act or action, with fairly specific consequences to the interlocutor(s) or situation
present, hence a speech act. One famous and widely cited example is the naming of
a ship. At a formal ship-naming ceremony, when the guest of honour says ‘I name
this ship Queen Elizabeth, he or she performs much more than uttering these six
words. As a direct consequence of these words uttered by the guest of honour at that
formal ceremony, a new ship with the name Queen Elizabeth is added to the world of
floating vessels.
Being Chinese, Speaking English: Pragmatic Norms and Speaker Identity	127
Similarly, a wedding ceremony is not complete without the right person allowed
by law to perform a marriage ceremony saying to the newlyweds T (hereby/now)
declare you husband and wife* (or the equivalent in Chinese, or the local language of
a community where weddings are regulated by law). As a result of these words, the
status of the bride and bridegroom undergo a qualitative change： They are now recog-
nized as a couple, with all attendant legally binding rights and obligations, including
but not limited to their undertaking which was spelled out in their solemnly recited
oath, typically in the presence of family members and close friends. For the intended
result of a speech act to take effect in speech events such as a wedding and a ship-
naming ceremony, Austin (1962) further reminds us that a set of Telicity conditions
must be met. For instance, the person presiding over a wedding ceremony rnust
have the right professional background and authority to utter those words; similarly,
no new ship will be added to the fleet if the words are said during role-play (e.g.，
student activity of a language class).
Subsequent research shows that, in addition to ceremonial events, many verbs ot
saying perform a similar function (Searle, 1969, 1979). For example, when a speaker
(S) says any of the following in conversation or writing: I accept...»I admit...,
I agree..., / apologize..., I conclude..., / condemn... > Z criticize..., / deny >
/ disagree..., I promise..., I query..., / refuse..., I request..., I repeat...»I take
your point, I warn ...» and so forth, S performs an act verbally in accordance with the
meaning of the verb. For example:
•	Making a judgement or stance, e.g., I agree, I disagree, I take your point
•	Expressing an attitude, e.g., I admit, I apologize, I deny
•	Declaring an obligation or an intention, e.g.» I accept, I promise, I refuse
•	Stating verbal action, e.g.> I conclude, I condemn. I criticize, I query,
I repeat, I request, I warn
The examples in (2) below, adapted with slight modification from Oishi (2006),
provide further illustrations of other performative speech acts:
(2)	a. I baptize thee in the name of Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit.
b.	I reprimand you fbr your negligence.
c.	I order you to release the prisoners.
d.	I divorce you! I divorce you! I divorce you! (Oishi, 2006, pp. 7-S)
All of the examples above make use of the first-person singular pronoun I and the
present tense. Notice, however, that the force (technically called illocutionary force)
is not as strong if the subject refers to the first-person plural pronoun (ue), still less
when referring to the second- (you) or third-person (singular he or she; plural they).
This is largely because, according to Speech Act theory, a speech act is performed
deictically ('here and now') by the speaker in a speech situation. The consequence
128
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
of the speech act typically bears on the hearer(s), although it may also impact some
other participant(s) implicated but not present in the speech situation (e.g., I promise
you hell be punished).
Linguistic failure vs. pragmatic failure
As we all know, errors are unavoidable in the language-learning process, be it a first,
second, or foreign language. Just as an infant must stumble many times before he or
she can walk, making errors in a target language is arguably an integral part of the
learning process. Relative to standard language norms, language errors have been
described as different manifestations of the learners* 'linguistic failure： Most of the
problems we have examined so far are due to one form of linguistic failure or another.
In this chapter, however, we will examine a few recurrent cases of 'pragmatic
failure (Thomas, 1983), which happens when the linguistic realization of a speech act
in L2 does not conform to the way NSs of L2 would normally say, or write in the case
of written communication. We will illustrate pragmatic failure with the help of exam-
ples of Chinese EAL users using English to realize two speech acts when interacting
with NSs or NNSs： (a) making requests, and (b) responding to compliments. Speech
acts such as these take place almost every day, in Chinese or in English, depending on
the interlocutor and context at large.
When expressing either of these two speech acts (among many others) in English,
should Chinese EAL users be guided by the social norms and cultural values of their
mother tongue (Cantonese or Mandarin), or their target language, English? One way
o answer this question is to ask: When interacting with a NS of English, are EAL
users supposed to behave in the same way as when they interact with someone who
speaks the same LI as they do?
Before moving on to discuss interactional problems arising from the realization
of these two speech acts, we will briefly examine two crucial concepts in the study of
cross-cultural and intercultural communication: face and politeness.
Face and politeness
Regardless of the language(s) and culture(s) in a community, be it monolingual or
multilingual, 'face' and 'politeness' are two crucial and closely related concepts for
understanding why people engaged in social interaction tend to behave the way
they do. For Chinese students, the concept of face as an area of study in sociology
and, later, sociolinguistics should be fairly straightforward given its terminological
origin and significance in Chinese culture (compare:面子,nuanzihnin6 zi2\ and 臉，
lidnllim6; Scollon & Scollon, 1983; Bond & Hwang, 1986). Building on Goftmans
(1955) notion of *face and 'facework； Brown and Levinson (1987) characterize face
Being Chinese, Speaking English: Pragmatic Norms and Speaker Identity
129
as a speakers right to his or her good public image in interpersonal communication.
According to their distinction between positive face and negative face, a hearers
positive face needs are best attended to by making the hearer feel that his or her self-
esteem is valued and appreciated. By contrast, the best way to attend to the hearers
negative face needs is to minimize intrusion in the hearers independence to act freely.
For instance, when making a request for an appointment：
(a)	I'm only available tomorrow; can we rneet at 3 p.m】
(b)	I understand how busy you are； would you happen to be free sometime
next week?
Compared with the requester in (a), who pays no attention to the interlocutors nega
live face needs in terms of limited choice of meeting time (3 p.m. tomorrow) or:ve
readiness and availability to meet, the requester in (b) sounds more cautious, taking
care to allow the interlocutor a lot of freedoin in deciding whether he or she wants
meet with the requester and, if so, providing ample choice of preferred meeting time.
In addition, compared with (a), the way the question is phrased in (b) (woul、
happen to be free ..・also helps preserve the interlocutors posithe face.
As Scollon and Scollon (1995) have observed, in interpersonal communication,
a speaker often finds it necessary to attend to both types of face needs of thehearer.
This is not easy at all, given the face-threatening nature of many speech acts. en
to attend to the hearers face is one reason why communication even in ones n?ve
language can be rather stressful sometimes, not to mention in those situations where
one is obliged to use a second or foreign language. To communicate interpersonally is
to expose oneself to 'face loss, to different extents： Just as an ofter to help ns'	8
rejected, so an invitation may not be taken up. When that happens, both sPea
and hearer 'lose face to some extent. As Scollon and Scollon (1995) put it, t ere is
no faceless communication. This is also why when a speaker attends to a pers ,
face needs, he or she will need to select a socially appropriate politeness straty
which has been conventionalized or encoded in their language (Lii Shih, ；9
Politeness strategies are useful for minimizing the damage, potential > ：
face-threatening act. For example, when exploring options of meeting up somewhere
the following day, which of the following remarks in (3) would make the hearer ee
more (un)comfortable? Why?
(3)	a. You're always late. Let me pick you up at your place at 6.
b.	Traffic is busy on Monday morning. Shall we go together by taxi.
c.	We cant afford to be late. Do you want (us) to go together?
d.	Arriving late will be a disaster. Ifd be nice if you could give me a ride.
In many languages, politeness strategies are highly codified. Depending on the per-
ceived status of the interlocutor(s) as deserving respect, typically older or more senior
130
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
than the speaker, who would select the expressions used for marking deference
[+ deference]). This is an example of "upward communication* which is characteristic
of employee talking to employer, student talking to teacher, son or younger brother
talking to father or elder brother, and the like. On the other hand, when the hearer is
perceived as an equal or has a lower status compared with the speaker (e.g., reversing
the speaker and hearer roles in the above dyads), then the hearer would normally
select those expressions that are not marked fbr deference (i.e., [- deference]).
In other words, language expressions that are not marked fbr deference may occur in
situations involving horizontal or downward communication.1
In some languages, different degrees of politeness (e.g., deference vs. solidarity)
are expressed through linguistic devices called honorifics. This is the case of two East
Asian languages, Japanese and Korean. For instance, with regard to the same basic,
denotative meaning (e.g., 'Are you going?, good morning,), a speaker of Japanese or
Korean is expected to use different expressions depending on who he or she is talking
to. Thus in Korean, to ask Are you going?； a Korean speaker would instinctively select
expression (4a) [+ deference] or (4b) [- deference], depending on the speakers per-
ceived relationship with the interlocutor (Table 9.1). Similarly, in Japanese, an elabo-
rate greeting expression like (5a) characterized by [+ deference] may be regarded as
more suitable when the interlocutor(s) is(are) someone deserving respect. By con-
trast, when the interlocutor is perceived as either equal or lower in status, a shorter
greeting expression like (5b) [- deference] is normally used (Table 9.1).
Table 9.1
Politeness strategies in Korean and Japanese, as reflected in the choice of different expressions depending on the perceived status of the interlocutor(s)	_____		
	Status of the interlocutor(s)	Deference
Korean: *Are you going?' ⑷a. 7\炬U 〃卜？ (ga sim ni kka?) b-井? (ga?)	to people deserving respect; to older persons in general to people perceived either as equals or lower in status	[+ deference) [-deference]
Japanese: 'Good morning' (5) a.	5 (o ha yd go za i ma su) b. fcli 9 o (o ha yd)	to people deserving respect; to older persons in general to people perceived either as equals or lower in status	[+ deference] [-deference]
1. According to Scollon, Scollon, and Jones (2012), a speech situation may be characterized as symmetrical
or asymmetrical, depending on the interlocutors relationship. Asymmetrical communication is typical of
speech situations which arc marked by unequal power (hence, [+P])t regardless of the social distance between
the interlocutors (hence. (+DJ or (-D)). On the other hand, in symmetrical speech situations, the role of
power diflcrcnce is minimal (hence [-P|), while social distance may or may not be marked (hence l+D]
or(-D|).
Being Chinese, Speaking English: Pragmatic Norms and Speaker Identity
131
Making requests in English
Making a request is inherently a face-threatening act to both the interlocutor and
the requester. Research shows that, in intra-ethnic communication among Chinese,
in general, a request—in speech or in writing—is often delayed and preceded by eiab-
°rate face work, focusing on the quality of the speakers (usually good) relationship
"ith the interlocutor or addressee. Thus, before a request is made to borrow money
from ones interlocutor, the requester would typically begin by saying something that
appears to be unrelated to the request itself, fbr example, inquiring about the inter-
locutors personal well-being (Do you manage to find time fbr sports?), or sharing
information about a mutual friend ('Frank is getting married; did you hear?*).
【n addition, the weightier the imposition (compare, e.g., a request to borrow 5500,
as opposed to $50,000), the more careful the Chinese speaker/writer usually is to
ensure the hearer/listeners face needs are satisfied and good mutual relationship is
established before raising the request. Weight of imposition is thus an important
additional factor in the study of the language of requests (see, e.g.» Kirkpatrick, 1991,
1993; cf. Jia & Cheng, 2002; Kong, 1998a, 1998b, 2006). In general, research on infor-
mation sequencing shows that Chinese speakers/writers tend to be more indirect as
they proceed inductively when making requests in Chinese. For instance, after ana-
lysing 46 Chinese college students English essays involving making a request, Jia and
Cheng (2002) found that over two-thirds (67.4%, n=31) used the inductive approach.
Commenting on this finding, Jia and Cheng state that:
The use of indirectness in Chinese English writing is even not uncommon among
professors, teachers and scholars of advanced level of English or those who have
been using and learning English fbr years. In fact even those who have been
staying in native-English countries and have been influenced fbr long by the
Anglo-American deductive model are often found falling back on this approach
from time to time—they would unconsciously cling to the traditional Chinese
writing model, which they acquired in their early education. (Jia & Cheng, 2002,
P. 70)
Significantly, Jia and Cheng (2002) are able to support this analysis with strong empir-
ical evidence： Of the 500+ abstracts received from scholars for the Third International
Symposium on ELT [English Language Teaching] in China in May, 200L the abso-
lule majority of the Chinese scholars followed the inductive style, while the abstracts
written by Anglo-American scholars invariably followed the deductive style (p. 70).
Requests being inherently face-threatening acts, NSs of English are naturally
also concerned about the need to mitigate the threat before making their request.
In speech, this is typically done by stating the reason for their request, such as those
in the following situation when the speaker requests assistance to carry a suitcase
upstairs (cf. Beltran, 2013)：
132
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
(6) a. Could you help carry this suitcase upstairs please? Ifs too heavy
for me.
b. Sorry to bother you, but I was wondering if you could carry this
suitcase for me. I've hurt my legs.
Similarly, the weightier the imposition is, the more elaborate the face work before the
request is made verbally. In writing, however, research shows that NSs of English tend
to proceed more deductively and are therefore more direct in making requests (Kong,
1998a). In particular, compared with Chinese writers, NSs of English are generally
less concerned about such face work when writing request letters, hence the impres-
sion that their requests are more direct (Kirkpatrick, 1991, 1993; cf. Kong, 1998a).
One interesting question is： How would English-L2 writers sequence the infbr-
niation in a request letter written in English? Research in contrastive rhetoric has
shown that, when writing request letters in English, Chinese writers tend to transfer
the 'delayed request* strategy into English (Kirkpatrick, 1991, 1993). This is partly
because many Chinese EAL writers, when writing a request letter in English, find it
necessary to preface their request with elaborate face work and to appeal to (good)
interpersonal relationship with the addressee.
Responding to compliments in English
Many Chinese EAL learners and users are unsure how to respond when praised by a
native English-speaking friend for their English (e.g., 'Your English is really good!)
Why is that so? Before answering this question, let us consider the findings to one
interesting study related to responding to compliments in English.
Chen (1993) collected contrastive questionnaire data from 50 English-speaking
college students in the US (questionnaire in English), and 50 Mandarin Chinese-
speaking college students in Xian, China (same questionnaire translated into
Chinese). The questionnaire was designed to elicit the subjects* responses to compli-
ments on ones appearance, possessions, and achievement (or ability). The findings
show that the two groups preferred rather different strategies. Below is a summary
of their preferred strategies and their subcategories, as stated in Chen (1993, p. 54,
Appendix B):
American English speakers strategies (in decreasing order of frequency):
Accepting:	• thanking, agreeing, expressing gladness, joking		______
Returning:	• returning compliments, offering object of compliment
(e.g.. Wanna wear it?)
• encouraging
(e.g.. Well, you can get one too.) 
Being Chinese, Speaking English: Pragmatic Norms and Speaker Identity
133
Deflecting:	• explaining
(e.g.. Thanks, I worked hard for this.)
• doubting
(e.g.> You re kidding, right?)_________________________________
Rejecting： • rejecting and denigrating
(e.g., No, its an old sweater.) 
Chinese speakers, strategies (in decreasing order of frequency):
Rejecting：	• disagreeing and denigrating
(e.g., No, Im older and uglier.)
•	expressing embarrassment
(e.g., I dont do it well. Im embarrassed.)
•	explaining
(e.g., No, Ini older and	face is 也ore wrinkled.)
Thanking and denigrating: • (e.g.. Thanks. But the watch is not what I really like.)
Accepting：	• thanking only 
On the basis of these findings, Chen (1993) concludes that the two groups of student
subjects responded rather differently when praised: The American subjects tended
to agree to the compliment by accepting it, while the Chinese subjects responses
seemed to be guided by the maxim of modesty or 'self-praise avoidance in general.
Chens (1993) findings suggest that, when using Mandarin Chinese, mainland
Chinese students tend to adhere to the cultural value of modesty or avoiding self-
praise, which, when collectively observed by everyone in their community, serves as
a norm guiding socially appropriate or 'correct' behaviour. In the US> on the other
hand, there seems to be nothing unusual about accepting a compliment at face value,
probably because modesty or avoiding self-praise is not considered to be socially
appropriate or desirable?
Now the question is: What happens when Chinese students are interacting with
their American counterparts in English? Tliere are two norms: one proper to their
Ll Chinese culture, the other guided by the target language, English. This is what
Michael Agar (1991, p. 168) means by a 'culture two' that travels with the second
language (cf. Agar, 1994). Should Chinese speakers of English resist that culture
two by adhering to their Chinese norm of modesty or avoiding self-praise, or should
they embrace it by adopting the American norm as a result of crossing the language
2. As il has been pointed out to the authors, in social interaction between NSs of English, receiving a compliment
graciously and considering the givers face is no less important. It is not self-praise to do this but rather out of
consideration of the face of the giver of the compliment.
134
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
boundary? Notice that there is no model answer to these questions. In earlier research
on ILP, there was an assumption that learners of English should strive to behave like
NSs of English. Such an assumption is increasingly challenged and no longer held to
be valid (see, e.g., Li, 1998,2002).
In the last section of this unit, we will examine another popular issue in pragmatics
which is also intimately related to Chinese EAL users* identity, the use of first-name
address when interacting with NSs of English and among themselves.
The use of first-name address
Research shows that bilingual, especially educated, Chinese Hongkongers tend to
7" ' >	adopt an English or English-sounding name, which they use when interacting with
* I	NSs but also among themselves (Li, 1997). For instance, over half of the Chinese
legislative councillors in Hong Kong (37 out of 70, or 52.85%) have adopted an
English name (e.g., Alan Leong, Jasper Tsang, Emily Lau, Cyd Ho; see Appendix). The
T	sequence follows the Western naming pract记e: first or given name, followed by last or
family name (compare Hilary Clinton, Angela Merkel, Jamie Oliver). This is different
from Chinese naming practice where the family name comes before the given name
(e.g.,曾 Jasper Tsang Yok-Sing).
For linguistic resources, apart from biblical names (e.g., John and Mary) and
popular English first names from Aaron to Zoe, Li (1997) found that many Chinese
Hongkongers' Western names were inspired by various sources:
•	common English words, e.g., Game, Mans, Rainy^ Saturday, Windy
•	low-frequency English vocabulary, e.g., Lithium, Rumple, Waddle
•	famous brand names, e.g., Mercedes, Rolex, Volvo
•	one or more syllables in their Chinese given name, resulting in English-
sounding names, e.g., Kit, Ling, Wan, Yung
•	initials based on the first letters of the romanized Chinese given name,
e.g., C. Y. (Chun-Ying), K. K. (Kwok-Keung)
Based on the results of a small-scale questionnaire survey, Li (1997) also found that it
was quite common for the adoption of an English or English-sounding name to take
place during the first two years of lower secondary school. Many Hong Kong students
who studied in English-medium schools reported being encouraged or required
by their teachers to adopt one, mainly to facilitate teaching and learning. Another
interesting finding is that name-change (i.e., abandoning an old English name and
adopting a new one) was rather common. Among the reasons were: difficult pronun-
ciation, the old English name being no longer fashionable, the new name sounding
better,and so forth. Li (1997) regards this popular practice as a special kind of bor-
rowing. As names are intimately related to a persons identity, Li (1997) characterizes
Being Chinese, Speaking English: Pragmatic Norms and Speaker Identity
135
the popular practice of adopting an English or English-sounding name as acquiring
a 'borrowed identity：
Names are basic not only for self-identification but more crucially when they are
used as terms of address in social interaction. For instance, the chief secretary for
administration of the Hong Kong government is Mrs Carrie Lam Cheng Yuet-Ngor,
whose name consists of the following elements:
[title + English name + husbands surname + maiden name + given name]
It is understandable why such an elaborate form is seldom heard in public media;
rather, in English news stories, our chief secretary is more commonly referred to
as (Mrs) Carrie Lam. In local Chinese news reports, she is usually referred to as
林太(lam4 taai2, "Mrs Lam： ['title + husbands surname]) or 林鄭月娥(lam4 zeng6
jyut6 〃go4, [husbands surname + maiden name + given name]. In informal, chatty
columns, however, she is often referred to as 林鄭(lam4 zeng6y that is,「husbands
surname + maiden name']). English-speaking journalists, on the other hand, would
often just call her Carrie. What is interesting is that, when interacting with Cantonese
speakers, including protesters and journalists, she is often addressed by her English
name, Carrie, resulting in the use of'mixed code： For example:
(7) Carrie,你點睇呀？
Carrie, nei5 dini2 tai2 nn3?
'Carrie〉what do you think?'
It is very common for Hong Kong Chinese to address one another by their English
(sounding) names, a practice which mirrors a society-wide preference among
Hong Kong Chinese bilinguals, namely, to address one another using an English
first name. But why? According to Li (1997), the main reason is that the Chinese
given name, pronounced in an Anglicized manner, cannot function like an English
first name. The reason is that addressing someone by his or her Chinese given name
(e.g., Chi-lam) may be heard as downward rather than horizontal communication.
Consider a name like 鄭月娥(Cheng Yuet-Ngor). As a term of address, ^uet-Ngor
sounds like a parent or a teacher talking down to the addressee (i.e., [+ P»± D], Scollon
& Scollon, 1995; Li, 1997, pp. 504-505). On the other hand, the English-based first-
name address system (e.g., Carrie) sounds more egalitarian^[- P] while conveying
a sense of solidarity [- D], which is thus ideal for speeding up the pace of getting
acquainted (Scollon & Scollon, 1995). Such a system is especially common in North
America (Louie, 1998). It is sufficient for one side of the new acquaintances to initiate
2 ritual-like invitation, such as "please call me John, which is usually accepted and
reciprocated. As noted by Fasold (1990) in his discussion of Brown and Fords (1961)
empirical insights regarding Americans* choice between first name (FN) address and
title with last name (TLN) address:
136
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
;T'he dinerecce	the two relationships for Americans is very small.
Fr.e 二conversation is often enough to move from a TLN relationship to
L FN £二二 匕 二？ c>*Ti experience, even five minutes will not be allowed to elapse
if soh之 reli±.ely permaneni basis for solidarity is beginning. For example, when
irs:二 w: :hdr co-workers or when a person who has just moved into
L ^dzhb-oriiood neeLs the new neighbors, mutual FN is commonly exchanged as
soon L5 th于 ininxhicticns are over, (Fasold, 1990, p. 8)
?4any edu:a：ed Chinese Hongkongers find this first-name (FN) address system so
useriil tha::hey have no hesitation using it with their new Chinese acquaintances.
One important implication of the use of names as terms of address in intercul-
tural communication is that, when interacting with other speakers of English, care
should be taken not to initiate the FN address without first checking whether this
would create discomfort to the addressee (see Scollon & Scollon, 1995, pp. 122-125
for more details).
Questions and activities
1.	Think of a context, and provide as many details as you can according to the
SPEAKING model (Hymes, 1976). Then, let your group-mates guess what
context it is. How useful is the SPEAKING model for generating the required
information for defining a context?
Thinkof the end of a court trial involving a criminal case, when thejudge is about
to reveaf the verdict. What is usually said in English or Chinese (Cantonese or
Mandarin)? What sorts of condition must be met for the pronouncement of the
verdict to have its intended legal consequence? And, what does this example tell
us about the 'felicity conditions' of a speech act?
3.	The Western concept of face was inspired by concerns fbr face in Chinese soci-
eties. Which Chinese expressions can you think of which are related to the
(Western) concept of face? Can you work out their English equivalents?
4.	Consider Brown and Levinsons (1987) distinction between 'positive face and
'negative face： Can you think of politeness strategies that may be used to attend
to a persons (a) positive face needs, and (b) negative face needs? Illustrate your
response with examples in each of the following scenarios：
(i)	A friend of yours asks you to lend her/him $5,000 urgently.
(ii)	A peer from the UK, a native speaker of English, invites you to work on a
project together, but you are unsure whether to accept that invitation.
5.	Imagine you wish to ask two new friends to do you a favour, one a local classmate
bilingual in Cantonese and English, the other a non-local, English-speaking
classmate who speaks very little Cantonese. The stakes are high, so you would
be very upset if your request is declined. How would you go about making that
Being Chinese, Speaking English: Pragmatic Norms and Speaker Identity
137
request (i) in Cantonese, and (ii) in English? In either case, do you find it neces-
sary to preface your request with a lot of face work? When framing your request
in English, is there evidence of transfer of LI information-sequencing norms to
L2? Script your request in about 4-5 turns, and see which strategy you seem to
prefer in giving you the best chance for the request to be accepted: inductive or
deductive.
6.	Referring to Chens (1993) findings, and based on your experience and obser-
vation, do you think mainland Chinese speakers of English today would reject
a compliment when interacting with others in English? Why or why not?
7.	Recall the last time you received praise from different people. Did you accept
or reject it? Did the maxim of modesty or self-praise avoidance play any role at
all? Why or why not?
8.	Imagine you are to introduce yourself to new acquaintances who are
(a)	NSs of English, and
(b)	other Chinese from the same LI background as yours.
How would you identify yourself by name? What advice does Li (1997) give for
initiating first-name address with new English-speaking acquaintances? Why?
Further reading
How do we do things with language? What is meant by a speech acf? Austins (1962)
and Searles (1969,1979) works are classic and still have high reference value for those
who wish to better understand the background to the emergence of the academic
discipline 'pragmatics： or the study of language in use. Schmidt and Richards (1980)
offer instructive examples how specific speech acts may be incorporated into the EAL
curriculum. Dell Hymess (1976) book is a good starting point for understanding
what we mean by a context (see 'Ethnography of Speaking, http://tiemcenter.org/
Hrp-content/uploads/sites/6/2012/05/Dell-Hyrnies-SPEAKING.pdf). To gain a more
in-depth understanding of how bilingual interaction is influenced dynamically by
contextualization cues, see Gumperz (1992). Lii-Shih (1994) is a highly readable
introduction into politeness strategies in conversation. Bond and Hwang (1986)
introduce the persuasive notion of face in Chinese societies from the social psy-
chology perspective. For a discourse approach to ^ntercultural communication, see
Scollon and Scollon (1995) and Scollon et al. (2012).
Appendix
Members of the Fifth Legislative Council, retrieved from http：//wwv.legco.gov.hk/
general/english/members/yr 12-16/biographies.htin. Notice that 52.8%» or 37 of the
70 Legislative Councillors—all Chinese Hongkongers—have adopted an English
138
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
name (two English names in one case). Those legislative councillors who are also
known by an English name are italicized.
President:
1.	Hon Jasper TSANG Yok・shig, GBS, JP
Members:
2.	Hon Albert HO Chun-yan
3.	Hon LEE Cheuk-yan
4.	Hon James TO Kun-sun
5.	Hon CHAN Kam-lam, SBS, JP
6.	Hon LEUNG Yiu-chung
7.	Dr Hon LAU Wong-fat, GBM, GBS, JP
8.	Hon Emily LAU Washing, JP
9.	Hon TAM Yiu-chung, GBS, JP
10.	Hon Abraham SHEK Lai-him, GBS, JP
11.	Hon Tommy CHEUNG Yu-yanf SBS, JP
12.	Hon Frederick FUNG Kin-kee, SBS, JP
13.	Hon Vincent FANG Kang, SBS, JP
14.	Hon WONG Kwok-hing, BBS, MH
15.	Prof Hon Joseph LEE Kok-longt SBS, JP, PhD, RN
16.	Hon Jeffrey LAM Kin-fungt GBS, JP
17.	Hon Andrew LEUNG Kwan-yuen, GBS, JP
18.	Hon WONG Ting-kwong, SBS> JP
19.	Hon Ronny TONG Ka-wah, SC
20.	Hon Cyd HO Sau-lan, JP
21.	Hon Starry LEE Walking, JP
22.	Dr Hon LAM Tai-fai, SBS, JP
23.	Hon CHAN Hak-kan, JP
24.	Hon CHAN Kin-por, BBS, JP
25.	Dr Hon Priscilla LEUNG Mei-funt SBSf JP
26.	Dr Hon LEUNG Ka-lau
27.	Hon CHEUNG Kwok-che
28.	Hon WONG Kwok-kin, SBS
29.	Hon IP Kwok-him, GBS, JP
30.	Hon Mrs Regina IP LAU Suk-yee, GBS, JP
31.	Hon Paul TSE Wai-chun, JP
32.	Hon Alan LEONG Knh・kit, SC
33.	Hon LEUNG Kwok-hung
34.	Hon Albert CHAN Wni.yip
35.	Hon WONG Yuk-man
Being Chinese, Speaking English: Pragmatic Norms and Speaker Identity
139
36.	Hon Claudia MO
37.	Hon Michael TIEN Pursuit BBS, JP
38.	Hon James TIEN Pei-chun, GBS, JP
39.	Hon NG Leung-sing, SBS, JP
40.	Hon Steven HO Chun-yin
41.	Hon Frankie YICK Chiming
42.	Hon WU Chi-wai, MH
43.	Hon YIU Si-wing
44.	Hon Gary FAN Kwok-wai
45.	Hon MA Fung-kwok, SBS, JP
46.	Hon Charles Peter MOK, JP
47.	Hon CHAN Chi-chuen
48.	Hon CHAN Han-pan, JP
49.	Dr Hon Kenneth CHAN Ka-lok
50.	Hon CHAN Yuen-han, SBS, JP
51.	Hon LEUNG Che-cheung, BBS, MH, JP
52.	Hon Kenneth LEUNG
53.	Hon Alice MAK Mei-kuen, JP
54.	Dr Hon KWOK Ka-ki
55.	Hon KWOK Wai-keung
56.	Hon Dennis KWOK
57.	Hon Christopher CHEUNG Wah-fung, SBS, JP
58.	Dr Hon Fernando CHEUNG Chiu-hung
59.	Hon SIN Chung-kai> SBS, JP
60.	Dr Hon Helena WONG Pik~wan
61.	Hon IP Kin-yuen
62.	Dr Hon Elizabeth QU AT, JP
63.	Hon Martin LIAO Cheung-kong, SBSf JP
64.	Hon POON Siu-ping, BBS, MH
65.	Hon TANG Ka-piu, JP
66.	Dr Hon CHIANG Lai-wan, JP
67.	Ir Dr Hon LO Wai-kwok, BBS, MH, JP
68.	Hon CHUNG Kwok-pan
69.	Hon Christopher CHUNG Shu-kim, BBS, MH, JP
70.	Hon Tony TSE Wabchuen, BBS
Suggested Answers to Questions and Activities
1.	Conversation Analysis, Error Analysis, and Cross-Linguistic Influence
There are many Chinese varieties or dialects within Greater China (mainland
China, Taiwan, Hong Kong SAR, and Macao SAR). Most of these varieties are
unintelligible to one another. Speakers of different varieties may find it difficult
to communicate in their respective dialects. There is thus a need for a standard
variety. This role is usually assigned to or performed by a 'national language
which, apart from being an important symbol of national identity, facilitates
effective communication within its borders. In mainland China, the national
language is called Modern Standard Chinese (MSC). In speech, MSC may be
iurther specified as Putonghua (also known as Mandarin outside of China,
Guoyu in Taiwan, and Huayu in Singapore), while the written standard is called
Standard Written Chinese (SWC).
Similarly, traditional English-speaking nations like the UK and the US are
also linguistically extremely diverse. There is thus a similar need for a standard
variety (e.g., BrE and AmE). For instance, in the UK, the way English is spoken
by people in the south-eastern part of England was selected to be the stand-
ard. The selection of a particular variety to be the national standard is largdy
a sociopolitical process. Compared with local varieties or dialects, the national
language is widely seen as being more prestigious. The selection process is
usually dominated by people who are politically influential, wealthy, and better
educated. That was the case with British English. It is therefore no accident that
the received pronunciation (taught in school and used in public media such as
the BBC) is also known as the Queens English.
Cantonese, a Yue dialect widely spoken in Guangdong and Guaiigxi, is gener-
ally recognized as a regional dialect. Despite being a dialect and therefore non-
standard； it is among the most prestigious Chinese variety in China. Many
native speakers of Cantonese are under the false impression that Cantonese has
no grammar. This is not true. Anyone who has any doubt about this may refer
t0 scholarly works on Cantonese grammar such as Matthews and Yip (1994)
142
Suggested Answers to Questions and Activities
and Tang (2015). For instance, like MSC, Cantonese has its own classifiers and
aspect markers.
3.	For historical reasons, there is no doubt that British English predominates in
Hong Kong. This is evidenced by the fact that many of the civil servants, lawyers,
and educators speak English with a BrE accent, partly as a result of pursuing
higher education in the UK. In addition, the Hong Kong SAR government
documents and textbooks continue to follow British spelling (e.g., programme
instead of program). In school, the pedagogical model, from accent to lexico-
grammatical usage patterns, continues to be BrE. The domains of business and
media are two exceptions, however, largely because many of the Hong Kong
Chinese professionals working in these two domains are returnees from the
US or Canada (and, to a lesser extent, Australia) after completing their training
there. Also, as the world becomes increasingly globalized and interconnected,
access to other varieties of English such as American, Australian, or Canadian
English is very convenient, not to mention TV programmes and video clips via
YouTube and other social media.
4.	When we learn a new language (L2, e.g., English), say from age six, after we have
acquired our first language (Ll> e.g., Cantonese), our LI knowledge (structures,
markers, etc.) tends to influence the way we produce L2 output. This is called
"mother-tongue influence： "Negative transfer results if the outcome of such
influence is negative (i.e.» non-standard features are produced). On the other
hand, if the outcome is positive, we will speak of 'positive transfer A more
neutral term is cross-linguistic influence (CLI). In the process of learning
English as a second or foreign language, many examples of CLI may be found.
2.	Cantonese-English Contrastive Phonology
1.	(i) bilabial
(ii)	velar
(iii)	alveolar
(iv)	interdental
(v)	labio-dental
2.	(i) fricative
(ii)	nasal
(iii)	approximant
(iv)	stop
(v)	affricate
3.	(i) 船(diul): voiceless unaspirated onset [t], diphthong [iu]
deal: voiced unaspirated onset, monophthong [i:], [1] as the coda
Suggested Answers to Questions and Activities
143
(ii)	風(fungi)： monophthong [o] + velar nasal
phone: diphthong [ou] + alveolar nasal
(iii)	先(s诚)：[i]
sin: [i] (a lower vowel than [i])
(iv)	鋪(poul): no coda
poll: [1] as coda
(v)	蒸(ziugl)： voiceless unaspirated alveolar affricate [ts] as onset, [i]
糕(goul): voiceless unaspirated onset [k], diphthong [ou], no coda
jingle: voiced unaspirated post-alveolar affricate [ds], [i]. Voiced onset
[g], monophthong [o], [1] as coda
4.	(i) consonant cluster
(ii)	diphthong + coda
(iii)	diphthong + coda
(iv)	[r] as coda
3.	Transitivity and Syntactic Structures
L (i) Borrow: transitive. Example: I borrowed a book. borrowed.
(ii)	Wash: transitive. Example: I washed the car, */ washed.
(iii)	Walk： intransitive and transitive. Example: I've walked a lot. Ive walked
the dog.
(iv)	Trust: transitive and intransitive (but only used with a prepositional
phrase). Example： I trust myself. She trusted in the power of justice. I trust
you had a great journey. */ trust.
(v)	Melt： transitive and intransitive. Example: The sun melted the ice. The
ice melted.
(vi)	Hang： transitive and intransitive. Example: I hung the picture. The picture
wns hanging on the walL
(vii)	Smile: intransitive. Example: I smiled (at her). */ smiled her.
(viii)	Escape: intransitive and transitive. Example: I escaped from that building.
I escaped the fire.
2・(i) W: transitive. Example:他踢健子。*他踢了。
(u)	委託:transitive. Example:他委託陳先生為他處理事務°
(ui)進去：transitive. Example:他進去那房間。"他進去0
(iv)死:intransitive. Example:他死了。
(v)	開始:intransitive and transitive. Example:表演開始了 ° 他開始他的
演奏。
(vi)微笑：intransitive. Example:他微笑。'他微笑她。
3.	It might be slightly strange to call 死 a transitive verb, despite the fact that it
can appear in the sentence 他死了 父親,because semantically the act of dying
144
Suggested Answers to Questions and Activities
involves only one person. Despite being located at the beginning of the sentence,
'他'does not function as the subjecf of the sentence； rather, the CA flee tee (not
introduced in this book) would seem to be a more appropriate semantic role.
4.	(i) location
(ii)	theme
(iii)	percept/patient
(iv)	location
(v)	instrument/theme
(vi)	percept
5.	Worry as a transitive verb. In a sentence like John worries me. John is the percept
and me is the experiencer; that is, John made me feel anxious. The verb worry is
often associated with the Chinese verb 擔which takes an experiencer as the
subject and a percept as the object (i.e., the opposite of the English verb worry).
.Passive Voice
1.	Verbs that can be passivized: think (He was thought to be .. .), call, notice, give,
slip (transitive) (The bill was slipped under the mat), give, walk (transitive) (I was
walked to my room by the manager of the hotel; this road has been walked on by
thousands of people).
2.	Verbs that take one argument: vanish
Verbs that take two arguments: suit, frighten, flatter, lack
3.	No suggested answer.
4.	世界術生組織在週二建議各國應規管電子香煙並禁制室內使用，直至證
實其釋放的氣他對人無害。世衞亦呼籲各國應禁止商舖售資含尼古丁氣
體產品給未成年青年,及禁止或減少相應產品的廣吿、推廣及賛助。這
個以日內瓦為基地的組織指，全球電子香煙市場值高達30億，當中包
括400個以上的品牌，固必須有適當的管制。報吿亦指，要確立使用電
子香煙影響的科學基礎，確保相關研究得以進行，公眾健康獲得保障，
並令公眾認識電子香煙的潛在風險及好處，管制是必須的。
5.	No suggested answer.
5.	Tense and Aspect
1-3. No suggested answer.
4.	Historical present is often used when a person recounts an event. Its use is
mainly motivated by some 'immediacy* effect, as if the events being described
are happening in front of our eyes. The following example is taken from Wolfson
(1979, p. 171):
Suggested Answers to Questions and Activities
145
Two years ago we were in Mexico, at Acapulco, and I called Mexico City
and I asked tor Juan. Now I've got to go through operators and I make it
person-to-person. And the maid tells the operator in Spanish, and the
operator tells me, 'He's not there? I said, 'When will he be back?； and the
maid and the operator are having this great big conversation. I keep getting
the same answer. And finally the operator says to me, 'He's dead. He diei
Thats-he^ not here. He died? Well, I tell you, I was so upset. I said, 'Thank
you； and I hung up. I must have made that person-to-person call three
times before the maid and the operator got together to try to explain to a
person-to-person call that he was not there because he wasn't. But I was
so upset and I couldn't find Marias phone number in the tel叩hone book.
5.	The word 'unlocked' in 'the door is unlocked* is an adjective, and it describes
the state* (as opposed to an action). The sentence thus describes a state in the
present time. The word "unlocked' in 'the door was unlocked* is a verb, and the
sentence describes an action that happened in the past (e.g., someone put a key
into the keyhole and turned the key).
6.	Determiners: Articles and Demonstratives
1.	'The [2] young woman in this photograph is me when I was writing The House
on Mango Street. Shes in her office, a room that had probably been a childs
bedroom when families lived in this apartment. It has no door and is only
slightly wider than the [2] walk-in pantry. But it has great light and sits above
the [2] hallway door downstairs, so she can hear her neighbors come and go.
She posed as if shes just looked up from her work for a moment, but in real life
she never writes in this office. She writes in the [2] kitchen, the [3] only room
with a heater?
2.	a room that had probably ..：=indefinite, classification
a childs bedroom .・：=indefinite, classification
a moment' - indefinite
a heater = indefinite
3.	Noun phrases with no determiners: door； 'great light： 'real like
Other determiners: this, her
4.	Definite:..・〔學校〕裡的校長，〔村子)裡的大人們
Indefinite:...-車亮晶晶的煤塊，一個聰明的孩子
7.	Subject-Prominence and Topic-Prominence
I. i.	I
ii.	English
iii.	The house
146
Suggested Answers to Questions and Activities
iv.	Sam and Teresa
v.	Jennifer
vi.	The dog
vii.	John F. Kennedy
2.	Examples may include:庭院，窗外，鏡中
3.	像其他人一樣，埃迪在露比碼頭，一個位於海洋旁邊的遊樂場，度過了
他人生最後的時光。這個遊樂場有遊樂場一般都有的玩意，如木板路、
摩天輪、過山車、碰碰車、太妃糖檔、和射水入小丑口中的遊戲。遊樂
場也有一個叫「弗雷迪的自由落體」的大型機動遊戲，而這個機動遊戲
就是埃迪身亡的地方。整個州的所有報紙都將會報導這宗意外。
8.	Europeanization: Influence of English on Chinese Grammar
Group 1: Translation method = Phonetic
i.	Watt, motor, ohm, volt
ii.	jeep, nicotine, Vaseline, hysteria
iii.	camera, inspiration, violin, guitar
Group 2: Translation method - Semantic + phonetic
iv.
v.
vi.
Group 3: Semantic translation (on the right) is clearly preferred to phonetic
translation (on the left).
microphone
economy
television
democracy
Marxism, romanticism, mango, bar, beer
Sardine, jeep, vitamin, humour, model
coffee powder, tank, sofa, Olympic village
2.
麥克風(ma/ ke feng)
愛康諾米(ai kang mid mi)
德律維雄(de lii wei xiong)
德謨克拉西(de mo ke la xi)
擴音器(kudyinqi)
經濟(jingji)
電視｛dian shl)
民主(nun zhii)
3.
4.
5.
vii.
viii.
ix.
x.
In English, there are more nouns denoting 'a person who .. ' that are formed
with the suffixes -er and -or than there are nouns formed with other suffixes.
The least productive is -eer (e.g., engineer). You may wish to google a few web-
sites to confirm (keywords： 'words that end with*). In Chinese, apart from -家
(jia/gaal),-師(shi/sil) and -者(z/^/ze2) are high-frequency suffixes to render
that meaning into Chinese.
-生,-士, and -員 are among the more commonly used suffixes in Chinese for
the meaning *a person who . .among others.
(a)
(b)
(c)
各位女士先生，總理和各與會代表
他們已把心事吿訴給神明，把一年來的罪過在神前取得了寬恕。
於是他們像修完了一勝業，臉上帶著微笑，心裡更非常輕鬆。
我們漸漸沒有這種受败的度员，但也很欣快沒有這種奴隸的根
性；我們正有自己的工作在'手段與目的是一致的！
J Suggested Answers to Questions and Activities
147
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)
(P)
(q)
(r)
停車在此
春節期間
這個問題，我們下次再談
她的決定，我們都很關注
我有問題，想跟你談談
日本是島國
應不應浪費掉，應提出來討論
那本書我喜歡
你，我愛/我愛你
紅樓夢我在讀/我在讀紅樓夢
當然不能算數
我完全明白了
我們是已註冊的團體
這有很多優點
她從來沒有承認
9.	Being Chinese, Speaking English: Pragmatic Norms and Speaker Identity
L No suggested answer.
-- Here is a concrete example: According to the report of a real court case, after
analysing the validity of various types of evidence, the judge (Williams) pro-
claimed： 'Based on the evidence presented, this court finds that the state has not
met its burden to prove beyond a reasonable doubt all required elements of the
crimes charged. Therefore, the verdict for each count is not guilty」The suspect
(Nero) was thereupon acquitted. For this verdict to take its intended effect,
one important felicity condition is that it must be proclaimed by a judge, who
is vested with the authority to make that decision or judgment. In addition, the
verdict must be delivered in court, as part of the court trial (rather than, fbr
example, during a visit in prison).
3. 'Face (面tnian zilmin6 z⑵;give someone face'(給臉>欢，Han；畀面,bei2
〃血2)； Tose face* (丢臉,diii lian/diul Um5); 'have no face'(冇N，mou5 min2\
沒面子，mei tnian zi), "shameless1 (不要臉,bu ydo liarr,唔要®> m4jiu3 min2,
'no concern fbr face'), etc.
1 No suggested answer.
In general, the higher the stakes of your request, the more likely you would find
it necessary to preface your request with some face work (i.e.» inductively).
『Full transcript： Judge Williams" ruling acquitting Officer Nero in Freddie Gray <.ase (-3 Maj -016). Thi
Baltimore Sun, emphasis added. Retrieved from http:〃www・baltinioK$un.com/news/mar)hn(i treddie-gra\/
b； nid-ci-wjllianis-nero-transcript-20160523-story.html.
148
Suggested Answers to Questions and Activities
Saying anything that would remind the listener of your solidarity or friendship
will help prepare him or her for that high-stake request.
6.	Unlike university students during the 1990s, todays young people in main-
land China have many more opportunities and experience interacting with
Westerners. For this reason, it is possible that the American pattern of respond-
ing to compliments may be considered acceptable by mainland Chinese college
students in the 2010s.
7.	No suggested answer.
8.	When communicating with a new acquaintance, Li (1997) cautions against
initiating first-name address, especially one based on a Chinese speakers given
name, without first checking whether the interlocutor is likely to be receptive
to this practice. A Chinese given name (e.g.> Chor-Shing), when used like the
equivalent of an English first name (e.g., David), is likely to be heard as down-
ward communication (see Scollon & Scollon, 1995).
IReferences
Adamson, B. (2002). Barbarian as a foreign language: English in Chinas schools. World
E，%园心,21(2), 231-243.
4 Adamson, B. (2004). Chinas English: A history of English in Chinese education, Hong Kong:
Hong Kong University Press.
• Agar’M. (1991). The bicultural in bilingual. Language in Society, 10,167-\S\.
Agar, M. (1994). Language shock: Understanding the culture of conversation. New Ydrk: William
Morrow & Co.
Albom, M. (1997). Tuesdays with Morrie. New York: Doubleday.
A bom, M. (2003). The five people you meet in heaven. New York: Hyperion.
Andersen, R. W. (1991). Developmental sequences: The emergence of aspect marking in second
language acquisition. In T. Huebner & C. A. Ferguson (Eds.), Crosscurrents in second lan-
guage acquisition and linguistic theories (pp. 305-324). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Anderson, S. R., & Keenan, E. L, (1985). Deixis. In T. Shopen (Ed.), Language typology,andsyn-
fncfic description III： Grammatical categories and the lexicon (pp. 259-308). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Ansaldo, U. (2009). Contact languages: Ecology and evolution in Asia. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Ansaldo, U, Matthews, 8.» & Smith, 6.(2012). China Coast Pidgin. In U. Ansaldo	Pidgins
and creoles in Asia (pp. 59-90). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
J. L. (1962). How to do things with words. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
^Itran, E. V. (2013). Requesting in English as a lingua franca: Proficiency effects in stay abroad.
Esmdios de Lingiiistica Inglesa Aplicadn (ELIA), 13,113-147.
Birner, B.> & Ward, G. (1994). Uniqueness, familiarity, and the definite article in English.
Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society: General
Session Dedicated to the Contributions of Charles /. Fillmore, 93-102.
Bohon, K. (2000). The sociolinguistics of English in Hong Kong. World Englishes, 29(3),
265-285.
Bohon, K. (2003). Chinese Englishes: A sociolinguistichistory. Cambridge: Cambridge Universit)-
Press.
"nd, M. H., & Hwang, K.・K. (1986). The social psychology of Chinese people. In M. H. Bond
(Ed.), The psychology of the Chinese people (pp. 213-266). New York: Oxford University
Press.
比n〔on, L. J.> & Brinton, D. (2010). The linguistic structure of modem English. Amsterdam：
John Benjamins.
150
References
Brown, A. (2014). Pronunciation and phonetics: A practical guide for English language teachers.
New York: Routledge.
Brown, & Levinson, S. C. (1987). Politeness: Some universals in language usage. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Brown, R.» & Ford, M. (1961). Address in American English. Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 62, 454-462. Reprinted in D. Hymes (Ed.) (1964), Language and culture in
society (pp. 234-244). New York: Harper and Row.
Bunton, D. (1989). Common English errors in Hong Kong. Hong Kong: Longman.
Carnie, A. (2006). Syntax: A generative introduction (2nd edn.). Oxford: Wiley Blackwell.
Chan, A. Y. W. (2004). Syntactic transfer: Evidence from the interlanguage of Hong Kong
Chinese ESL learners. The Modern Language Journal, SS, 56-74.
Chan, A. Y. \M (2006a). Strategies used by Cantonese speakers in pronouncing English initial
consonant clusters： Insights into the interlanguage phonology of Cantonese ESL learners
in Hong Kong IRAL Proceedings, 44, 331-355.
Chan, A. Y. W. (2006b). Cantonese ESL learners pronunciation of English final consonants.
Language, Culture and Curriculum, 19(3), 296-312.
Chan, A. Y. W. (2006c). An algorithmic approach to error correction: An empirical study.
Foreign Language Annals, 39(1), 131-147.
Chan, A. Y. W. (2010). An investigation into Cantonese ESL learners acquisition of English
initial consonant clusters. Linguistics. 48(1), 99-141.
Chan, A. Y. W・，Kwan, B. 8. C., & Li, D. C. S. (2003). Tackling the 'Independent Clause as
Subject* problem. Asian Journal of English Language Teachings 13, 107-117.
Chan, A. Y. W., & Li, D. C. S. (2000). English and Cantonese phonology in contrast: Explaining
Cantonese ESL learners English pronunciation problems. Language, Culture & Curriculum.
13(1), 67-85.
Chan»Y. H.(1993).英語語法對香港中文的影響［The influence of English syntax on Chinese
usage in Hong Kong］. Working Papers in Languages and Linguistics, 5, pp. 135-145.
Department of Chinese, Translation, and Linguistics, City Polytechnic of Hong Kong.
Chen, H. C. (2013). Chinese learners, acquisition of English word stress and factors affecting
stress assignment. Linguistics and Education, 24(4), 545-555.
Chen, H. C. (2015). Acoustic analyses and intelligibility assessments of timing patterns among
Chinese English learners with different dialect backgrounds. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 44(6), 749-773.
Chen, P. (1999). Modern Chinese: History and sociolinguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Chen, R. (1993). Responding to compliments: A contrastive study of politeness strategies
between American English and Chinese speakers. Journal of Pragmatics, 20, 49-75.
Cheung, Y. K.［張宇傑］. (2011). A critical study of Frederick Tsais approaches to translation
(unpublished masters thesis). The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
Chomsky, N. (1981). Lectures on government and binding. Dordrecht: Foris.
Clahsen, H., Felser, C., Neubauer, K・,Sato, M.» & Silva, R. (2010). Morphological structure in
native and nonnative language processing. Language Learning, 60(1), 21-43.
Comrie, B. (1976). Aspect. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Crystal, D. (1997). The Cambridge encyclopedia of language. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
DeKeyser, R. M. (2005). What makes learning second-language grammar diflkult? A review of
issues. Language Learning, 55(S1)» 1-25.
References
151
Diessel, H. (2006). Demonstratives, joint attention, and the emergence of grammar. Cognitive
Linguistics, 17(4), 463-489.
Duanmu, S. (2007). The phonology of Standard Chinese (2nd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Edge, J. (1989). Mistakes and correction. London: Longman.
Fasold, R. W. (1990). The sociolinguistics of language. Oxford: Blackwell.
Fishman, J. A. (1965). Who speaks what language to whom and when? La Unguistique,
2, 67-88. Reprinted in W. Li (Ed.) (2007), The bilingualism reader (2nd ed.) (pp. 55-/0).
London: Routledge.
Frawley, W, (1992). Linguistic semantics. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawence Erlbaum.
Gass, 8. M.，& Seiinker, L. (2008). Second language acquisition: An introductory course^ e ).
New York: Routledge.	.
Goffman, E. (1955). On facework: An analysis of ritual elements in soaal interaction.
Psychiatry, 18, 213-231.	r c ...
Green, C. (1991). Typological transfer, discourse accent and the Chinese writer o ng is .
Hongkong Papers in Linguistics and Language Teaching, 14, 51-63.
Gumperz. J. J. (1992). Contextualization and understanding. In A. Duranti & - 00 uin
(Eds.), Rethinking context (pp. 229-252). Cambridge: Cambridge Unixersit) Press.
Gundel, J. K. (1988). Universals of topic-comment structure. In M. Hammon . .: ora心，
& J. Wirth (Eds.), Studies in syntactic typology (pp. 209-239). Amsterdam： Jo n enjamins.
Hale, K., & Keyser, J. (2013). Some transitivity alternations in English. Anuano c unman
de Filologia Vasca "Julio de Urquijo” [International Journal of Basque Linguistics an
Philology], 20(3), 605-638.	.
Halle, M. (1973). Stress rules in English: A new version. Linguistic Inquiry, 4(4),	--
Hartmann, R. R. K., & Stork, F. C. (1972). Dictionary of lavage and hnguis^. Lon -
Applied Science.	..
Haspelmath, M. (1990). The grammaticization of passive morphology. Stu tes m angii v .
Hawkins,)j2A.：(1991). On (in)definite articles: Implicatures and (un)grammaticality predic-
tion. Journal of Linguistics, 27(2), 405-442.	r
Hopper, P. J., & Thompson, S. A. (1980). Transitivity in grammar and discours以呷 g，
56,251-299.	,	. c ,
Hou, W."侯維瑞](1992).英國英語與美國英語(British English and American Engl I-
Shanghai： Shanghai Foreign Language Education Press.
Hsu, J.-L. (1994). Englishization and language change in modern Chinese in aig
Englishes, 13(2), 167-184.	，-, x u
Hung, T. (2002). Towards a phonology of Hong Kong English. In K. Bolton (-'】
English: Autonomy and creativity (pp. 119-140). Hong Kong: Hong Kong University
Hymes'D. (1976). Foundations in sociolinguistics: An ethnographic approach (8th ed.).
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
International Phonetic Association. (2015). Retrieved from https：〃www.internati。岫honetic
association.org/.
Jackendoft, R. (1990). Semantic structures. Cambridge, MA・ MIT Press.
James, C. (1980). Contrastive analysis. London: Longman.	, . „ ,___....
lames, C. (1998). Errors in language learning and use: Exploring error anay^is. ar ow,-
Pearson Education.
152
References
Jia, Y・，& Cheng, C. (2002). Indirectness in Chinese English writing. Asian Englishes, 5(1),
64-74.
Kasper, G.» & Rose, K. R. (2002). Pragmatic development in a second language. Malden, MA:
Blackwell.
Kellerman, E. (1995). Crosslinguistic influence: Transfer to nowhere? Annual Review of Applied
Linguistics, 15,125-150.
Kirkpatrick, A. (1991). Information sequencing in Mandarin in letters of request.
Anthropological Linguistics, 33(2), 1-20.
Kirkpatrick, A. (1993). Information sequencing in Modern Standard Chinese. Australian
Review of Applied Linguistics, 16(2), 27-60.
Kirkpatrick, A., & Xu,乙(2012). Chinese rhetoric mid writing: An introduction for language
teachers. Fort Collins, CO: The WAC Clearinghouse.
Kleiser, G. (2008). Exploring English grammar. New Delhi: A. P. H. Publishing.
Kong, K. C. C. (1998a). Are simple business request letters really simple? A comparison of
Chinese and English business request letters. Text & Talk, 18, 103-141.
Kong, K. C. C. (1998b). Politeness of service encounters in Hong Kong. Pragmatics, 8(4),
555-575.
Kong, K. C. C. (2006). Accounts as a politeness strategy in the internal directive docu-
ments of a business firm in Hong Kong. Journal of Asian Pacific Communication, 16(1),
77-101.
Kwan, B. S. C., Chan, A. Y. W.> & Li, D. C. S. (2003). According to the expert, he said . .
A consciousness-raising approach to helping Cantonese speakers overcome problems in
topic-comment structures. Asia Pacific Journal of Language in Education, 5(2), 87-94.
Lado, R. (1957). Linguistics across cultures: Applied linguistics for language teachers. Ann Arbor,
MI: University of Michigan Press.
Ladefoged, P. (2001). A course in phonetics (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle.
Ladefoged, P. (2009). American English. Handbook of the I PA. Cambridge： Cambridge
University Press.
Lambrecht, K. (1994). Information structure and sentence form: Topic, focus and the mental
representations of discourse referents. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Langacker, R. W. (1982). Remarks on English aspect. In P. J. Hopper (Ed.), Tense-aspect:
Between semantics &pragmatics (pp. 265-304). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
LaPolla, R. J. (2009). Chinese as a topic-comment (not topic-prominent and not SVO)
language. In J. Xing (Ed.), Studies of Chinese linguistics: Functional approaches (pp. 9-22).
Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
Lee,K.S.,&Tse,Y.K.［李家樹、謝耀基］(1994).漢語的待性和運用［The characteristics and
use of Chinese］. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
Lee, S.» & Li» D. C. S. (2013). Multilingualism in Greater China and the Chinese language
diaspora. In T. K. Bhatia, & W. C. Ritchie (Eds.), Wiley-Blackwell handbook of bilingualism
and multilingualism (pp. 813-842). Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Levin, B. (1993). English verb classes and alternations: A preliminary investigation. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Levin, B・，& Rappaport Hovav, M. (1995). Unaccusativity: At the syntax-lexical semantics inter-
face. Cambridge, MA: Ihe MIT Press.
Li, C. N.，& Thompson, S. A. (2009). Mandarin Chinese: A functional reference grammar. Taipei:
The Crane Publishing.
References
153
Li, D. C. S. (1997). Borrowed identity: Signaling involvement with a Western name. Journal of
Pragmatics, 28, 489-513.
Li, D. C. S. (1998). Incorporating LI pragmatic norms and cultural values in L2： Deve oping
English language curriculum for EIL in the Asia-Pacific region. Asian Englishes, 1(1),
31-50.	.	,	, _	.
U, v. C. S. (2000). Hong Kong English: New variety of English or interlanguage, ngtsi
Australia Journal, 18(1), 50-59.
Li, D. C. S. (2002). Pragmatic dissonance: The ecstasy and agony of speaking - e a natne
speaker of English. In D. C. S. Li (Ed.), Discourses in search of members: In honor of
Ron Scollon (pp. 559-593). New York: University Press of America.
Li, D. C. S. (2006). Chinese as a lingua franca in Greater China. Annual Review of pp ie
Linguistics. 26, 149-176.	__
Li, D.C. S. (2007). Researching and teaching China and Hong Kong English： Issues, problems
and prospects. English Today, 23(3&4), 11-17.	f
Li, D. C. S, (2011). 'Perfective paradox': A cross-linguistic study of the aspec nc
-guo in Mandarin Chinese. Chinese Language and Discourse, 2(1), 23-57.
L., D. C. 8.(2015). Lingua francas in Greater China. In W. S. Y. Wang & C. F. Sun (Eds.), Oxford
Handbook ofChinese Linguistics^. 578-588). Oxford： Oxford Umversity Press-
Li, D. C. S. (2017). Multilingual Hong Kong: Languages, literacies an i n es.'
Li, D設:黑h默号 W. (1999). Helping teachers correct structural and g English
errors. Hong Kong Journal of Applied Linguistics, 4(1), 79-101.	.
Li, D. C. S„ & Chan A. Y. W. (2001). Fornvfocused negative feedback： Correctmg three
common errors. TESL Reporter, 34,22-34.	cHen
Li, D. C. 8., Chan, A. Y. W., & Kwan, B. S. C. (2002). Common errors an t eir c
http://personal.cityu.edu.hk/-encrproj/error_types.htm.	.. i
Li. D. G S. Keung, S.： Poon, H. F., & Xu,乙(2016). Learning Canton;： ： an addmnal
language (CAL) or not： What the CAL learners say. Global Chinese,
Li, D. C S..&Lee, S. (2004). Bilingualism in East Asia. In T. K. Bhatia* W. C. RKdue (Eds.),
The handbook of bilingualism (pp. 742-779). Malden, MA. Blackwe	rhin^e
Li, P., & Bowerman, M. (1998). The acquisition of lexical and grammatica aspec i
Li, J忠:幣。微*眾”55〃血5皿岫5 &
Libe窯駕(2009). Language Log. 16 March. Retrieved from http：〃languagelog.ldc.upenn.
LH-S*罗《富4). Cowerse。丽pohg祯伽晰 帅哄血血g［語言橙貌與
外語教學］.Taipei： The Crane Publishing.
Littlewood, W. (1984). Foreign and second language learning: Language acq冒
and its implications for the classroom. Cambridge: Cambridge Unixersit) 《诂
Liu, M.［劉宓慶］(2006).新編漢英對比與翻譯［Chinese-Enghs contra、an	-
A new edition). Beijing: China Translation & Publishing Corporation.
lo Bianco, Orton, J., & Gao, Y. (Eds.) (2009). China and En^sh： Global^on and 血
dilemmas of identity. Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Lock, G. (1996). Functional English grammar: An introduction for secon angu g -
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
154
References
Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English, (n.d.). Retrieved from http:〃\vww.ldoceonline.
com/.
Louie, E. W (1998). Chinese American names: Tradition and transition. Jefferson, NC:
McFarland & Co.
Luk, Z. R S., & Shirai, Y. (2009). Is the acquisition order of grammatical morphemes
impervious to LI knowledge? Evidence from the acquisition of plural ・s, articles, and
possessive 5. Language Learning. 59(4), 721-754.
Matthews S.,& Yip, V (1994). Cantonese: A comprehensive granvnar. London: Routledge.
McBride, C. (2016). Childrens literacy development: A cross-cultural perspective on learning to
read and write (2nd ed.). Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge.
Newbrook, M. (1991). Exploring English errors: Grammar, vocabulary, pronunciation (Vols. 1
& 2). Hong Kong: Oxford University Press.
Nornian, J. (1988). Chinese. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Norrish, J, (1983). Language learners and their errors. London: Macmillan Press.
Oishi, E. (2006). Austins speech act theory and the speech situation. Esercizi Filosofici, /, 1-14.
Retrieved from http://www.univ.trieste.it/~eserhlo/artl06/oishil06.pdf.
Paradis, M. (2004). A neurolinguistic theory of bilingualism. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Pinkham, J. (2000). The translators guide to Chinglish ［中式英語之鑒］.Beijing: Foreign
Language Teaching and Research Press.
Pullum, G. (2011). Language Log. 24 January. Retrieved from http://languagelog.ldc.upenn.
edu/nll/?p=2922.
Radden, G. (2007). Cognitive English grammar. Amsterdam： John Benjamins.
Ramsey, S. R. (1987). The languages of China. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Richards, J. C. (1971). A non-contrastive approach to error analysis. English Language Teaching
Journal, 25, 204-219.
Richards, J. C. (1973). Error analysis and second language strategies. In J. W. Oller &
J. C. Richards (Eds.), Focus on the learner: Pragmatic perspectives for the language teacher
(pp. 114-135). Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Richards, J. C. (1974). Error analysis: Perspectives on second language acquisition. London:
Longman.
Richards, J. C., Platt, J., & Weber, H. (1985). Longman dictionary of applied linguistics. Harlow,
UK: Longman.
Ringbom, H. (1987). The role of the first language in foreign language learning. Clevedon, UK:
Multilingual Matters.
Ringbom, H. (2007). Cross-linguistic similarity in foreign language learning. Clevedon, UK:
Multilingual Matters.
Roberts, C. (2003). Uniqueness in definite noun phrases. Linguistics and philosophy, 26(3),
287-350.
Robins, R. H. (1964). General linguistics: An introductory survey. London: Longmans, Green
and Co., Ltd.
Robison, R. E. (1990). The primacy of aspect. Studies in Second Language Acquisition. 12(3),
315-330.
Rogers, H. (2000). The sounds of language: An introduction to phonetics. Harlow, UK: Pearson.
Rowling, J. K. (1998). Harry Potter and the sorcerers stone. New York: Scholastic.
Saeed, J. I. (2003). Semantics (2nd ed.). Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Sasse, H.-J. (2002). Recent activity in the theory of aspect: Accomplishments, achievements,
or just non-progressive state? Linguistic Typology. 6, 199-271.
References
155
Schachter, J. (1974). An error in error analysis. Language Learning, 24(2), 205-214.
Schachter,& Celce-Murcia, M. (1977). Some reservations concerning error analysis. TESOL
Quarterly, 11,441-451.	.
Schmidt, R. W., & Richards, J. C. (1980). Speech acts and second language learning. Applied
Linguistics, 1(2), 129-157.
Scollon, R„ & Scollon, S. W. (1983). Face in interethnic communication. In J. C. Richar s -
R. W. Schmidt (Eds.), Language and communication (pp. 156-189). London：Lon^-
Scoilon, R., & Scollon, S. W. (1995). Intercultural communication: A discourse approach. Oxior .
UK： Blackwell.	.,..
Scollon, R., Scollon, S. B. K., & Jones, R. H. (2012). Intercultural communication: A discourse
approach (3rd eci.). Malden, MA： Wiley-BlackweD.
Seargeant, P. (2012). Exp，。喚 World Englishes: Language in a global context. Ab.ngdon, Oxon;
New York: Routledge.	,
Seargeant, & Swann, J. (Eds.). (2012). English in the world: History, diversity, change.
Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge.
Searle, J. R. (1969). Speech acts. Cambridge： Cambridge University Press：
Searle, J. R. (1979). Expression and meaning. Cambridge: Cambridge ^niverSit^
Seiinker, L, (1972). Interlanguage. International Review of Applied Linguisttcs, 10(3) 209-W.
Shi, D. (1997). Issues on Chinese passive./。"血 of Chinese linguistics, 25 ⑴,41-/ -
Shibatani, M. (1991). Grammaticization of topic into subject. In E. C. Traugott c .
(Eds.), Approaches to grammaticalization (Vol. 2): Focus on types ofgrammatwal markers
(pp. 93-133). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.	. .
Shirai, Y. (1991). Primacy of aspect in language acquisition: Simplified input am pro typ
(unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of California, Los Ange es_
Stowell, T. (1991). Determiners in NP and DP. In K. Leffel & D. Bouchard (Eds.),聞，on
phrase structure (pp. 37-56). Netherlands: Springer.	,
Tai, J. H. Y.(1985). Temporal sequence and word order in Chinese. In J. Hannan	・)，
in syntax (pp. 49-72). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.	v
Tang,S..W.［鄧思穎］.(2015).瑕語語法講義［An outline of Cantonese grammar］. °ng g-
Commercial Press.	— 让 口 r 由 田新、
Tang, S. W„ Fan, K., Lee, H. T„ Lun, S„ Luke, K. K., Tung, C. S., & 習呉普噁u
范國、李行徳、MU、陸鏡光、童哲生、張群顯】(2°°2).:冲拼表U, 8
romanized word list］ (2nd ed.). Hong Kong: Linguistic Society o Hong :
Thomas, J. (1983). Cross-cultural pragmatic failure. Applied Linguistics, 4(2), 9P-H-
Thompson, S. A. (1987). The passive in English: A discourse perspective. In R.甘1：
In honor of Use Lehiste (pp. 497-512). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Fons u ica 搭
Tomasello, M. (1995). Joint attention social cognition. In C. Moore & P DunhanHE^J.
Joint attention: Its origins and role in development (pp. 103-130). New York. s> ° °
Trudgill, & Hannah, J. (1994). International English: A guide to varieties of standard English.
London & New York: Edward Arnold.	, , _ . . .. .	.
Tsai, Frederic ［思果］(1982).翻譯新究［New studies in translation］, aipei:
Tsai, Frederic 思、果］(1987).翻譯研究［A study of translation). Taipei: Vast Plain Publishing
Tsai, Frederic ［思果］(2002),譯道探微［Exploring the nuts and bolts of translation］, Beijing:
China Translation & Publishing Corporation.
156
References
Tse, Y. K.［謝耀基］(1990).現代漢語歐化語法概論［Introduction to Europeanization in
modern Chinese］. Hong Kong: Kwong Ming Bookstore.
Tse» Y. K.［謝耀基］(2001).漢語語法歐化綜述［Europeanization of Chinese grammar:
A summary］.語文研究［Study of language］, 78(1), 17-22.
Tsunoda, T. (1985). Remarks on transitivity. Journal of Linguistics, 21, 385-396.
van Dijk, M. (2006). Let us prey. Bloomington, IN: AuthorHouse.
van Dyke, P. A. (2005). The Canton trade: Life and enterprise on the China coast, 1700-1845.
Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
Wang, J.［王菊泉］(2012).漢語特點與歐化譯文的改造［Characteristics of the Chinese
language and the refashioning of Europeanized translations］. In W. Pan ［潘文國］(Ed.),
英漢對比與翻譯［Contrastive and translation studies of English and Chinese］
(pp. 33-56). Shanghai: Shanghai Foreign Language Education Press.
Wang, L.［王力］.(1958a).中國現代語法［Modern Chinese grammar］, Beijing: Commercial
Press.
Wang, L ［王力］.(1958b).漢語史稿［A historical introduction to Chinese］. Beijing: Kexue
chubanshe.
Webster, M・，& Lam, W. C. P. (1991). Further notes on the influence of Cantonese on the
English of Hong Kong students. In D. Bunton, & D. Allison (Eds.), Institute of Language in
Education Journal, Special Issue No. 2: English usage in Hong Kong (pp. 35-42). Hong Kong:
Education Department.
Widdowson, H. G. (2003). Defining issues in English language teaching. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Wolfson, N. (1979). The conversational historical present alternation. Language, 55(1),
168-182.
Wu, Y.» & Bodomo, A. (2009). Classifiers h determiners. Linguistic Inquiry, 40(3), 487-503.
Xiao, R.» & McEnery, T. (2004). Aspect in Mandarin Chinese: A corpus-based study. Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Yip, V. (1995). Interlanguage and learnability: From Chinese to English. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Yip, V, & Matthews, S. (1995). I-interlanguage and typology: The case of topic-prominence.
In L. Seiinker, M. S. Smith, & L. Eubank (Eds.), Current state of interlanguage (pp. 17-30).
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Yip, V., & Matthews, S. (2007). The bilingual child: Early development and language contact.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Yiu, H. (1992).病句診症室［Wrong sentences diagnosed］. Hong Kong: Joint Publishing.
Yu, G.［余光中］.(1979).從西而不化到西而化之［From odd Westernization to smooth
Westernization］. Ming Pao Monthly ［明報月刊］» 8(164).
Yu, G.［余光中］.(1987).怎樣改進英式中文?—論中文的常態與變態［How to improve
Anglicized Chinese? On what is normal and abnormal in Chinese］. Ming Pao Monthly
［明報月刊 1，October, pp. 1-12.
Yu» G・［余光中］.(2002).余光中談翻譯［Yu Guangzhong on translation］. Beijing: China
Translation & Publishing Corporation.
Yuan, B. (1997). Asymmetry of null subjects and null objects in Chinese speakers L2 English.
Studies in Second Language Acquisition. 19,467-497.
Zee, E. (2009). Chinese (Cantonese). Handbook of the IPA. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
References
157
泣hang, Z.［張振江］.(2009). Language and society in early Hong Kong (1841-1884)［早期香港
的社會和語 Z : 1841-1884］, Zhongshan: Zhongshan University Press.
ZZhao, Y.［趙兀任］.(1982).國語語法-中國話的文法［A grammar of spoken Chinese］.
Taipei: Xuehai chubanshe.
ZZobl, H. (1989). Canonical typological structures and ergativity in English L2 acquisition.
In 8. M. Gass & J. Schachter (Eds.), Linguistic perspectives on second language acquisition
(pp. 203-221). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
i冰心,《閑情》(1988)。取自應屆畢業生網站；http://wenxue.yjbys.com/bingxin/69559.
html » 2016 年 4 月 26 日 «
N廣田。《花潮＞。取自王朝網絡;http://tc.wangchao.net.cn/baike/detaiL 1112192.
html，2016 年 4 月 26 0 °
莫言'《蒼蠅•門牙》。台北：麥田出版，2005，頁5。
目斯理'《新年》。香港：明窗出版社，1997，頁2。
果紹釣。《以畫為喻》。取自百度文庫；http://wenku.baidu.com/view/
368ed7765901020207409ca7.html?re=view，2016年4月 26 日。
朱自清。《背影》o取自互動百科網站；http://www.baike.com/wiki/背影，2016年
4月26日。
About the Authors
David C. S. Li is a professor and head of the Department of Chinese and Bilingual
Studies (CBS) at the Hong Kong Polytechnic University. He obtained his BA in
English (Hong Kong), MA in applied linguistics (France), and PhD in linguistics
(Germany). He has published in contrastive aspectology (tense and aspect), World
Englishes, lHong Kong English： "China English* bilingual interaction and code-
switching (translanguaging), multilingualism in Greater China, Chinese learners
:FL learning difficulties and error-correction strategies, Cantonese as an additional
inguage in Hong Kong, and South Asian Hongkongers1 needs for written Chinese.
Zoe Pei-sui Luk is an assistant professor in the Department of Linguistics and
Modern Language Studies at the Education University of Hong Kong. She obtained
her BA in Japanese studies (the Chinese University of Hong Kong) and her MA
and PhD in linguistics (University of Pittsburgh). She has published journal articles
and book chapters on various topics in language acquisition, including the influence
of a first language on second language acquisition, the development of tense-aspect
marking in bilingual children, and typological differences between languages and
their effect on language acquisition.
Ilndex
；affricate, 14-15, 21-22, 30, 35-36, 142-143
agreement, 43, 89, 90, 95
；allophone, 18, 27-28
- alveolar, 12, 14-17, 20-22, 24-28,30-31,
142-143
• Anglicization, 100
；argument, 40-41,43-44, 46-47,49-50,
54-55, 60-61,94, 144
null, 43-46,49
structure, 40
article, vi, xi, 9, 75, 79-86
definite, x, 75-87, 117
indefinite, x, 75-76, 78, 81-82, 84-87,
117, 145
zero, 81
articulation
manner of, 13-15, 19-20, 37
place of, 13, 16
aspect, xiii, 2, 8-9, 63-65, 69-74. 89,102,
142
experiential, 102
imperfective, 64-65, 68
perfective, vi, xiii, xiv, 8» 43, 64-68, 70,
102
progressive, vi, 1, 7, 8, 64-65, 68
Aspect Hypothesis, 72
aspiration, vii, 15, 20-21,35
baihua, 7» 98-99, 102
movement, 99
bei passive, xiii, 8, 55, 58, 59, 60, 61,119,120»
121
bilabial, vii, 14, 20, 142
Cantonese, vi, vii, ix, xi, xii, 2,7-9,11-38,
45, 49,65-67, 70,73,75,83,93,102,
125,128,135,136-137,141-142
Chinese
Mandarin, xi» xii, 7-9,34,45,55,66-67,
69-70, 74,82,99,102,108,128.
132-133,136,141
coda, 24-28,30-33,142-143
conjunction, 103-104,116-117
consonant, vii, 12-13,15-16,18-19,21,24,
28-31,37
cluster, 29-30,143
contrastive analysis, xi, xiii, 1
de, 103,109
demonstrative, 9, 75,79-86
dental. See interdental
determiner, vi, 2,9,75,79,82,84-87,89,
118» 145
diphthong, 18,22,24,31-32
English
American, vi, xiii, 5-6,17,132
Australian, 5
British, vii, xiii, 5,15-16,141-142
Hong Kong, xiii» 11,23,36
Indian, 6
Singapore, 6
error analysis, xi, xiii, 1
Europeanization, viii, xii» 9,59,97,100,106,
108» 110,114,116,120,122,124, 146
adverse, 101
beneficial, 101
experiences 94
expletive, 90
160
Index
face, x, xii, 42,81, 126, 128-129, 131-133,
136-137, 147
negative, 129,136
positive, 129, 136
face-threatening act, 129,131
failure
linguistic, 128
pragmatic, 128
first-name address, 134, 136-137, 148
French, x, xi, 3, 20, 33, 68, 90, 117, 121
fricative, 14, 15, 19,20,21,28,31,142
gan2, 66-67, 70
gud, 33, 69, 70, 102, 109, 119
hypotaxis, 103-104,106-107
incidence schema, 65
interdental, 14, 21, 142
International Phonetic Alphabet, 11
intonation, 12, 32, 34-35
intransitive, 40-44, 46-47, 50-51, 53-55, 60,
90, 143
Japanese, vii, x, 3» 28, 36, 54, 71, 75, 98, 108,
112, 126» 130
Jyutping, xii, 33
Korean, vii, x, 75,108,126, 130
lazy pronunciation, 27
let 66,67,82, 102
-men. xiv, 112, 113
monophthong, 17, 22-23, 32
nat 80-84
nasal, 13-15, 24-28, 31, 36, 142, 143
negative transfer, xii, 1,3-4,8
nominalizer, xiv, 103
object
direct, 40,44, 53, 54, 61
onset, 25,30
over-passivization, 55,60
parataxis, 103, 106-107, 110
phoneme, 12, 18, 21, 36-37
pinyin, xii
plosive. See stop
politeness, 128-130, 136-137
positive transfer, 3
post-alveolar, 35
pragmatics, ix, xi, xiii, 125, 134» 137
Principle of Temporal Sequencing, 105
Putonghua, xi, xii» 7-8, 12, 25, 32, 35, 141
rhythm, 32
schwa, 24
semantic role, vii, 42, 46-52, 61, 89, 92, 94»
144
agent, 46-48, 55-56, 60, 90, 92, 94
beneficiary, 49
experiencer, 48, 49
goal, 49
instrument, 49
location, 48
patient, 47, 48, 54, 56, 60, 90, 92, 94
percept, 48, 49, 94, 144
source, 48
theme, 48, 54, 60, 94
shi. 121-122
source, 120, 122
Spanish, x> 3, 68, 89
speech act, viii, 126-129, 137
stop, 14, 27
stress, 32-35, 38
contrastive, 33-34
stress-timed, 32-33
subject, xi, xiv, 2-4, 9, 20, 26, 34, 42-43,
45-56, 58, 60-61, 89-96, 109, 115, 120,
127, 132-133, 144
subject-prominent, 90, 92
suffix, xiv, 102, 112-114, 123, 146
syllable, 2, 18, 22, 24-36, 38, 112, 116, 134
stressed, 33, 35
structure, 29-31
unstressed, 33, 35
syllable-timed, 32-33
tense, x, xi, 2, 5, 8, 9, 23, 46, 63-69, 72-73,
89» 109
future, 64
DIndex
161
past, 63-64, 67-69, 72-73
perfect, 68
present, 68-69, 89, 127
tthematic role, 90
•tone, vi, vii, ix, xi, xii. 2, 7-9, 11-12,17, 28,
30-31,34-35, 70, 73, 83
level, 35
I topic, ix, xii, 2-4, 9, 45-46, 59-60, 91-93,
95-96, 105,110
1 topicalization, 4, 45, 60, 92-94, 96
topic-prominent, 91-92
transitive, 40-47, 50-51, 53-55, 60,62,
143-144
transliteration, 11-12, 100, 122
velar, 14,16
verb
auxiliary, 53
unaccusative, 47, 54, 60
unergative, 47, 60
voice
passive, xiii, 8, 13,41, 53-62,94,119-121
voiced, 12,15, 19-21,31,142-143
voiceless, 12, 15, 19-21,27-28, 142-143
vowel, vi-vjj, 12-13,15-18, 20,22-24,33
wenydn, 98
-xing, 101, 112
zait 66-67, 70-71,80-81,88,109-110,117,
120
zhe, 69-71,81,102-103,109,114,121
zo2,66-67,69» 83
Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar
An Introduction
"David C. S. Li and Zoe Pei-sui Lukzs brand new introduction to Chinese-English contrastive
grammar covers a number of key topics and comes with copious data, abundant
exemplification, and in-depth analyses. A must-read for all who are interested in the
similarities and differences between the two languages, and why.'
—K・ K. Luke, Nanyang Technological University
'This is a book which has long been needed. Drawing on their own research and teaching
experience, the authors have produced ◦ linguistically accurate and insightful, but also very
readable book. It should be required reading for language teachers in Hong Kong and the
Greater China region/
—Stephen Matthews, University of Hong Kong
The main objective of Chinese-English Contrastive Grammar: An Introduction is to
familiarize the reader with a subset of the learning difficulties and common errors in ESL/EFL
pronunciation and lexico-grammatical structures encountered by Chinese learners and users
of English, in Hong Kong and beyond. It also helps readers understand some of the ways in
which the Chinese language has undergone structural change as a result of Europeanization.
The book begins with a review of Cantonese-English contrastive phonology and is followed
by a detailed analysis of lexico-grammatical deviations found among Chinese ESL/EFL
learners. It concludes with a brief history of the Europeanization of the Chinese language and
a discussion of commonly encountered lingua-cultural problems encountered by Chinese users
of English in intercultural communication settings.
This book is written primarily for teachers and students specializing in language-related
disciplines. Scholars who wish to understand the acquisitional challenges for Chinese
students in the process of learning English as an additional language will also find the book an
informative reference.
David C. S. Li is a professor and head of the Department of Chinese and Bilingual Studies (CBS)
at the Hong Kong Polytechnic University.
Zoe Pei-sui Luk is an assistant professor in the Department of Linguistics and Modern
Language Studies at the Education University of Hong Kong.
CUHK Libra
005109395
香港大學出版社
Hong Kong University Press
Linguistics / Language
Printed and bound in Hong Kong. China
4