Keys to Teaching Grammar
to English Language Learners
A Practical Handbook
KEITH ร. FOLSE, Ph.D.
University of Central Florida
Foreword by BETTY ร. AZAR
Ann Arbor
University of Michigan Press
This book is dedicated to the memory of Dr. Olga Pustovalova, who was a visiting Fulbi
Scholar in our MATESOL program at the University of Central Florida in spring 2007. Her h<
campus was Metropolitan Institute for the Humanities in Moscow, where she was Professe
Linguistics.	/
I had the great pleasure of working with Olga during her time at UCF. Olga was a
vibrant and intelligent person, a very good scholar, and a fellow linguist. Her main research
was cross-cultural issues, and her main motive in coming to our university and area was to ga
data for a book on American culture that she could then use with her students in Russia. I
remember a Saturday in February when my partner and I drove Olga around all day to see A:
ican garage sales, a drive-thru car wash, a Sonic® burger restaurant, and even a trailer park. A
these pieces of Americana fascinated her, and she took numerous photos and talked non-
about her book project.
In March 2007, Olga and I flew to Seattle to attend the International TESOL confere
Instead of just attending a few sessions, Olga—ever enthusiastic—signed up for multiple ce
cate courses and spent her time attending workshops every day. It was on the return flight I
Seattle that she first felt ill. Shortly thereafter, medical tests indicated cancer. She remaine
Orlando for a few more months before returning to Russia in September 2007. Unfortunc
she passed away shortly afterward at the much too young age of 34. She was buried near S(
her hometown on the Black Sea, which she talked about so much while she was here in the
Although it was not part of her Fulbright duties, Olga attended my graduate TEFL
every Monday night without fail. She gave numerous presentations about Russian cultw
groups in our area.
Because of the obvious love and dedication that Olga had for her English education
reminded me of many of the students who come through our own MATESOL program, b
ming with excitement about teaching either here or in a foreign country. For this reason, I
icate this book to the memory of Dr. Olga Pustovalova. I also pledge to use portions o
royalties from this book to finance an annual fellowship in her honor for a graduate TESOI
dent at the University of Central Florida.
Copyright © by the University of Michigan 2009
All rights reserved
Published in the United States of America
The University of Michigan Press
Manufactured in the United States of America
© Printed on acid-free paper
ISBN-13: 978-0-472-03220-4
2012 2011 2010 2009	4	3	2	1
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitt-
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, or otherwise, without the written permi
of the publisher.
FOREWORD
Were you surprised one day to find yourself teaching ESL? I think that happens to many
of us. Certainly I got into ESL by pure serendipity. It was 1965, and I was in my first year
of teaching freshman composition in the English Department at Iowa State University.
One morning between classes, I was with a colleague who taught the only ESL course
offered at the university at that time. As she and I were walking down the hall of the
classroom building, we ran into the head of the English Department. My fellow teacher
said to him, "My English for Foreign Students class has too many students. We need to
open another section." The department chair said, "Okay. But who can we get to teach
it?" There were only three of us in the hallway. So he turned to me and said, "How about
you, Betty?" And I said, "Sure." I had no idea what it was all about, but as a young
instructor, 1 knew not to refuse a request from my department chair!
That very afternoon at 1:10 PM, I walked into my first ESL class. I returned compo-
sitions that the other instructor had corrected before the sections were divided and
walked around the class answering questions. One student, a Spanish speaker, showed
me an error the previous teacher had marked. He had written waters (as in I was thirsty,
so I drank some waters) and wanted to know why that was incorrect. I stared at his
paper and gulped. I had no idea—absolutely no idea—but I said to myself, "Wow,
what an interesting question!" and told him I would find the answer and tell him
tomorrow. That was my introduction to ESL and the grammar questions that our Eng-
lish language learners (ELLs) ask us.
After some scrambling, I came back to class the next day with a handout of explana-
tions and exercises on count nouns vs. mass nouns, two terms I had never even heard
of before. I had never noticed that some nouns can be counted in English (one chair, two
sofas, three tables, etc.), and others can't (some furniture). From that day to this, I have
been fascinated by the workings of English grammar and especially fascinated by how
the patterns of meaning in English are seen from a second language learner's perspective.
If you're like other teachers of ELLs, at one point or another you have found your-
self standing momentarily wide-eyed in front of your class as your brain feverishly
tries to puzzle through an answer to an unanticipated student question about an ESL
grammar point, perhaps about comparative adjectives ("Why do we say more expensive
but not more cheap?) or verb tenses ("What's the difference between I've known him for
years and I knew him for years?"). What can you the teacher do to prepare yourself for
this predictable hot seat?
As Keith Folse points out in Chapters 1 and 2 of this useful work, English gram-
mar for ELLs is different from the grammar that native speakers learn in school, so
iii
iv •ะ;:· Foreword
native speakers need to learn to see English from their ELLs' point of view. In chapter
3, Keith goes on to explain 15 important ELL grammar issues in clear, accessible lan-
guage that teachers can relate to and offers relevant information on the grammar topic
as well as how it is treated in certain foreign languages. More concrete help comes in
the unique Chapter 4, which offers 20 flot Seat Questions that prepare teachers for
some of the most commonly asked ELL grammar questions, including some really
tough ones, before their class has even begun.
As a teacher, from my very first day in an ESL class, I put my students' needs first,
finding out what they wanted from their English class, and then provided materials
and activities to meet these expressed needs as best I could. I was constantly inventing
materials, like so many other ESL teachers. Knowing ELL grammar in more detail will
enable you to prepare more effective materials specifically focused on the needs of
your particular students. To be certain, this suggestion applies to all teachers—ESL or
EFL, K-12 or adult, whether the focus is on conversation or academic usage.
Our field has seen tremendous changes since 1965, when language teaching was
shifting away from grammar. Fortunately, we have shifted back (though some of us never
stopped teaching grammar, much to our students' benefit and delight). With both
research and teaching outcomes on its side, grammar is now recognized by most in the
field as an essential component in balanced programs of second language instruction.
Keys to Teaching Grammar to English Language Learners: A Practical Handbook is not
meant to be an exhaustive grammar reference book or summary of research studies.
The biggest strength of this book is in fact the author's emphasis on teaching tech-
niques. For example, each of the 15 grammar points in chapter 3 ends with ideas for
teaching the grammar. Further concrete teaching ideas can be found in Chapter 5,
with techniques ranging from basic language drills to visual grammar presentations to
more complex and fun games.
Using his lengthy background as a foreign language teacher and learner, Keith
Folse has succeeded in creating a practical guide for teachers who want to learn more
about grammar so that they can help their ELLs. To this end, the book avoids the
heavy academic tone commonly found in some teacher development books. Teachers
will also appreciate the lack of excessive grammar terminology. Like me, Folse advo-
cates using only as much grammar terminology as needed to teach the material,
advice that he himself adheres to in his own writing. Folse underscores that in teach-
ing grammar, a teacher's goal is to show students how English works, not "teach gram-
mar rules." Finally, as I have seen Keith demonstrate in many conference workshops
and presentations, this book clearly focuses on practical application of grammar infor-
mation in effective language teaching.
The whole purpose of teaching grammar to ELLs is to help our students gain lan-
guage skills that will help them achieve their real-life goals. Keys to Teaching Grammar
to English Language Learners: A Practical Handbook offers a wide array of ideas for teach-
ing and practicing grammar with their learners. This invaluable work will benefit both
teachers and their ELLs alike.
Retry ร. à
Whidbey Island, Washington
September 2008
PREFACE
Interest in learning English as a foreign language is high in countries all over the world,
including English-speaking countries with large numbers of non-native immigrants.
Today's teachers of English language learners (ELLs) work with students who have a
unique, diverse set of language needs, while some teachers deal exclusively with the
teaching of English as a second language (ESL) or English as a foreign language (EFL),
there are thousands of other teachers in English-speaking countries who suddenly find
that their elementary school math classes or high school history classes, for example,
have many ELLs who must learn the subject matter of math or history and at the same
time somehow acquire English. Both of these groups of teachers—those who are obvi-
ously responsible for ELL instruction and those who teach subjects in K-12 settings—
need to know about ELL grammar. The problem is that these teachers are often
apprehensive of grammar and cannot understand its value in the teaching of ELLs.
In teaching graduate TESOL courses on grammar, I have worked with both novice
and experienced ESL/EFL teachers as they attempt to understand ELL grammar. These
teachers want to know how to explain why we use -ing in a certain sentence or why we
use the instead of a with a certain noun. In these same courses and in numerous work-
shops, I have also worked with content teachers who have ELLs in their math, history,
and science classes. Though well-trained in their subject matter, these teachers have no
idea why their ELLs omit -ing endings or do not use the verb tenses that their native-
speaking classmates do. Knowledge of ELL grammar can answer these questions.
Because of previous experiences with grammar, both of these groups of teachers
tend to dislike—or at least have a negative mindset toward—grammar. Talking about
grammar involves knowing some terminology, but teachers mistakenly tend to equate
grammar knowledge with knowledge of grammatical labels such as present perfect tense
or dependent clauses.
Grammar is the set of patterns that holds a language together. If vocabulary items
such as words and idioms are the building blocks of a language, then grammar is the
systematic glue that holds everything within a language together. Simply put, grammar
is the foundation of a language, yet teachers often have trouble grasping the extent to
which knowledge of ELL grammar will actually help them teach their students.
After one of many workshops that I had conducted on ELL grammar at a national
conference, a teacher asked me about some of the grammar points that I had just
introduced that day. "I understand count and non-count now," she said, "so now I
understand why my ELLs make those mistakes on their papers, but are these rules
•ะะ:- Preface
written anywhere? Do you have a. list of ELL grammar points? And do you have more
ideas about how to teach these grammar points?" I could tell that this teacher—like
almost all the teachers that I work with—really wanted to help her ELLs, but she had
little knowledge about ELL grammar and very few ideas about how this information
might inform her teaching.
The solution for these teachers and these questions is this book—Keys to Teaching
Grammar to English Language Learners: A Practical Handbook. To meet the needs of all
ELL teachers, I have written a book that presents grammar in a user-friendly way and
assumes no prior grammar study. Because the teachers that I work with are first and
foremost teachers, 1 provide information on our ELLs' problems with grammar
points, their first language interference issues, and numerous examples and explana-
tions of actual teaching techniques that all teachers can use in their classrooms.
Keys to Teaching Grammar to English Language Learners: A Practical Handbook is not
meant to be an exhaustive reference book for ELL grammar. This book focuses on
teaching teachers about some of the most common ELL grammar points that will
enable them to help their English language learners achieve their language goals.
Over the years, grammar in foreign language education has occupied both
extremes of the pedagogical continuum—from being the main component of lan-
guage study in the grammar-translation method to being downplayed and even inten-
tionally omitted during the peak of the naturalist/communicative methods that
focused exclusively on communication. Regardless of the assigned role of grammar in
the second language teaching method that happens to be in vogue at any given time,
two things are clear: Grammar is an immensely important component of learning a
second language, and all teachers of ELLs need to know about ELL grammar.
Why is knowledge of grammar so important for teachers? Instructors who are
teaching an ELL course in which grammar is featured in any way obviously need to
know about ELL grammar, but knowledge of ELL grammar is important for all teach-
ers, including teachers of conversation courses, composition courses, and reading
courses, as well as K-12 teachers who have ELLs in their classes. In a conversation class,
lessons are often organized around specific tasks such as ordering food in a restaurant,
and these tasks might require practice with modals (May 1 take your order? What should
I order?). In trying to compose longer sentences in composition class, ELLs may make
errors with gerunds and infinitives (To solve this problem efficiently, I believe that we must
try to avoid using fossil-based fuels in future vehicles.). In the reading course, the teacher
may want to check the number of adjective clauses ((ว. Henry, who was arrested and
sent to prison for embezzlement, is the most famous น.ร. short story writer) as well as
reduced adjective clauses (O. Henry, arrested and sent to prison for embezzlement, is the
most famous น.ร. short story writer) in a reading passage to determine readability of the
passage and to see the kinds of clauses to which ELLs are being exposed. Being able to
explain their ELLs' errors is a high priority for many teachers, and K-12 teachers in
particular might want to know why the ELLs say they have *many homeworks and
*much problem with math or *1 like the math. *ls easy for me. (The use of asterisks indi-
cate ungrammatical English. See page 2.) Because of the importance of an ell's first
language in learning English, all teachers should be familiar with those ELL grammar
points that may be particularly problematic because of the ell's native language.
tify ELL grammar points; (2) understand the details associated with each one; (3)
anticipate common ELL errors by grammar point, by first language, and/or by profi-
ciency level; and (4) learn specific techniques to make teaching more effective. These
objectives are for all teachers regardless of where you are teaching or who your stu-
dents are.
Book Organization
This book is divided into five chapters and includes three appendices. A companion
workbook is available for those who want additional guided written practice and ideas
for further teacher research on ELL grammar.
In Chapter 1, you will examine the differences between ELL grammar and tradi-
tional grammar taught to native speakers in middle and high school. Chapter 1
includes four pre-tests that readers should answer before finishing the chapter. Chap-
ter 1 explains what ELL grammar is and examines the role that ELL grammar can play
in eight different teaching situations.
In Chapter 2, you will review (or learn!) basic grammar terminology. Section 1
focuses on twenty common native speaker errors in English. Section 2 presents the
eight parts of speech from an ELL viewpoint. Building on the eight parts of speech,
Section 3 looks at basic grammar functions such as subject and direct object. Section 3
also includes information on types of sentences. Because of the major role that verbs
play in ELL grammar, Section 4 is dedicated entirely to the twelve English verb tenses.
Chapter 3 explains 15 key ELL grammar points. There are many grammar points
that could have been included here, but these fifteen are the minimum that any ELL
teacher should be aware of before working with ELLs. Four of the fifteen focus on
verbs, with Key 1 being the verb to be, and Keys 2, 3, and 4 focusing on verb tenses
used to express present, past, and future times, respectively. Keys 5 through 15 cover a
diverse set of ELL grammar issues, such as count and non-count nouns, prepositions,
articles, pronunciation of -5 and -ed, adjective clauses, infinitives/gerunds, phrasal
verbs, modals, word forms, passive voice, and conditional sentences. Each of these fif-
teen keys is organized around four topics: typical ELL errors, grammar explanation,
native language information, and ideas for teaching.
In Chapter 4, teachers have an opportunity to prepare for the unexpected through
Hot Seat Questions that students ask. why do we spell opening with one ท before the
-ing but we spell beginning with two? What does had had mean? Why do we say taller
and windier, but we do not say comfortabler or recenterl Teachers cannot know the
answer to every student question, but this chapter includes 20 questions that ELLs fre-
quently ask their teachers.
Finally, Chapter 5 offers 25 concrete "been there, done that" techniques on differ-
ent aspects of carrying out your lesson plans with grammar. It is important to read all
of the techniques in Chapter 5 because of a technique may be applicable to many dif-
ferent grammar points even though it is illustrated in this chapter with only one gram-
mar point.
piuviuco apeuiiic niiuiiiidLiou auuLiL COUIU ana non-couni nouns, mciuamg me rules
and common ELL errors, on pages 152-60. Chapter 5 offers several techniques that
could relate to count and non-count nouns, including pages 290-92, 294-95, 300-1,
303, 308, and 309.
The three appendixes located at the back of the book include a mini-lesson on
twenty common native speaker errors, a list of irregular past and past participles OÍ
verbs, and a glossary of grammar terms useful in reading this book.
How to Use This Book
There are as many different ways to use any book as there are different teachers, and
each class or workshop group that 1 work with is somewhat different.
Chapter 1 is an overview of the differences between native speaker grammar and
ELL grammar. In addition, Chapter 1 includes several pre-tests to help direct your
learning toward areas that may need further information.
Of the four sections in Chapter 2, Section 1 can be completed individually or as a
class, but the remaining sections (2, 3, 4) should be studied as a class since the gram-
mar terminology may require deeper review. The 20 native speaker errors in Section 1
of Chapter 2 introduce the concepts of prescriptive versus descriptive grammar. A pre-
test is provided to help individuals determine which of the 20 errors they need to
study further.
Chapter 3 contains the core ELL grammar points, called Keys, and most of the
course or workshop should deal with this chapter. Chapter 4 consists of 20 Hot Seat
Questions, which may be viewed as an extension of some of the pre-tests in Chapter 1.
Ideally, the teaching techniques in Chapter 5 should be covered whenever connections
can be made with one of the 15 ELL grammar Keys. For example, Teaching Technique
1 (p. 288) mentions an option for starting a lesson on teaching an and the and is tied
to Key 6, Articles. Teaching Technique 10 (p. 297) discusses using song lyrics as a vehi-
cle for practicing verbs and modals (Key 12, Modals) or infinitives and gerunds (Key
10, Infinitives and Gerunds).
Finally, the goal of Keys to Teaching Grammar to English Language Learners: A Practical
Handbook is for teachers to become not just better but the best teachers of ELL gram-
mar possible. To accomplish this goal, teachers need to develop their own deeper
understanding of the grammar of the 15 Keys in Chapter 3. To this end, each Key ends
with a small action research question called Find Out that teachers should attempt to
work through on their own. These questions allow teachers an opportunity to connect
the material in the book with grammar issues that are meaningful to the individual
teaching needs of teachers.
Acknowledgments
This grammar project has happened because of the generous help of many people.
Without them, this, Keys to Teaching Grammar to English Language Learners: A Practical
Handbook would not have happened. First and foremost, I am grateful to the Univer-
sity of Central Florida for the academic sabbatical that I received this past year that
gave me the time to compile a work of this magnitude and to Dawn Trouard, who
kept urging me to apply for a sabbatical in the first place.
Special thanks go to the many people who carefully read various versions of this
manuscript and offered their ideas for improvements: Charlie Piper (University of
Central Florida); Laura Villegas (Springdale Schools, Northwest Arkansas); Elena
Vestri Solomon (University of Nevada—Reno and Emirates College for Advanced Edu-
cation, United Arab Emirates); Ekaterina Goussakova (Seminole Community Col-
lege); Robbie Bushong (น.ร. Peace Corps); and Kate Brummett.
Many thanks go to colleagues near and far who offered samples of student work
to serve as the basis for some of the example errors in this book: Barbara Smith-
Palinkas; Virginia Lantry (Dixon High School, Dixon, California); Mark Richards
(James Lyng Adult Education Centre, Montreal, Quebec); Sharon Yoder (Allegany Col-
lege of Maryland); Jennie Farnell (American Language Program, University of Con-
necticut, Stamford); and Lynn Faught (Farmington School District, Arkansas).
Thanks also go to the professionals who provided information regarding native
speaker errors: Dr. Alan luffs (University of Pittsburgh), Chinese; Myrna Creasman
(Center for Multilingual and Multicultural Studies, University of Central Florida),
Tagalog; Bryan Stoakley (University of South Korea) and In-Kyung Breana Stoakley
(National Language School), Korean; Dr. Martha Garcia, All Korosy, Dr. Lisa Nalbone
(Department of Modern Languages, University of Central Florida), and Dr. Edwin
Lamboy (City College of New York), Spanish; Dr. Alla Kourova (University of Central
Florida) and Ekaternia Goussakova (Seminole Community College), Russian.
I	very much appreciate the help that the following people offered on individual
grammar issues: Theresa Pruett-Said (Macomb Community College, Michigan); Chris-
tine Tierney (Houston Community College); Karen Stanley (Central Piedmont Com-
munity College, Charlotte, North Carolina); Margi Wald (College Writing Programs,
University of California, Berkeley), Carol Bandar (California Unified Schools); Aaron
Lingenfelter (California State University, Sacramento); Joel Bloch (Ohio State Univer-
sity); Judy Hobson (University of Arkansas); Kathy Schmitz (Temple University,
Tokyo); Jan Oppie (Rainbow Language House, Lhasa, Japan); and Dr. Lynn Jensen
(Lynn's School of English, California). I am particularly indebted to Rachel Koch, who
helped me out with numerous grammar quandaries.
I also thank the numerous teachers who emailed items for the Hot Seat Questions
in Chapter 4: Melanie Gonzalez (Seminole Middle School); Jill Blanc (Orlando Lan-
guage School); Alison Youngblood (Samsung Corporation, Korea); Cynthia Jankovic
(Defense Language Institute, San Antonio, Texas); Lindi Kourtellis (EAP Lab, Valencia
Community College, Florida); Aneta Braczyk (New Jersey Adult Education Program);
Chrissy Della Corte (University of Central Florida); Marcelle Cohen (Seminole Com-
munity College, Florida); Kevin Smith (Seminole Community College); Catherine
Flores (Orlando Language School); Susan Reynolds (Seminole Community College);
Special thanks go to Betty Azar and Michael Swan for their generous and con:
information about grammar. Betty'ร Understanding and Using English Grammar
Michael's Practical English Usage remain as iconic works in our field and sen
inspire all ELL materials writers and teachers.
I am especially indebted to Kelly Sippell, my editor at the University of Mich
Press, who has worked with me so diligently as this book endeavor went from an
to a proposal to a chapter to some Word files. This book is a huge project, and
was instrumental in making sure that this book happened.
Finally, I thank my partner Jim for his patience and support. A year is a long
to listen to someone talk incessantly about grammar.
Keith
University of Central Fl·
November
to English Language Learn»
A Practical Handbook
KEITH ร. FOLSE, Ph.D.
University of Central Florida
CONTENTS
I An Introduction to Grammar for English Language Learners (El
SECTION 1 What Do You Already Know about ELL Grammar? (p
. SECTION 2 Approaches to Teaching ELL Grammar: The Role of ร
Setting, Course, and Teaching Situation
I Basic English Grammar: Usage and Terminology
SECTION 1 Common Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers
SECTION 2 Eight Parts of Speech
SECTION 3 Basic Grammar Labels for Sentence Structure
SECTION 4 Why the Twelve English Verb Tenses Matter
115 Keys to ELL Grammar
Key 1 to be
Key 2 Verb Tenses to Express Present Time
Key 3 Verb Tenses to Express Past Time
Key 4 Verb Tenses to Express Future Time
Key 5 Count and Non-Count Nouns
Key 6 Prepositions
Key 7 Articles
Key 8 Pronunciation of -s and -ed
Key 9 Adjective Clauses and Reductions
Key 10 Infinitives and Gerunds
Key 11 Phrasal Verbs
Key 12 Modals
Key 13 Word Forms
Key 14 Passive Voice
Key 15 Conditionals (1/Clauses) and Wish
Question 1 Adjective Word Order
Question 2 Inverted Word Order with Negative Expressioi
Question 3 Spelling Words with Double Consonants
Question 4 used to
Question 5 Present Unreal Conditional Sentences
Question 6 had had
Question 7 Adverbs of Frequency Word Order
Question 8 will in if clauses
Question 9 Contractions
Question 10 Verb Forms in Past Tense Questions
Question 11 since versus for
Question 12 Noun Clauses as Embedded Questions
Question 13 another, other, and others
Question 14 good versus well
Question 15 gonna (Informal and Formal Language)
Question 16 Present Perfect Tense
Question 17 Possessive Forms
Question 18 Comparison of Adjectives
Question 19 do versus make
Question 20 Adverbs of Degree Word Order
1 Specific Techniques for Teaching ELL Grammar
1.	You don't need a grammar book to start your lesson.
2.	In example sentences, use content that is relevant and
meaningful to your students.
3.	Find a real task that is suitable for low-proficiency aduh
4.	Use a rapid language drill for practice, assessment, or b<
5.	Limit grammar terminology as much as possible.
6.	Help students sort out and then consolidate new gramr
information.
7.	For any grammar point, consider potential first languag'
8.	Simple exercises may not be so simple.
9.	Use the board to help. ELLs visualize a pattern.
10.	Use songs to practice ELL grammar.
11.	Choose grammar materials for false beginners carefully.
12.	Use pantomime when it matches the grammar point.
13.	Multiple choice questions are useful in teaching, not jui
grammar.
XU. IJLCJLJJ xúxjXjo xiicuidgc U.1V u-auxiuxig C11U111\Ô VI gLcuLiiiidL iiiiviiiiaLivii.
16.	Help ELLs see all the pieces of a grammar puzzle.
17.	Break up longer or difficult grammar lessons.
18.	Gimmicks help all learners.
19.	Use examples that match the target grammar point.
20.	leach mnemonic devices to help ELLs remember grammar.
21.	Motivate your ELLs with a challenge.
22.	Reduce teacher workload: Let students write practice quizzes for
each other.
23.	Find grammar points in non-ELL materials.
24.	Use guided grammar writing activities to help ELLs see the connect;
between grammar and writing.
25.	Develop your own system for correcting grammar errors.
Appendixes
1	Common Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers
2	Irregular Past and Past Participles of Verbs
3	Glossary of Grammar Terms
References
Index
An Introduction to Grammar
English Language Learners (I
SecLion 1 พ!!at Do You Already Know about ELL Grammar? (
Seclion 2 Approaches to Teaching ELL Grammar: ■ The Role of
Setting, Course, and Teaching Situation
Grammar has been at the heart of learning languages for centuries. 1
guage teaching methods—from grammar-translation to more recen
methods—grammar has played a role to one degree or another. In th
to Teaching Grammar to English Language Learners: A Practical Handbo
sider the differences between grammar points for native speakers an
In a pre-test, you will have an opportunity to measure how much y
about ELL grammar points. Reflecting the incredible variety of teachir
wide, approaches to the teaching of grammar will be considered base
the setting, the course, and other factors. Finally, suggestions will b<
this book to maximize what you learn about teaching ELL grammar.
1

* V
*An asterisk: In ELL
grammar and linguistics
books, an asterisk * is
placed before examples
that are not grammatical
in English and not usu-
ally made by native
speakers. In contrast, a
double dagger ΐ before
an example indicates
non-standard English
used by native speakers.
Example A: I want to go there tomorrow.
Example B: I plan to go there tomorrow.
Example C: *1 can to go there tomorrow.
Native speakers of English would never say *1 can to go there tomorrow. Tho
native speakers, however, would probably not be able to explain why A and B
rect and c is wrong, nor would they normally have a need to know. (See Key 11
answer.)
For teachers of ELLs, however, the situation is quite different. Our ELLs c
errors such as *1 can to go, and they do want to know why one sentence is ]
while another one is not. Keys to Teaching Grammar to English Language Lean,
vides information to help you identify and address ELL grammar issues an
effective strategies and practical ideas to teach ELL grammar in your classes';
Grammar for ELLs is simply not the same as the grammar that native Í
usually study in middle school, high school, or college. Native speakers study
mal rules of a language that they already speak. Sometimes the focus is on way
ing something better. In other cases, grammar teaching to native speakers foe
avoiding common native errors such as double negatives (We don't have no real·
there instead of We don't have any reason to go there) or using an unnecessary ]
tion (Where are you going to? instead of Where are you going?). (For more infoi
on double negatives, see p. 324; for information on ending sentences with น
sary prepositions, see pp. 313-15.)
ELLs are not only learning new words and idioms in English, but also ho\
this new vocabulary together into phrases or sentences. Grammar for ELLs shoi
focus on how to correctly construct phrases and sentences that best express tl
intended messages. ELLs need to learn, for example, that the simple present ten
repeated actions (I play tennis every day) but that present progressive (also called
continuous in British English) is often for current actions (I am playing tenn
Grammar instruction intended for ELLs would therefore focus on avoiding c<
ELL errors with simple present tense such as * Every day I am play tennis (am play
be play because it refers to a daily action) or Sorry, Maria is not here right now. *f
tennis at the high school (plays should be is playing because it refers to an event in J
at the time of the conversation). (For more information, see pp. 76 and 77.)
Teaching English to ELLs requires special training in key areas of the Engl
guage, including ESL grammar. Unfortunately, it is sometimes assumed that a
lish speaker can teach English, but this belief is incorrect.
Untrained native speakers are not in any way prepared to teach their langu
non-native speaker. The fact that you may be a native speaker of English does ท·
matically or remotely qualify you to be a good ESL teacher. I sometimes hear 1
with little experience working with ELLs say that teaching ESL is just good teach
that no special teacher training is involved. In fact, being able to teach ELLs and I
their language development most certainly is much more than just "good teaci
In terms of ESL grammar, native speakers tend to have little knowledi
particular issues that ELLs face, but this lack of knowledge is normal. Native
are not trained to know the second language aspects of their own first
because they are native speakers. The instinctual knowledge of grammar th
with acquiring a language natively does not transfer to the understanding of
ture of another language. As a result, untrained ESL instructors are often t
highlight these differences adequately to their students.
When asked about grammar, most native speakers fall back on their sc
painful memories of grammar lessons from junior high and high school. The^
her conjugating verbs for no apparent reason—I went, you went, he went, she wet
we went, you went, they went. Think about it. Why did we native speakers have to
conjugations of the verb to go in the past tense when in fact the form is exactly
for each subject—I/you/he/she/it/we/you/they went? Was this really productive?
Native speakers might remember diagramming sentences, which was sup
help us learn the part of speech of words in a sentence. For example, if you
the sentence The lazy brown fox jumped very quickly over the river, your diagra
look like this:
While I enjoyed diagramming sentences, I do not know if it really helped me t<
parts of speech. The irony of diagramming is that in order to diagram a sent
rectly, I had to already know the part of speech of each word; thus, it was no
gramming but more likely the analyzing that was the real practice. In order tc
the word lazy in the example sentence, I had to know first that it is an adjec
then I had to remember what kind of line adjectives occupy when diagramn
actual act of diagramming is not what taught me that lazy is an adjective.
When native speakers—even those with years of teaching experience—are
explain why we can say I want to go and I plan to go but not *1 can to go, they c
unhelpful and uninformative answers that do not at all resemble good teach
as, "We don't say that" (Yes, but why not?) or "You can't put to there" (Why
"You need the infinitive in the first two sentences" (what does that mean
What is an infinitive? why do you need an infinitive?). Native speakers al
explain ELL grammar questions by saying, "It's an exception." No, it's not <
tion. To be sure, there are exceptions to certain grammar patterns, but if any
consisted of a high number of exceptions, no one would ever be able to spee
All languages—including English—have patterns of usage, and those patterns
make up the grammar of that language. In fact, that is what grammar is—th
atic patterns of any language.
sion. The content of these tasks is similar to language issues that t
ELLs' writing or speech. In addition, ELLs commonly ask direc
"Teacher, why does listening have one ท in the middle but beg
"Teacher, why do you say the Philippines and the Soviet Union bul
*the China?"
Most native speakers have never thought about English from -
so many of the issues addressed here may be brand new. oftenti
initially respond to these types of questions by saying, "I've neve
before." Therefore, if you find that you have to leave some questic
test, do not be alarmed. Blank answers are normal at this stage
they are blank for you, they are most likely blank for your ELLs.
Quiz L· Distinguishing Traditional Grammar and ELL Grat
Grammar for native speakers is not the same grammar that ELL
these ten sentences, underline the grammar errors and then c
indicate whether you think the grammar error is more likely t(
native speakers or English language learners. (Answers with bri
on p. 14.)
NS	ELL 1. My favorite color is the blue because it makes
NS	ELL 2. Alaska is a U.S. state since 1959.
NS	ELL 3. Where does the president live at?
NS	ELL 4. Congress should to make a new tax law.
NS	ELL 5. George Washington was born in February 22,
NS	ELL 6. More people should of voted in the last natio
NS	ELL 7. The taxi driver said that he felt badly about d
NS	ELL 8. Most citizens want to avoid to pay higher tax(
NS	ELL 9. A knowledgeable gardener does not need man
NS	ELL 10. All the students answers should be completec
Your Score:	/10
For each of these 20 multiple choice questions, choose the one answer that best
answers or completes the item. Answering these 20 questions should not take more
than ten minutes, which allows approximately 30 seconds per question. If you
need more time than this, then you do not know this material well enough yet.
(Answers are on p. 14. For detailed explanations, see the Keys or other text refer-
ence indicated in the margin next to each question in the quiz.)
1.	Adding the letter -s to a word in English can be confusing to an ELL because
the letter -s means
A.	plural for nouns but singular for adjectives
B.	plural for count nouns and singular for non-count nouns
c. plural for nouns but singular for verbs
D.	plural for nouns but singular for possessives
E.	plural for nouns and singular for irregular verbs
2.	In English, we use a few (instead of a little) with
A.	non-count nouns
B.	count nouns
c. negative nouns
D.	certain adjective phrases
E.	certain adverb phrases
3.	Which of these verbs is in the past perfect tense?
A.	had eaten
B.	was eating
c. was eaten
D.	had been eating
E.	would have eaten
4.	When adding a suffix such as -ing or -ed to a verb, we may double the last
letter if
A.	the last three letters are Consonant + Vowel + Consonant
B.	the. last three letters are Vowel + Vowel + Consonant
c. the last three letters are Vowel + Consonant + Vowel
D.	the last three letters are Consonant + Consonant + Vowel
E.	the last three letters are Consonant + Vowel + Vowel
Ke
8
Ke
5
Ke
3
Keys
it
3J
45
A.	It depends on the number of syllables in the adjective.
B.	It depends on the number of vowels in the adjective.
c. It depends on the first letter of the adjective.
D.	It depends on the tense of the verb used in the sentence where the adjec-
tive occurs.
E.	There is no reason. ELLs must memorize these usages.
6.	Had belter, will, and ought to are
A.	infinitives
B.	modals
c. gerunds
D.	phrasal verbs
E.	idioms
7.	In general, the is not used with the names of countries, but an exception is
A.	Asian and European country names
B.	country names that begin with a vowel letter
c. country names that begin with a vowel sound
D.	country names that seem plural
E.	country names with 1 to 4 syllables
8.	Choose the underlined verb that is in a tense that does not match the time
normally associated with that particular tense.
I got up early, drove to the post office, and mailed that box to Sue this morning.
When she gets it, I am sure that she will call me.
A.	got up
B.	mailed
c. gets
D.	am
E.	will call
A.	lhey have their check, but the waiter took (JLlKi).
B.	YOU have seen that movie twice, haven't you?
c. Does Jane have HER paper with her today?
D.	Excuse me. Is this phone card yours or MINE?
E.	I don't know HIM very well, but I have known his brother for ages.
10.	Which sentence has an intransitive verb?
A.	In the storm, the small bird plunged from the tree.
B.	In spite of the rain, we enjoyed the party a lot.
c. Every student in the class uses a number 2 pencil for the weekly tests.
D.	Upon hearing all of the evidence, the jury reached a unanimous verdict.
E.	Who murdered the robber?
11.	Which of these animal names ends in the sound /s/?
A.	monkeys
B.	lions
c. tigers
D.	hippos
E.	giraffes
12.	Which of these is the least useful grammar category for ELLs (and is therefore
almost never covered in any ELL grammar book for students)?
A.	articles
B.	clauses
c. adjectives
D.	conjunctions
E.	interjections

See
Chapter
See
Chapter
A.	The last letter is ท.
B.	The last letter is a consonant.
c. The word listening is a gerund.
D.	The word listen has two syllables.
E.	The first syllable of listen is stressed.
14.	In this sentence from an autobiography, When I was a kid, I would play with
my imaginary friends, would is used because it refers to
A.	permission to do an action
B.	a desire to do the action
c. very polite language for the action
D.	past repeated actions
E.	conditional situations
15.	When a verb form occurs after any preposition (except to), the verb form
used is usually
A.	an infinitive
B.	a past participle
c. a gerund
D.	a verb phrase
E.	a present participle
16.	In which sentence is light used as a non-count noun?
A.	She put on her light green sweater because it was cold.
B.	We need more light in this office.
c. Please turn off the light when you are done.
D.	The fire began to light up the entire room.
E.	Will lanet light the furnace before she leaves?
17.	For ELLs, which of these pairs of words exemplifies a whole group of adjec-
tives that are immensely problematic in mastering English?
A.	chosen vs. selected
B.	economy vs. economical
c. fried vs. baked
D.	annoyed vs. annoying
E.	English vs. greenish
18.	Which of these sentences has a phrasal verb?
A.	On our way to work today, the traffic held US up.
B.	The cat may have been sleeping since noon.
c. If Mark will work harder, together we can finish this job.
D.	Joe typed the memo, put it in an envelope, and mailed it.
E.	Joe typed the memo, Sue put it in an envelope, and I mailed it.
19.	When we talk about a contrary-to-fact condition for right now, what does the
verb in the if clause look like?
A.	simple present tense
B.	simple past tense
c. present progressive tense
D.	would + VERB
E.	would have + VERB
20.	Which of these CAPITALIZED parts is an adjective clause?
A.	No one is certain of WHAT THE OUTCOME OF THAT MEETING WILL
BE.
B.	WHAT THAT BANK FAILED TO DO was to inform the clients of the
approaching deadline.
c. In spite of the scientific knowledge clearly available at that time,
THAT RATS AND OTHER RODENTS COULD SPREAD DISEASE was dis-
counted.
D.	Geologists had warned for decades OF THE POSSIBILITY OF A
CATASTROPHIC EARTHQUAKE IN THAT REGION.
E.	The mechanic did his best to save the parts of the car THAT WERE
SALVAGEABLE, but in the end, little could be saved.
Your Score:	/20
Quiz 3. Can You Explain ELL Grammar Errors?
The following errors are typical of ELLs. Circle and correct the errors. Then explain
your corrections in the space provided. In other words, if you were the ELL teacher,
how would you explain the error? (Answers are on p. 15. For detailed explanations,
see the Key or other text reference indicated in the margin next to each question in
the quiz.)
1.	When I watched a movie on TV last night, my best friend called me. We talked
for over an hour, and then I returned to the movie.
2.	My parents visited Europe last year. They went to France, Belgium, and Netherlands.
See pp.
278-79.
See pp.
277-78.
3.	Bolivia is a landlocked country. Other example is Paraguay.
4.	I don't know where I left my watch, so I don't know what time is it.
6.	My sister won $1,000 in the lottery. She has lucky.
7.	I didn't know the words, so I looked up them in the dictionary.
8.	Maria was born in El Salvador, but she is a บ.ร. citizen, she lives in Dall:
is in Dallas since 2007, and she loves the city.
Your Score:	/ 8
only tangentially pertinent. How would you answer the following tl
grammar questions? (Answers are on p. 15. For detailed explanatic
or other text reference indicated in the margin next to each question
1.	I know the past tense ending is -ed, so I write added, wanted,
and pushed. I pronounce these words as two syllables, so I say c
cleansed, hug*ged, and push*ed. Someone told me that cleaned
only one syllable and end in /d/ and that pushed is one syllable
How can I know when to pronounce the ending as /d/ or /t/ or Í
/ad/? Is there any rule?
2.	I don't know when to use present perfect (have worked). I thou;
perfect tense is for actions that began in the past and still contin
lived here for two years because I still live here—so I can't say, I
years even though that makes more sense to me because it's Stif
action. However, I see sentences where the action is clearly
Congress has decided to change the current laws regarding the fed
Congress's decision is finished. I don't know when to use presei
Is it for actions that are over or not?
3.	If you want to compare two things in English, you can say that A is biggei
and that A is crazier than B, but you also say A is more interesting than B (
of interestinger). Can I say A is comfortabler than B? How about, A is modert
B? When do you add -er, and when do you have to use morel
Your Score:	/3
Answers for Quiz If p, 4
Here are the answers with brief explanations. For detailed explanations, Π
or pages noted in the margin next to each question in the quiz.
1.	ELL: the blue blue (We do not use the with a noun when the noun
eral idea or thing.) (See Key 7.)
2.	ELL: is “> has been (We use present perfect for a past action that contin
(See Keys 2, 3.)
3.	NS: omit at (Including unnecessary prepositions, especially with quest
with where, is a common native error.) (See pp. 313-15.)
4.	ELL: omit to (Modals are followed directly by the simple form of th
infinitive.) (See Key 12.)
5.	ELL: in -> on (We use in with months but on with days and dates.) (Se
6.	NS: of "> have (In native English, have in past modal expressions sot
native speakers often write o/instead of have.) (See pp. 326-27.)
7.	NS: badly -> bad (This is a hypercorrection. An adverb is used after ac
example, behave badly, but feel is not usually an action verb and shou
by an adjective form, not an adverb.) (See pp. 324-25.)
8.	ELL: to pay -> paying (When avoid is followed by an action, it must be
is, an -ing form used as a noun.) (See Key 10.)
9.	ELL: many equipments -> much equipment (.Equipment is a non-coun
means that it has no plural form. In addition, non-count nouns a]
much, not many.) (See Key 5.)
10.	NS/ELL: students “> students' (Native speakers frequently misuse possi
the point where they cannot distinguish students from student's or str
this error is possible by an ELL, a more common ELL error would
student's and students'. In other words, the ELL knows to use some f(
with an apostrophe, but a native speaker may not remember to use an)
all.) (See p. 330.)
Answers for Quiz 2f pp. 5-9
For detailed explanations, refer to the Keys indicated in the margin next to
in the quiz.
1.	C; 2. B; 3. A; 4. A; 5. D; 6. B; 7. D; 8. C; 9. C; 10. A; 11. E; 12. E;
15. C; 16. B; 17. D; 18. A; 19. B; 20. E
For more detailed explanations, refer to the Keys indicated in the margin next
question in the quiz.
1.	Several corrections are possible, change when I watched to While/When 1 wa
ing. The verb watched should be in past progressive tense (was watching) to
that this action was ongoing when it was interrupted by a telephone call.
2.	The correct name of the country is the Netherlands. In general, the can be น5
with country names that seem plural because of “ร, United, Union, King
Republic,
3.	Change other to another. Other is used in the singular only when preceded by
this, or a similar word. Other is used in-the plural before a plural noun. Befo
gular count noun, use another.
4.	The stand-alone question is, "What time is it?" but when this is a noun clause,
rect word order is wh- word + SUBJECT + VERB. The correct answer is what tin
5.	The correct way to negate a verb is to use a form of the auxiliary do. FI ere we
not speak. Verbs that do not use the auxiliary do to negate are the verb to be,
and any verb that already has an auxiliary in it—for example, has gone.
6.	Change has to is. Certain ideas that are expressed by to be + ADJECTIVE in Enj
expressed by to have + NOUN in other languages.
7.	Change looked up them to looked them up. Look up is a phrasal verb. For phras
that contain the word up, a pronoun object must separate the verb and the พ
8.	Change is to has been. Actions that began in the past but are still true use pres
feet tense (has been), not simple present tense (is).
Answers for Quiz 4f pp. 12-13
For more detailed explanations, refer to the Keys indicated in the margin next
question in the quiz.
1.	Yes, there is a rule, which is explained in depth on pp. 186-90. The last soun
verb before you add the letters -ed or -d is what determines whether you pre
the past tense ending as /d/, /t/, or an extra syllable /sd/. In brief, only verbs 1
in the sound of /d/ or /t/ add an extra syllable. For example, add, trade, and
one syllable, but in the past tense, they are pronounced with two syllables.
2.	Present perfect tense is one of the most difficult tenses in English because it F
tiple meanings. At one extreme, it is used for actions that began in the past 1
tinue until now: I have lived here for five years. It is also used for actions that ha
in the recent past but are important to a current situation. In your example
gress has decided to ..., the writer (or speaker) used present perfect to conne
gress's action with a current situation. Other uses for present perfect are disci
greater detail on pp. 79, 104-5, 119-24, 281-82.
3.	In general, adjectives and adverbs that are one syllable (tall, hard) or two ร
ending in -y (heavy, crazy) add -er. All others (modern, comfortable) use the wc
instead. There are a few exceptions. More detailed information is on pp. 283-
Grammar for ELLs consists of a unique set of language issues. ELLs vary in Γ
important ways, including setting (ESL or EFL), learner age (adults or children),
riculum (emphasis on grammar or emphasis on communication), and learner o
tive (academic preparation or survival skills). Because of these and other key facte
is not surprising that ELL teachers approach the teaching of grammar in different ไ
As students, many
adult learners have
expectations about
what a teacher should '
do and what learners
should do; These stu-
dents may prefer the ,
teacher to' be in front
of the room actively
teaching. They may
expect direct grammar
instruction; No one
knows your ELLs better-:
than you, so it is up to
you to gauge your
ELLs' expectations early
in the term.
A Direct Approach in Teaching Grammar
Some teachers .teach grammar directly. Teachers who use the direct approach inc
teachers of grammar classes, composition classes, and even test-preparation classes
TOEFL®). When teaching grammar, these teachers might write the name of the gran
point on the board, explain why the grammar point is important, and then procec
give explanations with relevant examples. An essential element here is to relate the g
mar to students' actual language needs. For example, if you are teaching present pc
tense, think of a real-world use for this grammar point. Perhaps your students wi
completing applications in English for a job or for university admission. If so,
make sure that you include a task in which students work in pairs to interview
other with questions such as, "How long have you lived at your current address'
"Have you ever worked in a similar job (to the one that you are applying for)?"
An Indirect Approach in Teaching Grammar
Other teachers rarely deal with grammar directly, but these instructors are awai
ELL grammar points and make sure that these grammar points are included or 1
lighted in class material whether or not the teacher actually points them out. 1
teachers are most likely not teaching ELL grammar or any ELL language class pc
instead, they are either ELL teachers teaching a special content course, often C!
English for Specific Purposes (or ESP), such as health, tourism, or business Englis.
they are K-12 teachers teaching math, reading, or social studies to mixed class*
both native speakers and ELLs. A good teacher is aware of what a real-world
would be for his or her own students, and that teacher has also thought about พ
ELL grammar issues could potentially be important in the students' writing (or sp
ing or reading or listening) task.
In an ESP course on Business English, for example, ELLs might be studying ho
follow up on a business transaction by writing a thank-you email. Their grammar f
might be on infinitives and gerunds (see Key 10) as they write their messages:
Thank you very much for responding to our query. We are interested in
receiving more information about .... We plan to use your product
provided that we do not need to pay additional taxes or other charges.
and gerunds before, during, or after the task—or even not at all.
ELLs in a K-12 setting could be in any number of classes for different subjects. In
a kindergarten class of native speakers and ELLs, the children might be learning the
song "The Itsy Bitsy Spider." Songs naturally repeat certain lines, which makes their
lyrics a perfect vehicle for learning language patterns. In this particular song, students
learn three regular past tense forms (climbed, washed, dried) and two irregular forms
(1came1 went).
In a fifth grade math class, students might be solving math problems that require
knowledge of many, much, a few, and a little, or even little and few. These words are a
core part of count and non-count nouns, as explained in Key 5. ELLs' ability to answer
a math question correctly may well hinge on a thorough knowledge of these expres-
sions. Obviously, the best teacher to help ELLs here is one who knows that terms such
as many and a little are not simple words but rather part of a much more elaborate ELL
grammar point, whether or not the teacher explicitly teaches these expressions is his
or her choice. At the very least, teachers with several ELLs in the class should have
these words on wall posters (i.e., word walls) to help students become more familiar
with the terms. A good fifth grade math teacher with several ELLs in his or her class
recognizes that the ELLs are likely to have difficulty solving this math problem not
because of any lack of math ability but rather because of English language issues, in
this case count and non-count markers.
Learners' Objectives
Learners' objectives in studying English can range from improving conversation ability
to passing a university entrance exam. Learner's objectives in studying English should
dictate the amount and kind of grammar in their coursework.
In K-12 settings, many students' main objective is to master the material of third
glade science or eighth grade math, but this material is being delivered in a foreign
language, namely English. Knowing ESL grammar can certainly aid them in overall
comprehension. Teachers of these students have two instructional responsibilities: the
subject matter of the course, that is, third grade science, and, simultaneously, English as
a second or foreign language.
At first glance, adult ELLs in a conversation class do not appear to need grammar,
but a well-planned conversation lesson almost always has a grammar point as its
basis. For example, a lesson on talking about occupations might practice the pattern
he/she + is as well as using a/an with an occupation: My brother is a doctor. [Typical ELL
errors here include: no verb (*My brother a doctor), incorrect verb form (*My brother are
a doctor), or no article (*My brother is doctor).]
ELLs in test-prep courses need grammar, too. Two examples of high-stakes tests
are the Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL®) and the Ei-ken in Japan. These
tests are considered high-stakes because good results can lead to better educational
opportunities or employment. To demonstrate a higher-proficiency level on these
exams, students need to recognize and/or use certain grammatical structures such as
present perfect tense. A test question might require students to distinguish a correct
i .เท,esse
■ nothin
langua
music.
: 10, p.
inform
best b(
a vehic
lish pre
Chants
sity Pre
Carolyi
kind of lesson would be to combine two or more shorter sentenc
tence using an adjective clause:
*	The reason is valid.
•	The reason is that they want to cancel the meeting.
-> The reason that they want to cancel the meeting is valid.
ELLs in EFL settings as diverse as China or the United Arab Er
ferent needs. EFL students do not interact much in English out!
people in their country do not speak English. EFL teachers appre
their English teaching has on the development of student proficÍÊ
teachers (e.g„ those in the United States or another English-spea
times mistakenly assume that simply because their students are in
country, they will encounter English outside of class through TV
native speakers. In reality, however, many ELLs in this setting soc
other people who speak the same native language, making the le
more like that of an EFL, not ESL, setting.
Sometimes ESL teachers do not always recognize that they I
source of grammatically correct English input for their students,
consists of ELLs from the same language background, the teacher
English input. The implication here is that the teacher's daily E
much more important role in the English acquisition of ELLs
believe.
Teachers must be aware of ELL grammar problems. If not, ELI
be evaluated as unsatisfactory simply due to ELL errors even thou
normal and natural part of the the English acquisition process. In
tive content and ELL educator in this situation, teachers shoul
grammar structures that their ELLs need to acquire to improve the
if teachers are not aware of what some of these key grammar is
have seen, these grammar issues are not at all the same ones
have—then it is impossible for teachers to build a solid lesson ]
school year that systematically addresses ELLs' grammar needs. (
even the science, mathematics, and physical education teachers
for their ELLs' English language needs and ultimately their 1;
growth.)
Course Logistics
Course logistics have a major impact on how grammar is (or is
English program. Perhaps the single most important issue is the a
able for instruction and study. How many times per week does 1
lasts eight to fifteen weeks, and if ELLs are starting from the beginning level, the
need a year or two to progress through all levels. In these intensive programs, th
riculum is often set up so that there are separate classes for the distinct language
grammar, reading, composition, listening, and speaking. In other programs,
same skill areas are integrated into one course, such as reading/writing or gran
writing.
In programs with classes for each distinct skill, there is overlap and recycl:
material, so a grammar point may be taught explicitly in the grammar class anc
recycled in a composition or other class. Realistically, it is almost impossible to in
a class that focuses purely on one discrete language skill to the exclusion of all ot
In these intensive programs, grammar is covered explicitly in a course
Grammar. Students have an ELL grammar textbook and often a workbook. I
class, students have an opportunity to ask questions that they have about ELL
mar. Their questions are not necessarily limited to the lesson; they may want an
nation of something that they heard at the store, from their child, or on televisil
Adult learners have unique learning constraints. Many adult ELLs work all di
take English classes in the evening. These students' language objectives will var
siderably—from the desire to speak better English to secure a good job in their
country, to learning better English to improve their career chances here in the L
States or another English-speaking country. Restrictive course logistics here inclui
limited class time, which is often a two-hour class meeting on two or three nigh
week, and limited homework time due to students' work and family obligations
ELLs in K-12 face very different course constraints depending on the st
which they go to school, a school district's resources, and even local attitudes ti
immigrant acceptance. Ideally, an ELL in K-12 would have a teacher specialized i
issues, including ELL grammar and assessment. In the real world, however, m
cases where ELLs do have an ELL teacher, the teacher is sometimes a "roving" t(
who works with the ELLs only a few hours per week. As a default, the primary f
of ELL instruction for our ELLs then falls on the content teachers, whose lesson
are already filled with teaching objectives related to their particular K-12 subject
as tenth grade geometry or seventh grade history.
In addition to these course constraints, there looms a larger issue. All
students—including ELLs—and their teachers are often under time const
imposed by large-scale tests such as the Florida Comprehensive Assessment
(FLAT) in Florida, the California High School Exit Examination (CAHSE) in c
nia, or the Texas Assessment of Knowledge and Skills (TAKS) or Reading Profii
Tests in English (RPTE) in Texas. (Every U.S. state now has a similar examinatio
tests language arts and mathematics.) These test results are used by the respective
for a variety of purposes, such as determining whether a student is retained in a
whether a teacher's students have scored well enough for the teacher to receive a
are a number of ELLs taking the test in their school or district,
down the average. Non-native speakers may not be less know
areas, but they often need more time to comprehend parts of tl
cannot finish the work within the allowed time limits. The botti
of fluency impacts their subject examinations, which can have
their teachers, and even their schools. To do their jobs well, tea
distinguish between the content issues and the ELL issues—pr
ELL's paper or test regardless of the subject matter being addres!
Course Location
Course location usually refers to three categories: ESL, EFL, and
as a second language) refers to students who are learning English
country. Thus, ELLs in the United States, Canada, Great Britain,.
lish-speaking countries are said to be studying ESL. ELLs who ;
country where English is not spoken, such as Japan, Colombia,
rates, are said to be studying English as a foreign language (EFL
The reasons for making this distinction between ESL and ;
class, the students often speak different languages, so the prim;
nication in the classroom is English. In an EFL setting, gettin;
English can be more challenging since there is no real com:
English (except that the teacher often requests that ELLs use E:
In addition, ESL and EFL settings will require different
teaching grammar (or any other ELL skill such as reading c
teaching in Japan, a country where ELLs often have a much SI
than in real-time conversations, you will probably need to hi
than traditional fill-in-the-blank tasks to augment this deficii
setting, teachers and materials should make use of locally Imo
in an example that talks about food, food from the home co LI
Malaysia, you could mention durians; in Japan, sushi; and in I
setting, resource materials can reflect the international nature
class. In all teaching settings, however, teaching should be gear
ground and objectives for studying English.
The ESL-EFL dichotomy is very important in teaching grar
it is important to know whether a grammar issue is problem
groups in the class or only for some select groups. For exampl
errors with many and much. (The rule is that many is used with
with non-count nouns: many books, much information. See page
tion.) Because this grammar issue is a more universal problen
whole class makes sense.
a lesson on this grammar point, and because it is problematic for speakers of these
languages, all EFL teachers in these areas will cover this point. In an ESL class with
speakers of several languages, including Spanish, Japanese, Korean, and Arabic, I
would expect to cover this grammar point as a class (because it will be in the ESL
books and is problematic for some of my students); however, I expect my Arabic and
Persian speakers to have the biggest problem with this, not my Spanish, Japanese, or
Korean speakers.
In an ESL class with no Arabic or Persian speakers—that is, with no students for
whom this grammar point is a common error in English—I would skip this part of the
lesson. Likewise, if I were teaching in Japan or Brazil with a book that had a lesson on
pronoun repetition in adjective clauses, I would skip it because these ELLs would
never make this mistake. I would exercise my professional judgment as a teacher to
omit this portion of the lesson on adjective clauses. (I would cover adjective clauses,
but I would skip this one aspect.)
In a K-12 setting, your approach depends on whether you are the ESL teacher or
the content teacher. If you are the ESL teacher, much of the preceding information
applies to you. If you are the content teacher, you will almost never be teaching ELL
grammar explicitly. The material in your class textbook, however, and the language
that you use in class in your teaching and even in your class worksheets play an
extremely important role in the ultimate English proficiency that your ELLs will attain
because you (and your textbook and your explanations and your worksheets) are quite
possibly the primary or even the only source of English input for your ELLs. By default,
you are your ELLs' link to English.
Consider this task from a fourth grade science class:
We learned that there is air in our atmosphere, but is there air in the
ground? How can you find out whether your answer is correctใ Work in
small groups to come up with as many ways to prove your answer as possible.
To the average fourth grade science teacher, this task appears to be a normal part of
the science curriculum. This task does not appear to have any ELL grammar issues. How-
ever, one important ELL grammar point that is covered here is phrasal verbs. Can you
find the two phrasal verbs in this task? They ar efind out and come up with.
It is important to note here that textbook publishers might include key teaching
points in the teacher's edition, so in the previous task, the words atmosphere and prove
might be highlighted because the first word is a key science term and the second word
is a key part of understanding how science works. These boldfaced words are the sub-
ject matter objectives for all students—both native and ELL alike—but for ELLs, this
task also has ELL grammar examples in it that teachers should be ready to exploit for
language development. However, no teacher can focus on something that he or she
does not even recognize. As we have seen, native speakers often have no understand-
ing of what ELL issues are since these speakers did not learn English as a second
Phi
one
cult
poll
issues in their teaching materials quickly and accurately.
Once a non-ELL teacher can easily identify ELL grammar i
ject material, what can the teacher do next? In this example น
important for the teacher to know that phrasal verbs are not 1
sometimes not even to native speakers). The teacher may write
vocabulary word wall in the classroom. The teacher might ma
these phrases more often in the pre-task activities to make SI
what they mean. The more you make your ELLs aware of the
other ELL grammar issues), the more likely your ELLs are to ac(
What I would never do in a fourth grade science class
phrasal verbs. Grammar is not about labels; it is about helpin;
matical patterns of English, a task that is impossible unless )
grammar issues are. (In addition, science class should be first
ence, not English.)
If you could hear a recording of yourself teaching sev
months, you might be quite surprised to discover that you t
same words and expressions repeatedly. This repetition is a
technique, which is why songs are often a good teaching vehii
this for kindergarten ELLs would be the song "Old MacDo
repetitive lyrics of "On his farm, he had a [duck, cow, etc.]" rei
mar issues, including: (I) had as past of have, (2) on + farm [N
in a farm instead of on a farm], (3) use of a/an with singular cc
a quack-quack, etc.), (4) he as subject and his as possessive a
(5) the basic sentence pattern of SUBJECT + VERB + OBJECT !
Grammar is really nothing more than language patterns,
repetitive lyrics might be an obvious example of the use of pa
in all types of English, including the English used in math, sc
and other subjects. Consider these three statements from the
Assessment Test (ECAT) 2007 Mathematics Released Test for 6
1. Samantha baked a dessert for her class using the recipe shot
5.	Mr. Henderson made the table below to show the number 0]
6.	In art class, Rita drew the design below. For her second desit
Look carefully at the word below in these three statements. A
of these sentences would include the words that is, so that #1 V
is shown below, #2 would read the table that is below, and #3 พ
is below. Can you explain why the word shown is in #1 witho
word shown is not the main verb. In ELL grammar, the words
below in #5 and #6 are what we call reduced adjective clausi
information on this ELL grammar point.)
As a native speaker, you realize that both forms are con
include that + is or we can omit it, but there are rules that al
native speaker, you are not conscious of the underlying gramr
be omitted, but you do not make a mistake with this. This pan
appears in the textbook.
The Importance of Grammar in Eight Teaching Situations
Grammar is the glue that holds a language together. Grammar affects all
English language learning, from writing to speaking to reading to listening, c
plays an obvious central role in grammar courses, but grammar is also imp,
ESP courses such as Business English and Tourism English as well as in K-l
lege content courses such as literature, science, and mathematics.
No one knows your subject matter and your ELLs better than you do. It ii
up to you as their teacher to determine how much grammar instruction th
which grammar points to teach, and what kinds of grammar activities are
them. In the remainder of this chapter, we will look briefly at how gram
impact different types of teachers in different teaching situations.
Situation 1. An ELL Grammar Teacher
If you are the grammar teacher, it is obvious that you need to know ELL gram
success of your class depends to a large extent on how well you know ELL gran
how well you are able to develop that knowledge in your students. You should k
grammar points so well that you might be able to identify an ELL's first langua;
types of grammatical errors that he or she makes in English. You should know
pie present tense and basic word order are grammar issues in beginning classes
perfect tense and phrasal verbs are often in intermediate classes, and past peri
and gerunds are seen in higher-proficiency grammar classes.
Situation 2. The Composition Teacher
There are several types of teachers who teach composition, including a K-l2 '
arts teacher, a freshman composition instructor, a composition teacher in an :
ESL or EFL program, or a composition teacher in an English for Academic :
(EAP) program in a university or community college. While the ESL, EFL,
teachers work with ELLs enough to be familiar with ELL errors in writing, ma
and freshman composition teachers are not. The more familiar composition
are with ELL grammar issues, the better they can help their ELLs improve thei
proficiency and writing skills.
When ELLs write in English, they make many types of errors. While E
make just as many errors in their speaking, we tend not to pay as much atti
those errors. Because the act of speaking a message happens very quickly,
words are spoken, they are gone. In contrast, a written message is a permanei
that everyone can see (and continue to see). The error is there and is a deep
visible "event." Therefore, our focus tends to linger on written errors more t
ken errors.
VUWWWUj บ]	บ] CM&bdUA บ] UU6 jury
painting is 0/ light bulb that could also stand ft
Artother details one, 0/ wry unforgetadle, bulb. fl
the· crowded room/ Looks hurt almost dicing or a
words suffereing badly, other details are> hapeu/,
the-plare and a/ sad horse'. The, “guernical’poind
wry interesting and unforgotiMepainting.
It is obvious that the writing sample contains errors. As ;
many factors to consider when providing feedback to the stuc
that you see here, which ones would you mark? Would yoi
How would you mark the errors? Would you just circle the er
correction there for the student?
Teachers who are not accustomed to ELL language prob
spelling errors first. Those errors are very clear in the native ร]
they are very easy to explain. However, what about errors tha
such as * another details and *are happen? Of course you can c
ing other details and happen, but can you explain these error
avoid using grammatical jargon that will more likely confuse
Teachers with English as their LI frequently write the word
student papers. To an ELL, this word is a general cop-out. Nev
on an ell's paper (and probably not on any student's paper),
paper acknowledges what ELLs already know—that their พ]
word awkward is not helpful unless you really think that th
another way to word this and simply chose the current WO]
wording, which is a completely different case of a writer havir
wrong choice. However, if you think that the ELL wrote this
ULUWUCU. 1UU111 ιυυκδ ... 15 appiicauit LU dll siu-ueiiLS, UUL ULiiei errors are UIJ
ELLs and are actually normal errors in the acquisition process of English. L
about ELL grammar will help you differentiate ELL errors from those typicall
by native speakers.
Situation 3. Judging the Readability of Texts
All teachers of all subjects worldwide have to look at a book or worksheet t<
mine if the level of the language or content is appropriate for their students. 1
of ELLs need to be able to look over a reading passage to determine if it is with
students' English proficiency level, whether the textbook in your class deals พ
instruction, tourism English, or social studies, how do you know whether a pa
the right level for your ELLs? what kinds of grammar points might make a
passage beginning, intermediate, or advanced? If you know ELL grammar we
you can look at a passage and gauge the difficulty level for your learners.
Some ELL grammar points do not affect the comprehension of reading f
very much. For example, articles rarely change the meaning of a passage. I
words, their impact is relatively weak.
Example: I ate an apple versus I ate the apple.
In the first sentence, it could be any apple, but in the second sentence, we kn
this was a specific apple, one that had been mentioned somewhere earlier in 1
sage or one that we as the readers are supposed to know about already.
Different languages deal with articles in very different ways. Some langua^
no articles (e.g„ Japanese, Russian, Chinese); others have only definite articl
Turkish, Hebrew, Arabic); and still others have articles that look like those in
but sometimes function differently (e.g., Spanish, French). For example, Russi:
not have any articles, so a Russian student who reads the sentence George has a
may in fact read it and remember it as George has new car unless a knowle
teacher points out that we use a in English in this case. This does not mean 1
teacher should label this inserted word as an indefinite article. Again, gramma
ing is not about students learning grammatical labels. A more effective al
might be to get students to notice the difference between what they have writ
what is in their textbook. Your goal is to get students to notice this "gap" betwe
current English usage and what the target structure looks like in actual usage b’
speakers.
ELLs have a hard time understanding your English, they are
resource to further their English proficiency.
How can you make your language more comprehensible
tions include slowing down your rate of speech, pausing ml
chunks), raising your voice on key ideas, and writing (or I
board as you say them. However, what can you do to the act
speaking? For ELLs to acquire the language and not just the g
speaker ELL instructors need to work on the language they
the content but also the grammar in the language.
One way to simplify language for an ELL is to use easi
vocabulary, but many native speakers do not readily und
structures are difficult. For example, a native speaker will ร;
sort of humid" and upon seeing many blank faces in the clas
saying, "Yes, today's weather is kind of damp."
Using one idiom (kind of) to explain another idiom (sort
analyzing spoken American English, Liu (2003) found that 1
idiom in spoken American English is sort of. what does this
native speakers will answer "kind of," which is ironically the
used idiom. In addition, many native speakers assume th
word difficulty and that damp (one syllable) would be easi(
bles), but that is not at all the case for ELLs. (An easier way t(
is a little. Instead of damp, use feels wet because these words
and are therefore more likely to be known already.)
Another technique to keep your teaching language me
break up longer sentences into more manageable chunks, c
on page 27 of directions from a teacher in a social studies cl:
Class, today we're going to trace the route of Vasco da Gama across the Pacific Ocean to India. (The teacher is pointing at a huge map of the world which is at the front of the class.) Vasco da Gama made several trips toward India, but basically all of his trips followed the route that I'm marking here on the board.	Class, does anyone know the name of the explorer who traveled across the Pacific Ocean all the way around southern Africa and then on to India? (pause) Can any- one tell me the name of this man? (pause; some students guess incorrectly) OK, I will give you a hint, (pause) He was from Portugal. (Some students say, "Vasco da Gama") Yes, that's right. It was Vasco da Gama. OK, here we have a map of the world, (teacher points to the map) Mark, can you come up here and show US where Portugal is? (Mark comes up) Thank you. Yes, this country right here (teacher points) is Portugal. That's where Vasco da Gama was from. Now what about the southern tip .. . the southern point... of Africa? Tanya, can you show US where the southern tip of Africa is? (Tanya comes up to show this) OK, now everyone look at me. Watch me as I draw the route, the path, that Vasco da Gama took on his first trip. OK, we start here at. . . . (teacher pauses and waits until someone says "Portugal") . . . Yes, that's right. We start at Portugal, and then we go south around the west coast of Africa, (teacher draws the route) Yes, this is the route that Vasco da Gama took. Can everyone see this? What direction are we traveling here? (pause) Yes, we're going south. OK, when Vasco da Gama readied the southern tip of Africa, what did he do? (pause; Students offer answers) Did he go back to Portu- gal? (pause) Right, he did not go back to Portugal. He continued. He continued on to India.
As you can see, the second teacher is much more interactive, which is a style that All teach
works well with second language learners because there is more repetition of key lan- learn to'
guage and the teacher is actually engaging the ELLs in a sort of dialogue rather than a respon:
lecture. The pauses are important for learners who simply need some time to consoli- of al1 ag*
date what they have heard. Many teachers, especially novice teachers, do not allow suf- whoTan
ficient wait time for students to respond. In Western society, we tend to be seconds
uncomfortable with silence and often wish to fill this perceived void.	teacher's
Í ELLs resp
Situation 5. All Teachers—observing the Growth of Students' Language reflective^
Regardless of your teaching situation, you want to monitor—directly or indirectly—	ELLs iimc
the progress of your ELLs' English proficiency. One way to do this is to notice specific
language structures that they are first attempting to use and then are actually pro due-
ing correctly. For example, beginning ELLs tend to put a form of be in front of all verbs, possible "1
so they say, * Every day I am go to school. *At school, I am study English. Gradually, this in their I-
be + VERB will give way to just VERB: Every day I go to school. At school, I study English. they atte
The crrcs '.hat we
see in an nil's
interlanguage
refect language
growtli and are ล
nâtLirai,·'paíwBlSS
learning a anguago.
school, I am studying English. A few weeks later, after the ELLs have studied
ent progressive tense—I am eating or I am studying—they might "revert" ti
be + VERB + -ing pattern because many ELLs tend to overuse any structw
have recently been taught and say, * Every day I am going to school. At school,
ing English when they should use only simple present tense.
This flowing in and out of the correct target structure is normal; in fI
name, interlanguage (Seiinker, 1972). Interlanguage refers to the way a struc
by a language learner at any given point of time. For any target structure, in
ranges from no ability to native ability with many points in between these tw
Interlanguage does not develop in a linear fashion; instead, progress can a]
erratic, but this is normal. Your ability to recognize ELL grammar points in
language output allows you to assess ELLs' language progress more accurate!;
Situation 6. All Teachers—Answering ELL Questions
As teachers, we live for that "teachable moment," and there is no bette
moment than one that actually comes from the student. If you have ELLs,
asked questions about English. If you are new to teaching ELLs, you will
stumped by many of these questions that you as a native speaker have
thought about, much less heard or seen. Consider these three exchanges:
Exchange 1
Ke* )	ELL:	Can I say much people?
’I	Teacher:	No, you should say many people.
}	ELL:	Why?
J	Teacher:	Because ... we don't say much people. We say many people.
ELL:	? (puzzled look)
Teacher: OK? (hoping that the ELL will say yes)
NOTE: The teacher has not explained anything.
Exchange 2
Key ) ELL:	Tomorrow I will to go to the movie with my friends.
Teacher: That's great. Tomorrow you will go. (emphasizes will by sayir
J	more loudly)
J ELL:	Yes, to the movie.
Teacher: Yes, I know, but you said you "will to go," but in English, we
use to here.
ELL:	Really? OK, thanks, why not?
Teacher: It doesn't sound right.
ELL:	What do you mean?
Teacher: It's awkward.
NOTE: The teacher has not given an explanation at all.
■ ELL:	My mother is from Philippines.
Teacher: Your mother is from the Philippines, (emphasizes the by saying it
more loudly)
ELL:	The Philippines? I can't say just Philippines?
Teacher: No. You need to say the Philippines.
ELL:	Why?
Teacher: Ummm . . . well... We use the with country names.
ELL:	Like the United States?
Teacher: Yes, exactly.
ELL:	Hmmm ... So I need to say the Mexico and the Saudi Arabia?
Teacher: Well, no. We don't use the with those two countries.
ELL:	Why?
Teacher: Because they're exceptions.
ELL:	Which one is the exception—the Philippines or Mexico?
Teacher: Ummm . . . Well....
NOTE: The teacher does not know the rule. The teacher has confused the student
even more now.
Nothing is better for an ELL teacher than when a question comes from one of our
students instead of our own mouth as we try to plant a question in the class. When
ELLs ask questions about ELL grammar, a prepared ELL teacher is able to answer most
of them. Yes, it is true that all of US get a question that we have not thought of before,
but the examples here are ELL Grammar 101. (Chapter 4 in this book addresses 20
impromptu grammar questions, called Hot Seat Questions, to help you prepare for
these questions.)
Situation 7. An Inquisitive Teacher: Action Research
When you first start teaching anywhere, you will be busy with the ins and outs of your
new school, the students, the paperwork, the testing, school duties, and other daily
tasks. As you gain experience, you will think about better ways to organize your class
or better ways to teach a certain topic. As you experiment with different aspects of your
teaching, you are engaging in what is referred to as action research. In action research,
you, as the teacher and as informal researcher, have a purposeful question in mind—
if I teach these math procedures in a different order, will my students' scores on the state test
be different? You then make the change and thereby conduct an informal experiment
with your new treatment.
If you are not an experienced ELL teacher, the first few times you teach ELLs, you
will make some mistakes. As you gain teaching experience, you will develop better
ways of teaching certain concepts. Because grammar is so important, teachers are
always trying to come up with better ways to teach ELL grammar. To do this, teachers
must first be familiar with basic ELL grammar points, which can be found in this
book, particularly in Chapter 3.
number of u.s. ^bigh ^
schiAl EM
Í úc^ f rom^higH^^fíooí 41
but enter, college’with-
MMHiDADaWotz
English. Generation 1 5
students are similar to.
both first- and second-
generation immigrants.
ELLs in your class, a college instructor of Generation 1.5 students, or a cor
teacher in Greece—should be familiar with ELL grammar issues. Knowledgi
issues makes you better able to help students improve their speaking, writing
ing proficiency in English.
Basic English Grammar:
Usage and Terminology
Section 1 Common Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers
Section 2 Eight Parts ofSpeech
Section 3 Basic Grammar babels for Sentence Structure
Section 4 Why the Twelve English Verb Tenses Matter
Before examining ELL grammar issues, it is important to have a solid
grammar usage and key terminology. This chapter explores some of tl
errors made by native speakers of English as a way to help all teachei
understanding of their native language. As you speak to your ELLs,;
to easily differentiate Standard English from incorrect English. พhi
tions of English do exist, learners hope to attain proficiency in Static
tion 1 includes a short pre-test of 20 common errors made by ท
spoken and/or written English. More information about each error
Appendix 1.
Section 2 reviews the eight parts of speech, the basic buildii
English language. ELL grammar makes use of seven of the traditioi
speech, but ELL grammar is not organized around the parts of speech
that the grammar of native speakers is.
31
reviewed in Section 3. Learning the labels for grammatical concepts, howeve
the same as understanding the underlying patterns within a language. Label·
useful tools for teachers and students, but grammar is much more than labels
fore, you should exercise great care when using these labels in the classroom.
3 also contains a brief overview of sentence structure.
In observing grammar classes over the years, I have seen teacher's confuse
ing a grammar label with giving a good grammar explanation. They are not tl·
In one class, a student asked the teacher a grammar question about a sente!
someone had told him was incorrect. Logically, he wanted to know why his ร
was incorrect.
wish has a spec'il·
grammar for ELLs. See
Key 15 for more infor-
mation on the gram- -
mar of the verb wish.
Student: why is it wrong to say, "I wish I studied more for today's test"?
Why do I have to say, "I wish I had studied more for today's test"
Teacher: Because had studied is past perfect tense.
Student: Excuse me? what?
Teacher: Had is the auxiliary verb, and studied is the past participle, when
you use had as an auxiliary verb with the past participle, that's
called past perfect tense.
Student: OK. [clearly not understanding]
The label past perfect is in fact the correct label for the words had studied. L
the label past perfect is not the grammar explanation here. The correct explar
that native speakers use past perfect tense of a verb after the word wish wher
wishing now about something in the past. Thus, the key component of the (
tion is that the word wish triggers a mandatory verb form, which happens to
perfect tense.
Because verbs occupy a special place in English grammar, Section 4 focuse
twelve verb tenses in English. Just as native speakers of English often have bad
ries of verb conjugations in the various tenses in Spanish, French, or other fore
guage, ELLs find the many English verb tenses to be confusing and at times se
incomprehensible.
Sec. 1: Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers
33
SECTION 1
Common Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers
At one point or another, all of US make grammatical mistakes in our speech and writ-
ing. When we say or write something very quickly, our minds are so focused on the
content of our message that we might pay less attention to our language and inadver-
tently make a grammatical error. A good example of this scenario occurs with email
messages; we may have to answer so many messages daily that we aren't always as
careful as we should be. However, in formal reports, academic writing, and public
speeches, it is imperative that we use correct language so that our audiences pay atten-
tion to our message and are not distracted by our errors.
Teachers expect their ELL students to make mistakes with grammar. Students are
in class to improve their language skills. As teachers, however, we are in a different cat-
egory. What is the impression given when a teacher consistently makes a grammar
mistake not because of time constraints but because of lack of knowledge about the
language? When teachers make grammatical errors on a class handout, quiz, or note
to a student, it does not reflect well on them or their credibility. (Like it or not, teach-
ers are held to a high degree of language accountability.)
To assess your ability with 20 of the most common errors made by native speakers
in spoken and written English, a pre-test follows. Use your results to review the
detailed information on these grammar points, which can be found in Appendix 1.
Take the pre-test on pages 34-35 now, before reading on.
Why Grammar Matters
Many people have a negative image of grammar because they tend to associate gram-
mar lessons with reprimands and warnings about not making certain kinds of errors.
In fact, many of US associate the word grammar with the word don't. Don't say me and
my friend. Don't use ain't. Don't misuse broke for broken.
"What's the big deal with grammar anyway?'' some might ask. The style of lan-
guage that you speak does matter in many situations, and grammar is a key compo-
nent of that style, when we first meet people, we are already forming an opinion
about them. Do they sound educated? Do they sound professional? Do they sound
friendly? The list of questions goes on, and the answers to many of these questions are
based on the kind of language being used, including the number and type of errors in
a person's speech.
To be sure, some errors are judged—fairly or unfairly—as more serious than oth-
ers. Language is spoken by humans, and human perceptions are very subjective. Soci-
ety tells us that some errors are bad, but others are not so serious. For instance, most
people would agree that hearing a person that we do not know say ain't or it don't mat-
ter lowers our perception of that speaker much more than adding the unnecessary
(and incorrect) preposition at in Where do you live at? (Note that all three examples are
incorrect.)
correction above it. (NOTE: Individual stylistics vary conk
these statements could be rewritten with different gramma)
task, however, is to identify parts of the sentences that are
gested time limit: 15 minutes. (Answers are on pp. 86-87.)
1.	It's essential to get the message out to parents that they
times exactly whom their loved ones associate with and
2.	I've encountered a problem when I'm trying to insert a 1
while I'm trying to build a menu list, I'll get an error mi
thing about too much recursion. What does this mean?
3.	Between you and I, this situation is going to have a very
4.	My wife and I look forward to working more with the A
Program. Founded a decade ago by Theodore Jabil and :
tion serves children and families in the Brooklyn area.
5.	I had went to different therapy services, but Pressure Poi
6.	The DC-10 jet cracked into two pieces and came to rest ’
laying on its side.
7.	The campus police department is proud to announce th
long-awaited and revised Student Safety Guide. Note th;
changed to the Annual Report & Safety Guide to reflect:
appropriately.
8.	Team captains are receiving this article because they mi£
to whomever would benefit from it the most.
9.	What the boss don't know won't matter in the end.
10.	If it wouldn't have been raining, the kids could have pla
11.	The jurisdiction that includes these seven heavily popul:
areas should have its boundaries redrawn.
12.	The school board's new plan will not hardly affect the ร
tary school.
13.	According to the author, when people feel stressed, angi
off negative energy. This is why viewing negative events
Similarly, witnessing acts of kindness causes us to feel gi
15.	My opinion is that the manager should of fired those employees on the
16.	Care should be taken when attempting to remove a tick from human sl<
Cover the tick with this liquid for a few seconds. If you apply enough li
the tick will let go on it's own.
17.	A clear advantage that this particular electronic dictionary software has I
competitors is the incredible number of words that can be quickly look
18.	If you want to play on the team, please send me an email letting me kn
your interested. I need your response no later than Saturday.
19.	Krashen came up with the concept of i + 1 to help describe the distance
between a persons language proficiency and the level of the language in
material.
20.	If you are an employee who's contract expires annually and a renewal is
at the beginning of a semester, you may not be entered into the data syf
yet.
21.	Yes, I'm looking for something that is more stable than my current job,
haven't been going to job interviews to much.
22.	Your place was terrific, but I want to say that your warm hospitality and
facilities are what we enjoyed the most and what made the trip so sped
Kate and me.
23.	Applicants may submit their paperwork either in person or via email. N
that the submission method will not effect the committee's decision reg
any application.
24.	This plant can withstand temperatures to five degrees Fahrenheit, which
point at which the plant may loose some or all of its leaves (but still no
the plant).
25.	In a recent ruling by five of the Supreme Court justices, there conclusior
that police should have more authority in some cases.
Your Score: /?5
economic group and that committing these errors tends to ide
member of these groups—rightly or wrongly. (This judgment of
or personality based on the language used is a universal; it is in
English with English speakers.) To be certain, ELLs need to learn
We also need to make a distinction between a true error an
All speakers use different varieties, or levels, of a language when
ferent people. The language that I use in telling a joke to a good
tone, vocabulary, and level of formality than when I am writing a
cation. The key point is that I know the difference between the
have not only sufficient situational awareness but, more importa
proficiency to use one kind of language instead of the other. In
extremes when I wish because I know the difference. I know n
made an informed, conscious choice.
A good concrete example of this distinction is with the usa;
Grammatically, who is a subject and whom is an object. Therefore
helped you? and whom did you help? This grammatical differen
whom is clear. Current usage in the real world is different.
First, no native speaker would ever misuse whom for who: *
native speaker would never say this since the question is when to
to use who.
Language is not spoken in a vacuum; we use it to interact wi
ferent situations, ranging from the very formal to the very info
guage, yes, we could ask, Whom did you help? However, in inforrr
us rarely if ever use whom—even in a sentence like this one where
rect. For most of US, using whom sounds very formal, possibly
"stuck up." In fact, I have never used (or heard) the word whom
in my immediate circle of friends. In contrast, it is quite easy to in
operator at a large firm answering the phone by asking, Good afa
wish to speak with today? If the operator used who, suddenly the i
not seem so formal.
Because it is natural to want to bond with other humans, we
language to try to fit in. When applying for a job at a large comp
formal language possible to sound educated and capable. Flowev
gas station to get our car repaired, we would probably ask, who
ting my car repaired? instead of Whom do I speak with about having t
who instead of whom is appropriate in informal situations; it is Í
rapport in our conversations.
The usage of who/whom illustrates prescriptive grammar vs. descriptive grammar,
scriptive grammar prescribes, or dictates, exactly what should or should not be sa
used. In contrast, descriptive grammar describes how the language is actually being 1
For instance, prescriptive grammar says to use whom for all object positions: ท
would you like to speak with? In contrast, descriptive grammar notes that in cu
usage, Whom would you like to speak with ? is correct, formal language. Descriptive g
mar would also note that in a very formal situation, we would probably begir
question with the preposition [With whom would you like to speak?) and that in 1
informal settings, people would use who [who would you like to speak with?). Not'
levels of formality in this series of questions posed by an operator at a business.
Most Formal With whom would you like to speak?
) เ	Whom would you like to speak with?
Whom do you want to speak with?
Who would you like to speak with?
Who do you want to speak with?
Who do you want to speak to?
T	Who do you want to talk with?
Most informal Who do you want to talk to?
Table 2.1 shows how prescriptive grammarians and descriptive gramma:
might treat three grammar topics.
Table 2.1 Examples of Prescriptive vs. Descriptive Grammar
Grammar Topic	Prescriptive Grammar	Descriptive Grammar
who/whom	Always use who as a subject and whom as an object.	1.	We always use who as a subje 2.	In everyday language, people also use who as an object. In very formal language, we alwi use whom in the object positii 3.	When directly preceded by a preposition, people usually 1 whom.
splitting an infinitive	Never split an infinitive. (Few people would dare to change the opening lines of the TV show "Star Trek" from to boldly go to to go boldly, but from a prescriptive viewpoint, only the second option is correct.)	1. People often split infinitives with adverbs of manner (to quickly exit) or adverbs of degree (to almost double).
agreement	somebody are always	2. When trj
with everyone	singular, when referring to indefinite	correct- writing,
	pronouns, use his. (Many people find the use of his to be sexist. To sound less sexist, it is possible to use the phrase his or her.)	phrase h its repeti awkwarc
Does this mean that if enough people say something,
descriptive grammar and acceptable to say? Every languag
usage rules (hence the term prescriptive grammar). These rules Í
sidered normal by educated speakers within that language £
mar views language as finite; descriptive grammar account
consequently acknowledges that over time, language usage V
Maybe some day whom will disappear completely, and all spe:
one have their ID ใ without any grammar guilt pangs.
Having discussed and acknowledged the two camps of pr
tivism, the bottom line is that in professional settings and,
demic settings in which we teach, language accuracy does m;
spoken language allows more flexibility, written language do<
writing are right there in front of our readers' eyes. Readers wi
tion, socio-economic status, professionalism, and even intelli
of errors we make in our writing.
The pre-test on pages 34-35 and Appendix 1 examine 2
native speakers. The errors are presented in two groups. The f
that appear in both spoken and written English, while the
errors that appear more commonly in written English. The I
occur for different reasons, but all are considered grammatica
late some aspect of grammar (as opposed to spelling or pron
(e.g., Where do you live at<T) 2.	I, me 3.	myself (reflexive pronouns) 4.	past participles and past tense (e.g., gone, went) 5.	lie, lay 6.	whoever, whomever (or who, whom) 7.	he/she/it don't* 8.	if I would have known* 9.	double negatives 10.	bad, badly 11.	them, those	13.	it's, its, its'* 14.	your, you're 15.	'ร 16.	who's, whose 17.	to, too, two 18.	affect, effect 19.	lose, loose 20.	they're, there, their
NOTE: More detailed information can be found in Appendix 1.
While it is true that some of these errors are considered more egregious th;
ers, no real effort has been made to rank these 20 topics in terms of severity. Wh
are applying for a teaching job, any error in your cv—even just one—will be
and will impact your chances of getting the job that you want.
Your goal is to recognize these usages as incorrect English. You are an ext
important source of English input for your EEEs. Because your students will 1
you as a model of good language usage, your ultimate goal is to avoid makin;
common errors.
SECTION 2
Eight Parts of Speech
For many people, the eight parts of speech are the cornerstc
Native speakers from elementary school to high school leal
eight parts of speech along with numerous examples and US
will review the traditional eight parts of speech. To determine
two pre-tests follow to help you recognize where to concentre
Pre-Test 2: Eight Parts of Speech
Without looking ahead, list the eight parts of speech. D
example. Suggested time limit: 10 minutes. (Answers are or
1.	_________________________________________________
2.	__________________________________________________
3.	__________________________________________________
4.	_________________________________________________
5.	__________________________________________________
6.	__________________________________________________
7.	_____________________________________________________________________________
8.
Formative Years:
Children’s Health in the United States, 1880-2000
Alexandra Minna Stern and Howard Market, Editors
Much has changed in (D the lives of children, and in the health
@ care provided to them over the (D past century. We like the book
Formative Years © because it explores how children's lives have become
© increasingly medicalized, (D traces the emergence of the fields of p
atrics, and offers © fascinating case studies of important and (ริ) time
issues.
(ริ)With contributions from historians and physicians, ©this colie
illuminates some of the most important @ transformations in © chile
health in the United States since the 1880s. opening with a history of
atrics as a © medical specialty, the book © addresses such topics as th
mulation of normal growth curves, Better Babies contests @ at county
the "discovery" of the sexual abuse of children, and the political radic
of the founder of pediatrics, Dr. Abraham Jacobi.
One of the first long-term historical and analytical @ overviews of
pediatrics and child health in the twentieth century Formative Years will
© welcome addition to © several © fields, including the history of
medicine and technology, the history of childhood, modern บ.ร. history
women's history, and American studies. @ It @ also has ramifications
policymakers concerned with child welfare @ and development and
@ poses important questions @ about the direction of children's hea
in the (25) twenty-first century.
nouns, conjunctions, prepositions, and interjections. In real:
can be divided into many more than eight parts of speech, I
past has almost always been to name only eight categories. .
include articles (a, an, the), determiners (some, any), demor
that, these, those), and possessive adjectives (my, your, his, ht
grammar books for native speakers actually consider these grc
gories. Because all of these categories modify a noun, which
adjectives, these four categories are traditionally not consil
speech but rather types of adjectives in grammar books for na
these subcategories are important because their grammatical b
Unlike other countries that rely on a central Ministry or D
that is in charge of producing a national curriculum, the Unit
of its control of content to state and local school commissic
much more diversity in what is actually taught in บ.ร. schoi
this diversity, the eight parts of speech are taught pretty much
coast, and the definitions that are taught—from a multitude
numerous publishers—tend to be very similar.
Before reading further, let's consider the example of just f
speech—namely nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs. On Pre-
did you write for the definitions of a noun, a verb, an adjectiv
Once you have done this, discuss your responses. If you an
the state, province, or country where everyone in class went to
groups, you will be amazed at the geographical distribution,
that no matter whether you went to school in Colorado or I
tend to be fairly uniform.
What did you write for the meaning of a noun ใ Most peof
they studied this concept years ago—invariably say that a nou
son, place, or thing." Some people may also add, "or a feelir
how many people in your group said "a word that names som
is also possible, but hardly anyone says this.
What about a verb? How many people said, "a word thi
people may say, "action, being, or state of being." No one
though this definition is also possible.
In traditional grammar, an adjective is usually defined as
noun," but another good definition would be "a word that de
or pronoun."
Adverbs are perhaps the trickiest of all the parts of speec
seems to be a dumping ground for a lot of very different kind
that an adverb is "a word that modifies a verb, an adjective, or
you say modify instead of describeใ
For whatever reason, no matter where we learned the eigh
tend to know a very similar wording of the definition. We saj
Multiple Approacnes to Explaining me rarts or apeecn
As we have just seen (and have been taught all our school lives), the most
way to teach someone about a given part of speech is to give a definition. Ir
to a traditional definition, teachers can also provide an example phrase O]
where only one part of speech can be used. This kind of approach is called
filler" grammar because we create a slot that could usually—if not (ideall
be filled with one part of speech. (Sometimes even just a portion of a wo
used in lieu of a phrase or full sentence to create the slot.)
We already said that a noun is the name of a person, place, thing, or feel
are some slots, that would allow for nouns but not verbs or adjectives or an
of speech? What are some slots that will help ELLs visualize what a noun is
slot, we assume we are putting only one word.)
1.	I have a.______
2.	a____________
3.	the______
4.	five	______
5.	My favorite hobby is.______
Sometimes what looks like a good slot for one part of speech is problf
teaching because another part of speech can also fit. For example, a seemi:
slot of nouns is_ร because we can insert nouns such as cat (-
(-Ebooks), and car (->cars). However, we can also insert verbs such as eat (4
take (-Stakes). Since our goal is to help learners understand what makes ea
speech unique, we need slots that do not overlap or that have as little 1ΌΟΠ
lap as possible.
Sometimes slots that seem logical to you as a native speaker of Englis]
produce the same conceptualization in the mind of ELLs because that part
works differently in their languages. In Japanese, for example, adjectives hav
forms and past (tense) forms, which means that for Japanese speakers lear
lish, the line between verbs and adjectives may be obscured. A slot such as
I_ed" works in English for verbs only, but to a Japanese ELL, this 1
also hold an adjective. It is not essential that you know all of these linguist!
regarding how different languages treat the parts of speech. However, whe
coming up with slots that are appropriate for your learners, keep in mind tilt
fused faces of your ELLs might be due to interference between their native
and your particular example slot, so be prepared to present multiple examp:
For each of the parts of speech, we will look at traditional definitions
common, productive slots to illustrate their usages. Skilled teachers are able
parts of speech (or any aspect of grammar) in multiple ways to accommO'
learning styles.
Common ELL Errors	Examples
omission of plural -s	*five girl
unnecessary plural -s	* every girls
wrong noun ending	*enjoyation
plural of non-count nouns	*many equipments
no article with count nouns	*1 have cat.
the with abstract nouns	Be brave. *You must have the
not capitalizing proper nouns	*1 was born in guadalajara it
what is a noun?
A noun is the name of a person, place, thing, or quality,
person: a girl, a driver, Kevin
place: a park, a city, Boston
thing: tennis halls, milk, a Toyota
quality: friendship, joy, confidence
What questions does À noun answers the. que Question	1 noun answer? stions who or what. Answer (= noun)	
Who took the money? What did you eat? What are possible slot	Tohn took the money. 1 ate salmon. 8 for a noun?	
Slot	‘		Examples
1 see an			apple, igloo, Audi; ostrich
She is a 			driver) grandmother, meet
There are four			reasons, people, assignme
the· .ไ '1 - -	''		title, money, equator, Phil
	is important		oxygen, kindness, exercisil

Common Nouns	. Proper Nouns
a princess	Princess Diana
a city	Los Angeles
a day	Friday
a product	a Toyota
A common ELL error is to use lowercase letters with proper ท
write sentences such as *My parents grew up in miami and *The mos
document is the declaration of independence.
What is the difference between concrete nouns and abstract noun
Nouns can be further divided into concrete and abstract nouns. 1
noun is a noun that you can perceive with your five senses. That is, y
it, hear it, smell it, taste it, or feel (physically touch) it. In contrast, Í
noun names an emotion, idea, or quality. An abstract noun cairn
ceived with any of the five senses.
Concrete Nouns	Abstract Nouns
(I saw a) sunset.	patience
(I heard some) cats.	childhood
(I smelled your) cologne.	justice
(I tasted the) doughnut.	humor
(I felt a gentle) breeze.	success
A common ELL error is to use the definite article the with absti
ELLs write sentences such as, *You must have the patience and * We real
justice for everyone.
Nouns can also be divided into count and non-coti
implies, a count noun is a noun that you can count, พ
singular form and a plural form. Count nouns include
child (1 child, 15 children). In contrast, a non-count ท
cannot count. A non-count noun has only one form an
in front of it. Non-count nouns include homework, mi
tion, and traffic. (NOTE: Non-count nouns are also calle
Count Nouns	. Non-Coun
assignment	homework
fact	information
machine	machinery
A common error occurs when ELLs assume that i
noun that is actually a non-count noun. They write sen
many homeworks and * Thank you for the advices.
Verbs
Common ELL Errors	Examples
misuse of have for be	*We have hungry now. Let's
lack of verb endings for 3rd person singular	*The teacher drive a Toyota.
problems with auxiliary verbs in negating	*My sister no lives in Texas
problems with auxiliary verbs in questions	* Why you need more medic
wrong verb tense: present tense for present progressive	*She can't go now because ร
wrong verb tense: present tense for present perfect	*How long do you live here
verb tense switches	*In this story, the main char married his sweetheart (Can they have three children. Th a famous doctor, but the yor go to medical school, too.
lack of direct object for a transitive verb	The dinner was great. *We e
use of infinitives after modals	*1 believe that everyone shoi language.
What is a verb?
A verb shows action or being (existence). A verb is the heart of any Engli
sentence.
action:	' run, eat, prepare, destroy, ask
being (existence): be (am, is, are, was, were)
What question does a vei A verb answers the questior Question 1	b answer? 1, What does/did [the subjecti do? Answer (- verb) 1’;; -	,	
What does a dog do? What do you do? What did Jo and Bob do? What are possible slots f You can conjugate a verb, ร	/Itbarks.' ,J ’ ■ ■	_ I teach. . They complained to the manager. or a. verb? ว possible slots include:	
Slot		Examples
I / you / we / they			work, worked, take, took
he / she / it -	ร		works; takes, needs, seems
Yesterday I	ed		worked, wanted, needed, seemed
I didn't	it		have, take, need, like
Details of Verbs
• What are the principal parts of verbs?
Verbs have four principal parts: base form, past, past participle, an<
participle. For regular verbs, the past and past participle forms use 1
-ed. Irregular verbs use a variety of forms, including the suffixes -en ai
well as internal vowel changes or no change at all.
Regular Verbs	Base	Past	Past Participle	Present Panic
	work	worked	worked	working
	rob	robbed	robbed	robbing
	flash	flashed	flashed	flashing
	copy	copied	copied	copying
Irregular Verbs	Base	Past	Past Participle	Present Panic
	take	took	taken	taking
	go	went	gone	going
	sing	sang	sung	singing
	cut	cut	cut	cutting
vero tenses are vero structures mat ten me time or me
verb. There are twelve verb tenses in English: simple p:
tense, simple future tense, present progressive tense,
future progressive tense, present perfect tense, past per
tense, present perfect progressive tense, past perfect pro;
perfect progressive tense. (See pp. 74-83 for example.)
•	What is the difference between transitive and intrans
Transitive verbs must have an object for their action, a:
never have an object for their action. For example,
because you must put an object after it. You cannot say
restaurant. You must say I like the book or I didn't like I
Likewise, consist is an intransitive verb because you cam
You cannot say *The story consisted three parts or
cjuestions.
In a dictionary, verbs that are only transitive are usu
ters vt, verbs that are only intransitive by the letters พ่1
both transitive and intransitive by the letter V. Considi
three categories:
transitive verbs (vt): like, love, kill, take, make, fun
intransitive verbs (viy.die, occur, happen, arrive, thru
both (v):	read, move, study, watch, open
There is a special category of intransitive verbs calle
verbs do not express action. As their name implies, li
subject to additional information in another part oi
verbs are followed by adjectives, not adverbs.)
Linking verbs: appear, become, feel, get, go, grow, loo 1
smell, sound, stay, taste, turn, and (ar
•	What are auxiliary (or helping) verbs?
Most sentences have verbs that consist of one wore
examples:
The earth reveals much about its past through natui
Together with southern Mexico, Belize, Hondur;
small Central American nation of El Salvador is h
Mayan ruins.
In other cases, the verb is actually a verb phrase cons'
word, such as in The cost of living has been rising sharpl
a main verb (rising), which is usually the word that ca
verb phrase, and one or more helping or auxiliary vt
study the most common helping verbs, which are forn
well as modals.
were, be, being, and been. Remember that a form of be can also be ti
in a sentence. (See pp. 77-78 and 81-83 for more information 01
tenses.) Initially, ELLs have a problem remembering the different
Later, ELLs internalize the forms of be so well, especially I am, you เ
they end up learning to use SUBJECT + be when in fact they real
subject. Therefore, it is common for ELLs at the intermediate level
tence such as, *1 am drive this kind of car because it is get really good
Be as Auxiliary Verb	Be as Main Ver
(la) Our fifth-graders are studying the chemical properties of water this week, (main verb = studying, from study)	(lb) For bulk buying at พ clubs, non-perishabl often at unbeatable ] (main verb - are, fro
(2a) Medical scientists have been working on better ways to use ocean plant life to produce mir- acle drugs against cancer, (main verb = working, from work)	(2b) Oil has been the mai Saudi Arabia for seve now. (main verb - bi be)
(3a) In the experiment, the water is heated in the dish for approximately twelve minutes, (main verb - heated, from heat)	(3b) Together with southe Honduras and Onate small Central Amerk of El Salvador is hon intriguing Mayan rui verb - is, from be)
(4a) Arizona was admitted to the บ.ร. in 1912. (main verb - admitted, from admit)	(4b) Arizona was the 48th enter the บ.ร. (main from be)
There are three forms of do that are possible as auxilia
A form of do is used as an auxiliary verb when the ve
(a question), negative, negative imperative (comn
emphasis, as in I do need more money). Remember tha
the main verb in a sentence. The use of the auxiliary d
Do as Auxiliary Verb	Do
(la) How many cups of sugar does the recipe call for? (main verb = call, from call) (interrogative)	(lb) Accord] he does relaxes from de
(2 a) We took the bus, but we did not save much money at all. (main verb = save, from save) (negative)	(2b) The tax by takii lobby, from de
(3a) Don't do the dishes now! (main verb - the second do, from do) (negative imperative)	(3b) Do you do, fror
(4a) Yes, you do need a jacket today. Put it on! (main verb = need, from need) (emphatic)	(4b) Parents some c want. ( do)
• Examples of Have
There are three forms of have that are possible as auxi
had. (See pp. 79-80 for more information on perfec
have can be a main verb as well. ELLs are confused b
have problems when have is used as both auxiliary an
had several meetings today or If I had had a cell phone, I
Have as Auxiliary Verb	Havt
(la) Without a doubt, my parents have been the most important influence in my life, (main verb - been, from be)	(lb) My cats verb - hl
(2a) Nicole Kidman has devised a strategy to keep herself in the public eye. (main verb = devised, from devise)	(2b) Consisti] cirrus clc approxir sea level. have)
(3) Scientists in Hawaii say that Mars has had at lea!
during the past five million years, (auxiliary vert
had, from have)
UI upiijLiuijLü 111 cl vtiu puidac. iviuucti VCIUS Iiiciuue. บนท, บบนเน, may, migiu, musb,
will, would, should, and shall. Modal verbs are never main verbs; they are always
used with a verb. (Modal verbs are difficult for ELLs and are covered extensively
in Key 12.)
Modal	Examples
can	You can do anything if you try.
could	Could you tell me where the produce is?
may	You may go to see the park if you want.
might	It might rain tomorrow.
must	You must have been joking when you told him that.
should	Should we eat now or wait till later?
will	How will you get from the airport to your apartment?
would	I would not eat that if I were you.
shall	Shall we sit here for a while?
Λ เก ทา
Ame
shal
than
’ Shàl
; resti
quês
■pern
- in ร/
■ Shah
Pronouns
Common ELL Errors	Examples
omission of subject pronouns	My favorite city is Boston. *Is very special place to me.
confusion of he and she	Do you know my uncle? *1 think that she is your neighbor.
pronoun reference	Cars are important. * People need it in today's world.
double subject pronoun	*My sister she is a good swimmer.
unnecessary object pronoun	*A computer is something that all students need it.
plural of indefinite pronouns	* Everyone were very happy.
A pronoun IS a word mat can replace, or substitute tor,
<^rego^)is:on the western coast of the United States.(it)is
noun	r > โ „ pronoun
whal questions does a pronoun answer?
Λ pronoun performs the same function as a noun, so a
same questions that a noun answers, namely who or wl
Question	Answer (= pronoun)
Who lives there?	They do.
what is the answer?	It is 42.
What are possible slots for a pronoun?
Pronouns occur in similar slots as nouns, so possible ร]
Slot '	- '	Examples
(a person) am/is/are hungry. ’ ‘ ‘	want/wahts tbr eat now.	1, You, Lie, Sh
Maria sees (a person). - Can Maria see	, too?	me, you,, him
Dr. Smith is the professor - ■■■ we like the most.	whom, that
Dr. Smith is the professor	 helped US the most.	who, that
The flight arrived late,		 caused US many problems.	which
Details of Pronouns
• What are the different kinds of pronouns?
A subject pronoun is a pronoun that can be the subj
she, it, we, or they. A common ELL error is to confuse
from Morocco. *He speaks French and Arabic.
An object pronoun is a pronoun that can be the d
or object of a preposition: me, you, him, her, it, US, or th
to use a subject pronoun in an object slot, as in, *Thes
A relative pronoun is a pronoun that connects
sentence: who, that, which, and whom. A common
instead of that in adjective clauses, as in, *1 want ft
bought last week.
one, nothing, or nobody. A common ELL error is to confuse the various indefinite
pronouns. An ELL might say, *1 needed help, but anyone helped me or *1 read any-
thing interesting in today's paper. In addition, ELLs mistakenly assume that indef-
inite pronouns are plural, so they say * Everyone have a TV or * Everything you
need are here.
A reflexive pronoun is used when a word refers to the same subject: myself,
yourself, himself, herself, itself, ourselves, yourselves, and themselves. A common ELL
error is the use of youself instead of yourself or the misuse of yourself instead of
yourselves.
A demonstrative pronoun stands in lieu of a specific thing (or person): TI
this, that, these, or those. ELLs make mistakes with number such as *this books or ■ pi
* these reason.	is
A possessive pronoun refers to a thing or person and its owner: mine, yours, ริ
his, hers, ours, and theirs. Sometimes ELLs use the definite article with possessive
pronouns and say, *Your shirt is new, but the mine is really old. Note that all pos- fa
sessive pronouns except mine end in -s, but one form is used for both singular ■ á
and plural: my book - mine, my books = mine; her book - hers, her books = hers.
Adjectives
Common ELL Errors	Examples
misplacement after nouns	* China is a country big.
making adjectives plural	""These books are very cheaps.
wrong comparative form	* China is more big than India.
lack of adjective ending	*In the summer, the weather here is very rain.
What is an adjective?
An adjective is a word that describes a noun or pronoun.
good, tallest, green, slow, Russian, delicious, problematic, national, expensive
What questions does an adjective answer?
An adjective answers the questions which, how many, how much, or what kind.
Question	Answer (= adjective)
Which? How many? How much? What kind?	The green book is mine. There are six children in her family. No one received any mail today. Raw milk can be dangerous.
In English, adjectives have two general locations in a sentence. Adjective
precede nouns (a difficult lest) or they come after to be (the น’.st is difficult
or a linking verb (the lest seems difficult).
Slot	Examples
รุa? a พ รุรุพฺรุรุ รุรุรุpeispmW พ-พ	happy, honest, short, smart
MMNWAMbMMUWIMAAM	a, the, my, this, (hick, which
■ ■' .■■·■·■■··.■ 1 ·■■ books	some, (he, my, these, French, purple
รุWisU^ •รุรุ··พฺรุพ:รุรุรุพฺรรุพรุรุพฺรุ	awake, important, essential, blue
■พน:!(30 k:รุรุรุพพรุรุ••รุรุรุรุรุรุรุรุรุรุ	tired, good, nervous, different .
Details of Adjectives
• What makes articles difficult for ELLs?
Articles are a difficult type of adjective. There are three kinds of article
ing indefinite articles (a, an), the definite article (the), and the zet
which simply means no article is used, as in I like tea or Tigers are wil
Articles are very difficult for ELLs to acquire and are covered in greater
pp.179-84.
. MariyiLL. books have ÍI
lesson UN how to
sequence three or
four adjectives.
Skip th.■.ร impractical
lesson and foc.js on
the more comrion
prohem of plac'ng
adjectives after nouns
inSteadtBb®rSft''O
them, as in *a story
sod. เท spo<en English,
we usually jse on'y
one adjective wit;; ะเ รุ
noun—if we use any at
ah. เท contrast, the use
of multiple adjectives
before a noun :ร more ■
common in written - ·
Erigib เารุ'รุ·ร พ·;■พ····:
•	What makes possessive adjectives difficult for ELLs?
Possessive adjectives include my, your, his, her, its, our, their. Sometimes
fuse his and her or they attempt a plural form before a noun, such as *c
•	What makes demonstrative adjectives difficult for ELLs?
Demonstrative adjectives include this, that, these, those. Common I
include using this or that with a plural noun (e.g., *that numbers) or t
or using those with a singular noun (e.g., * these woman) or a non-co
(e.g„ * those information).
•	What makes quantity adjectives difficult for ELLs?
Quantity adjectives include numbers and words such as many, mu
a little. Common ELL errors include omission of a plural marker (e.
animal) or using the wrong quantity word for a count or non-count ท
*many money, *much ideas).
•	What makes descriptive adjectives difficult for ELLs?
Examples of descriptive adjectives include beautiful, stormy, green.
errors include using a noun as a descriptive adjective (*You have a beam
using the wrong suffix to create an adjective (*stormed weather). The II
mon error is placing descriptive adjectives after nouns (e.g., *a book inte
rarely have a problem with this grammar. The general rule is that adjectives
come in this order: (1) opinion, (2) size, (3) age, (4) shape, (5) color, (6) ori-
gin, (7) material. In actual English samples from native speakers, only one
or two adjectives is used, so ELLs should generally be told to use no more than
two adjectives in a row.
Adverbs
Common ELL Errors	Examples
lack of adverb ending	* He plays the violin very beautiful.
misplacement of adverbs	*1 like very much this food.
wrong adverb forms	*The professor explained the lesson detailly.
underuse of advanced adverbs of degree	not advanced: Gas prices have risen a lot. advanced: Gas prices have risen sharply.
use of much and very much in affirmative statements	not usual: I want to learn Spanish very much, more usual: I really want to learn Spanish.
What is an adverb?
An adverb is a word that modifies a verb, an adjective, or another adverb.
Modifying a verb:	Gas prices have risen sharply.
Modifying an adjective:	The company reported sharply lower profits.
Modifying an adverb:	Gas prices have risen very sharply, ? < 7
What questions does an adverb answer?
An adverb answers the questions how (manner), พ/ใβท, where, how and
how much (and io what degree).	'	'
in ธ
a ร^
or li
thal
but
For
desi
to L
moi
Question	Answer (= adverb)
How?	Evidence indicates that ocean levels are slowly rising.-
When?	The news was announced yesterday.
Where?	The accident happened downtown at dusk.
How often?	The library usually has story hours for children at noon.
How much?	The exam was extremely difficult for the students.
me movie was	sad.	very, extremely, somev
We	drink coffee.	always, never, sometirr
	, it began to rain.	Fortunately, Llnexpectc
Details of Adverbs
•	What are adverbs of manner?
Adverbs of manner tell how something happens. Exam
fully, and rudely. They usually end in -ly; some commoi
slow, and hard. Both slow and slowly are correct adverb fc
fit some situations, as in People are slowly feeling the efj
may confuse the adverbs hard and hardly, which have Vf
A common ELL error involves placement of these
general, adverbs of manner occur after the main verb i:
but after the direct object if there is one. ELLs often mt!
of manner between the verb and the direct object am
tences such as, *You know very well Spanish or *The sti
exam.
•	What are adverbs of frequency?
Adverbs of frequency include always, usually, often, som I
never. A common ELL error involves placement of the!
In general, adverbs of frequency come before main verl
for several months in a row) but after be, modals, and ai
ings are usually held in the morning).
•	What are adverbs of degree?
Adverbs of degree include almost, hardly, extremely, and
problem is the overuse of very instead of other adverbs <
mon error is with placement in a sentence. Adverbs of I
before an adjective or adverb (the plans are extremely Cl
main verb (she almost spilled the soup).
Conjunctions
Common ELL Errors	Examples
lack of conjunction	*The exam was difficult, I did not do well.
lack of punctuation	*The exam was difficult so I did not do well.
extra conjunction (double)	* Although I watched the movie, but I did not enjoy it.
fragment	Our flight to Bolivia was delayed. * Because the weather was really bad.
What is a conjunction?
A conjunction is a word that connects parts of a sentence together.
Conjunctions link words, phrases, and clauses.
linking words:	I sec|a cat] and I a dog]. .
linking phrases: The cat might be ]on the bed] or kinder the sofa!.
linking clauses:	|The cat coüldõT walk] because ^Ithad a broken leg].
What are possible slots for a conjunction?
Slot		Examples
We want a (noun) 				a(noun)	and, or
The food was cheap			good.	and, but -	’·
ไ went inside			it began to rain.	because, when, as soon as, after, before
We want 	tea ''		coffee.	both'. . and, either ... or, neither . . . nor
.เท
: is
.พ
V(
c
- in
(a
“st
st
ar
pl
cc
SI
Tl
; S)
fc
st
hi
El
(2
•	a
UI
•th
•	SL
. V€
•	what are coordinating conjunctions?
A coordinating conjunction is a conjunction that jo
independent clauses: for, and, nor, but, or, yet, and so. (An
these seven conjunctions is the mnemonic device FAN
error is to omit a comma between two independent clau
takenly write, * Mexicans use the word tú for you but Argem
•	What are subordinating conjunctions?
A subordinating conjunction is a conjunction that ir
clause and explains its relationship to the main part
although, as, because, before, how, if, once, since, than, though
where, whether, or while. Some ELLs incorrectly attempt
conjunction and a coordinating conjunction in the same
factory was profitable, but the company has decided to relocate
mon ELL (and native speaker) writing error occurs when
clause. A subordinating connector with a dependent <
sentence fragment: *iBecause the restaurant did not have t
p. 73 for more information on fragments.)
•	What are conjunctive adverbs?
Conjunctive adverbs are transitional devices that COI
consequently, however, likewise, moreover, nevertheless, non
larly, or therefore. These adverbs are used in the second o
the correct punctuation options include
Punctuation Pattern	Examples
Sentence 1; conjunctive adverb, sentence 2.	Great minds de however, it fail
Sentence 1. Conjunctive adverb, sentence 2.	Great minds de However, it fail
• What are correlative conjunctions?
Correlative conjunctions occur in pairs and connect eq:
both . . . and, either ... or, neither . . . nor, not only . .
whether ... or. ELLs make few errors with these conjun
not make use of them enough.
common Í5JLJL· nirurb	
confusion of at/on/in with times	*in Monday, *on June, *at 1990
confusion of at/on/in with places	*in McDonald's, * in Main Street, *011 her office
lack of preposition	*1 am waiting tire bus.
extra preposition	*How can we avoid for any problems?
wrong preposition	*The car is full from gasoline right now.
What is a preposition? ·	.	A 9<j
Λ preposition is a word that shows the relationship between a noun (or pro- teac
noun) and the rest óf the sentence. Λ preposition is usually one short word	|earr
(at, on, with) 1 but some prepositions consist of two words (according to) or	tion
three words (in spite of). Many people mistakenly assume that prepositions	squil
are easy because prepositions are often one-syllable words that are very com-	tree'
mon. 'rhe truth is that prepositions are perhaps one of the most difficult
grammatical points in English because they have multiple meanings that do I). J
not translate well from language to language.	squil
The combination of a preposition with its object (and any modifiers or tree,
describing words} is called a prepositional phrase (in the room, on, my birth- thro
day, from the sixth floor). Prepositions have many purposes, but-they .often give tre®·
us information about place (in Canada), time (at 9 PM), and direction, (from	bott
the ocean), .	r-	.»	. -	bott
Λ longer list of prepositions can be found on pp. 164-67, but here is a list aroL
of some of the more common prepositions: about, After, at, because of before,	over
between, by, except, for, from, in, 'in front of, in place of, in spite of, instead of,_like,	hetv
1 of, on', on top of,since, to, and with.	r	1
What are the possible slots of a preposition?	'	“๓
, , -	- /	— 7- .	-	-	.	lean
What are the possible slots of a preposition?
Slot	Examples
The sqftifrel ran- 7- 7 thfe treé; ■ - *	'up? down,' through	· ‘	'
The ant is	the bottle.	"under, by, before’
The bird flew	the bushes.	around,, over, under
What is the name	the book?	' of, on, in" '	'
• why are prepositions difficult for ELLs?
A simple explanation is that prepositions are notoriously
ply means that a preposition can have numerous mea
than 30. Table 2.2 shows the eight most common Englii
General Service List (West, 1953) along with their respect
from the unabridged dictionary.com reference tool. (Nc
ings are included; thus, from an ELL's point of view
meanings is certainly higher.)
Table 2.2 The Polysemy of the Most Frequent ]
Rank	Preposition	Numb Mean
1	of	1
2	in	8
3	to	2:
4	for	3:
5	with	Γ
6	on	3(
7	at	It
8	by	2;
To be certain, other parts of speech can also be pol
the noun book can be something to read, a written recoi
of items, such as stamps or matches). Consider these ter
in the parking lot, in January, in time, in the hospital, in th
in a hurry, in love, and in the universe. From an ELL point
in meaning here are more nebulous and therefore ha
cases, the "meaning" of a preposition is really based OI
seen in context.
Different languages handle prepositions different
they come after the noun, and are therefore postposit
guages, the meaning of the preposition may be expresse
a separate word. Though these differences exist, what g<
tion problems for ELLs is usage, not location, of the pr
Japanese ELLs, whose native language uses postpositior
= desk on - on (the) desk], rarely write *The book is the
ELLs, they are more likely to make a mistake in usage a
the desk or *The book is in the desk (when the book is de
Each of these "meanings," or usages, of prepositic
word in ano ther language. Therefore, when a teacher t(
an ELL by giving one meaning or definition—"Class, in
usages that often include prepositions.
What are the different kinds of prepositions?
There are many specific kinds of prepositions, including preposi
tion (in the box), prepositions of time (at 10:30), and prepositions
(from the office). The choice of preposition depends on the type o
type of time, or the type of movement. Other prepositions are c
the adjective, noun, or verb that comes before them: the exact ai
ested in, fond of, perplexed by), the exact noun (the center of, the tea
of/in), or the exact verb {excel in, forget about, tire of). However, a
way for teachers (not students) to analyze prepositions is whethe:
a concrete, lexical meaning or a more abstract, grammatical mear
Lexical prepositions include across, before, down, on top of, พ
From a teacher's point of view, lexical prepositions are easy to e>
trate. Lexical prepositions pose few grammar problems. ELLs di
down and with or across and under. If a mouse is in a tree and run;
of the tree to its base, we say, The mouse ran down the tree. We use เ
easily understand the meaning of down and produce original sen
ing this pattern.
Grammatical prepositions include many usages of at, in,
usage of grammatical prepositions is less predictable and theref
able. For example, when talking about time, we say at 1 PM, on M
in the spring, in 1975, in this decade, in the 21st century. There is a p
lish that smaller points of time use at, "medium" points of tin
larger points of time use in. However, what is a "medium" poi:
order to use at correctly with time, an ELL really has to know the \
When talking about places, at, on, and in can be both lexic
grammatical usages. We can clearly see lexical prepositions in
Gate 7, on the table, and in the box because, in these examples, at
specific location," on means "touching the surface of," and in m
However, the situation is less clear when we say at McDonald's, 0
on Park Lane, in my neighborhood, in London, in Canada, or in Not
be sure, there is a similar pattern of using at with smaller p
"medium" places, and in with larger places. Again, how can ELLs
a "medium" place? ELLs will definitely make seemingly logical a:
mistakes such as *in McDonald's, *at Green Street, and *on North.
Common ELL Errors Examples
For the most part, interjections are not a problem for ELLs
ELL grammar books never cover this part of speech. (In fac
study how to diagram an interjection.) An ELL teacher mi
ELLs from repeating the informal interjections that they heal
may use interjections to fit in, not realizing that sometimes p
a given interjection.
What is an interjection?
An interjection is a word that expresses strong feeling c
tions are more common in spoken language than in wri
jections often appear in fiction; especially when authors !
natural dialogue. Examples include:
- Wow! Great! Gosh! Ouch!;~	■ - __ -- ไ
Interjections are perhaps the least important of the eight p
daily for teaching English language learners how to const
Interjections are more of a vocabulary issue than a gramn
Changeable Parts of Speech: Form vs.
This chapter has tried to classify words according to on
reality, a word can be more than one part of speech dependir
sentence. This free variation primarily affects nouns, verbs,
lesser extent, adverbs and prepositions. Very few conjunctic
speech. Pronouns are usually pronouns. Interjections are not
Consider these usages of the word book:
She wanted to book a flight, (verb)
We had to read that book for class, (noun)
Our library has a book problem, (adjective)
Consider these usages of the word well:
Is there a lot of water in this well? (noun)
Tears began to well up in his eyes, (verb)
You play tennis very well, (adverb)
The doctor says that I will get well soon, (adjective)
Focusing on the eight parts of speech individually may have given the impres
a given word form always belongs to only one part of speech. Languages have
parts of speech, and some languages actually add markings (e.g„ suffixes) to
the part of speech. However, the part of speech of a word is more accurate
mined by the function of that word in a sentence, not its form.
For ELLs, the problem with word forms is that we have many ways of mai
given part of speech, yet that marking does not guarantee that the word will b
that part of speech. For example, the suffix -tion generally forms a nour
verb (produce -> production), but a noun can also be formed by a verb
suffix -ment (enjoy -> enjoyment) or -ing (clean -> cleaning). It is no wonder 1
invent words such as *enjoyation or *cleanment. However, even after the corr
has yielded a noun, that word with the supposedly distinct noun marker c:
times serve as an adjective (the production vs. a production problem).
Review of Parts of speech
Post-Test. In this excerpt about learning vocabulary, write the part of spee
each of the 40 underlined words. Suggested time limit: 15 minutes. (Ans
on p. 88.)
(D Learning vocabulary in a second language is (I always a (D dau:
task because of the (D number of (ริ) single words, phrases, idioms, col
tions, (ริ) and other (D lexical chunks that exist. In addition, learners ท
learn multiple aspects (ริ) for (ริ) each of these, including (พ) the form
word (e.g., its spelling), its pronunciation, its meaning(s), its connotatio:
most common (rt) usages, and (12) its register. All of this is (13) even @
(ริ) complicated for the skill of @ writing in a second language. Writers
depend (17) on the nuance of a word, and nuances can (18) only be learn
@ after you @ have learned the basic meaning(s) of a word. A @ pie
writing often stands out @ because the writer has used a (23) few @ k<
@ vocabulary words that are not (26) so common. At times, it is @ the
rarity of the words that makes (28) them effective (29) communicators for
writer. However, a rare word is usually learned after (30) several @ mud
(32) more (33) common synonyms have been learned. In (34) other words
(35) advanced writer needs a @ repertoire of words for a (37) given cone
(38) Clearly, vocabulary with regard to second language writing, (39) espe
at the upper proficiency levels, is a (40) huge task.
Source: Reid, J. (2008). Writing myths: Applying second language research to classroom ti
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Basic Grammar Labels for Sentence Structure
This section contains ten key concepts regarding sentence structure in English
grammar terms relevant to sentence structure are explained.
เท an imperative
(command) sen-
tence, the subject is
the person being com-
manded—you—and is
usually omitted. เท this
case, the subject you is
referred to as an
understood subject
because it is implied
but rarely ever stated.
Therefore, Open the
door really means
(You) Open the door.
The subject of this
clause is you. This sub-
ject is understood and
not directly stated.
1. In English, a sentence consists of a subject and a predicate. The subject
person or thing that does the action of the verb. Simply put, the predic
everything else, including the verb and all other sentence components.
Sometimes we talk about the simple subject, the complete subject, the
pie predicate, and the complete predicate. The simple subject is the main
or pronoun, and the complete subject is the simple subject and all mod
The simple predicate is the verb (or verb phrase if there are several verb
ponents, have been eating), and the complete predicate is the verb ar
modifiers.
Sentence	Analysis	
The brown foxes jumped quickly.	complete subject simple subject	the brown foxe foxes
	complete predicate simple predicate	jumped quickly jumped
The brown foxes jumped quickly over the lazy dog.	complete subject simple subject	the brown foxe foxes
	complete predicate simple predicate	jumped quickl over the lazy d jumped
Errors that ELLs Make with Subject-Verb Combinations
Errors	Examples
Error 1. leaving out the subject completely, espe- cially when the subject is a pronoun	I like tennis very much. *Is my favorite sp< I like tennis very much. It is my favorite sp The police arrested the man. *The police did this because robbed a store. *The police did this because he robbed a stc
Error 2. inverting the subject and verb (putting the verb before the subject)	*	I am not sure where is Calcutta. I am not sure where Calcutta is. *	Cairo is more populated than thinks Joe. Cairo is more populated than foe thinks.
The children played a Igamel.	subject + verb +1 object! (noun)
The children played |rt].	subject + verb +1 object! (pronoun)
3. When the object is the receiver of the action, it is called a direct object. When
the object is the person (or thing) to whom or for whom the action was done, it
is called an indirect object.
Tohn read a\story\.	What did John read? a story - direct object
John read the children a\story\.	For whom or to whom did John read a story? the children = indirect object
4. A verb in English can be transitive, intransitive, or both.
Some verbs must be followed by an object to be correct English. These
verbs that have to have an object are called transitive verbs. Common transi-
tive verbs are break, bring, climb, contain, discuss, enjoy, like, prepare, put, rob, steal,
and take.
Errors that ELLs Make with Transitive Verbs	
Errors	' -ft >■	Examples ’	1J	‘ <- 'พ' >' ,พ
Error 1. leaving out the direct object entirely	Tennis is my favorite sport. *1 like very much. Tennis is my favorite sport. I like [Rjvery much.
	*The police arrested the man because he robbed. The police arrested the man because he robbed the|bank ■
Error 2. inserting unnec- essary prepositions (usually a result of translating or native language interference)	*In the meeting, we discussed ajsopt her ideas. In the meeting, we discussed herideas .
	*Many people enjoyedf&ffer innovative ideas. Many people enjoyed her innovati ve ideas .
Some verbs can never be followed by an object in English. These verbs are
called intransitive verbs. Common intransitive verbs are complain, consist, die,
emerge, happen, occur, resemble, and seem. After an intransitive verb, you might
find an adverb (He died quickly), or a prepositional phrase (He died at home), or
nothing (He died).
A prepositional
phrase js a preposkl·.
tion and a noun (or
pronoun) that func-
tions as the object of \
the preposition. Exam-
ples of prepositional
phrases include at the
park,Jnythe room, to
the bank, with some-
one, Piepositions are
discussed in detail on
pp. 59-61.
E11U1 JL. wealing me intransitive verb as if it were a transitive verb (by leaving out the required preposition, usually the result of translating or native language interference)	vvaici	นฬ iiyuiugcii αιιχι <ΛΛ.γgen, Water consists of hydrogen and oxygen.
	*At the finish line, the winner emerged t runners. At the finish line, the winner emerged fi the runners.
Error 2. inserting incor- rect prepositions (usually the result of translating or native language interference)	*In the meeting, we complainedff&ffthe 1 rules. In the meeting, we complained about tf rules.
	*what happened yhtfTyour car? What happened to your car?
Finally, many verbs can be either transitive or intransitive, including begu
close, drink, eat, end, finish, guess, leave, move, open, run, speak, start, and study.
Verbs with Both transitive and Intransitive Usages
Verb	Transitive Usage	Intransitive Usage
begin	We began the [meeting |at noon.	The meeting began at ท
move	The wind moved the [boxes].	The cat moved slightly c the noise.
speak	Can you speak [French [well?	Can you speak at the m
study	I am sftiifytnfflbusiness at college.	I am studying in the lib these days.
5. Beyond a word, the next grammatical unit is called a phrase. A ph
group of words that does not contain both a subject and a verb. A pl
as one part of speech. The three most common types of phrases Í
phrases, verb phrases, and prepositional phrases.
The sentence The red grammar book is lying on the coffee table cor
following phrases: the red grammar book (noun phrase), is lying on
table (verb phrase), on the coffee table (prepositional phrase), and the Cl
(noun phrase).
	flowers		tiny edible flowers
Verb	are eating	Verb Phrase	are eating some fish
	arrived		arrived late yesterday afternoon
Preposition	under	Prepositional Phrase	under the table
	on		on the table
6. Beyond a phrase, the next grammatical unit is called a clause. A clause is a
group of words with both a subject and a verb. There are two kinds of clauses:
independent and dependent.
An independent clause has a subject and a verb and expresses a complete
thought and can therefore stand on its own. (An independent clause can be a
sentence.)
A dependent clause has a subject and a verb but does not express a com-
plete thought and cannot stand on its own.
Independent Clause	Dependent Clause
Many young drivers avoid driving in rainy weather	because they do not have enough experi- ence driving under such conditions.
One of the first airlines in Asia was Air India,	which began as Tata Airlines in 1332.
I want to give you the book	that I bought at a garage sale yesterday.
7. Dependent clauses can be adverb clauses, adjective clauses, or noun clauses.
Adverb clauses answer questions such as when, where, why, with what result,
and under which conditions'). Adverb clauses usually modify the verb. Adverb
clauses begin with subordinating conjunctions. Examples of subordinating
conjunctions include after, although, as soon as, because, before, if, when, and
while. Adverb clauses can come either before or after the main clause. However,
adverb clauses that begin a sentence are always set off from the main clause by
a comma.
Independent clause + adverb clause. (No comma)	They stopped the game because the rain started.
Adverb clause + , + independent clause.	Because the rain started, they stopped the game.
a.	The term "staycation" became popular after the price 0
b.	Although the beginning of Cinderella is sad, this fair
c.	The soccer players walked back on the field as soon as ti
d.	Because vitamins are so important, many people take
e.	It is important to finish the match while the รนท is shh
Adjective clauses tell which one. Adjective clause!
nouns). Adjective clauses begin with one of the five 1
whom, whose, that, and which) or one of two subordina
and where). A special problem for ELLs occurs with wh(
can be omitted in English at certain times. Maria is
Maria is the girl (---) we saw.
Original Sentences	Sentences with
The answer was correct. You gave the answer.	The answer that you The answer (	) γι
The woman was Dr. Stans. The woman wrote the speech.	The woman who wro Dr. Stans. The woman that wro Dr. Stans.
Study these examples of sentences with adjectives
f.	People who live in glass houses should not throw stone.
g.	Consumers often prefer to watch movies of celebrities wht
about.
h.	One of the main reasons that the accident happened น
i.	No one wants to stay in a hotel room where a murder \
j.	On September 11 of each year, there is a moment of si:
the exact minute when a plane hit the first of the twh
Noun clauses answer questions such as who, whot
that commonly introduce noun clauses include that,
where, and whether. A special problem for ELLs is that
ductory words are optional: I believe that she is in the Oj
the office.
Study these examples of sentences with noun clau
k.	It is better to keep what you have than to risk losing it by I
l.	Why the accident happened is still under investigation.
m.	Do you really believe that the price of gasoline might}
ท. I do not know where Deanna lives.
o. A true pessimist is never caught offguard by what goes
n alJLiipic aciiLciivc iJLdõ UJL1C uiucpcjLJLuciiL L-Idusc. 1L Ao pussiuic LU nave 111U1-
tiple subjects and multiple verbs, but there is still only one subject-verb
relationship.
Simple Sentences
(a)	Washington was the first บ.ร. president.
•	subject: Washington
•	verb: was
(b)	Washington and Lincoln were น.ร. presidents.
•	subject: Washington and Lincoln
•	verb: were
(c)	Washington was president in 1789 and served for eight years.
•	subject: Washington
•	verb: was and served
(d)	Washington and Lincoln dedicated their lives to the บ.ร. and worked
hard to build a better country.
•	subject: Washington and Lincoln
•	verb: dedicated and worked
A compound sentence contains two independent clauses. (In other words,
it contains two simple sentences.) The two independent clauses are connected
by one of seven coordinating conjunctions: for, and, nor, but, or,· yet, so. (A
mnemonic device to remember these seven is FANBOYS.) A comma should
always be inserted before coordinating conjunctions between two independent
clauses.
Compound Sentences
(e)	Washington died in 1799, and Lincoln was born in 1809.
•	independent clause: Washington died in 1799
•	independent clause: Lincoln was born in 1809
(f)	Washington died in 1799 before Lincoln's birth, so these two famous
citizens never met each other.
•	independent clause: Washington died in 1799 before Lincoln's birth
•	independent clause: these two famous citizens never met each other
Complex Sentences
(g)	The last runner collapsed at the finish line becau
more than two hours.
•	independent clause: The last runner collapsed a
•	dependent clause: because she had run- for
(adverb clause)
(h)	The runner who crossed the finish line last had ไ
hours.
•	independent clause: the runner had run for mo·,
•	dependent clause: who crossed the finish line la:
A compound-complex sentence contains two inc
least one dependent clause.
Compound Complex Senlcnc
(i)	The last runner collapsed at the finish line becauf
more than two hours, so a medical team examint
•	independent clause: the last runner collapsed at
•	independent clause: a medical team examined 1
•	dependent clause: because she had run for more
clause)
(j)	Washington died in 1799 before Lincoln's birth, ■
these two famous citizens never met each other.
•	independent clause: Washington died in 1799 I
•	dependent clause: which was in 1809 (adjectiv
•	independent clause: these two famous citizens ท
Simple Present Tense of the Verb to need
	singular	plural
1st person	I need	we need
2nd person	you need	you need
3rd person	he needs	they need
	she needs	they need
	it needs	they need
One important rule for subject-verb agreement is that the object of a t
prepositional phrase can never be the subject of a sentence because it is already 5
an object. The prepositional phrases are in boxes.	f
Sentence	Subject-Verb	Notes
(a) The boxfon the paper is green.	box—is	on the paper is irrelevant
(b) The box Pon the papers, is green.	box—is	1 on the papers is irrelevant
(c) The boxes on the paper are green.	boxes—are	on the paper] is irrelevant
(d) The boxes on the papers] are green.	boxes—are	on the papers is irrelevant
10. Three common errors in writing involve incorrect sentence composition:
fragments, run-on sentences, and comma splices.
A run-on sentence has two parts that the writer has pushed together with-
out a proper conjunction or punctuation. For this reason, run-on sentences are
also called fused sentences.
vorrecung Kuibuu denieiict	
run-on sentence	*Each country despen natural resources a sei
Correction 1: add a comma and a coordinating conjunc- tion	Each country desperat natural resources, so c
Correction 2: add a subordinating conjunction (no punctuation)	A serious war broke 01 desperately needed the resources.
Correction 3: add a semi-colon	Each country desperat natural resources; a se
Correction 4: make two sentences	Each country desperat natural resources. A ร
Correction 5: add a transi- tional word or phrase; note the two punctuation options (; or.)	Each country desperat natural resources; thu out.
	Each country desperat natural resources. Thi out.
A comma splice has two parts, but the writer has p
them without any connector word.
Correcting Comma Splices
comma splice sentence	*Each country despera natural resources, a se
Correction 1: add a coordi- nating conjunction (after the comma)	Each country desperat natural resources, so a
Correction 2: add a subordinating conjunction (no punctuation)	A serious war broke 01 desperately needed the resources.
Correction 3: change the comma to a semi-colon	Each country desperati natural resources; a se
Correction 4: make two sentences	Each country desperati natural resources. A se
Correction 5: add a transi- tional word or phrase; note the two punctuation options (; or.)	Each country desperate ural resources; thus, a
	Each country desperate ural resources. Thus, a
clause. There are several ways to correct a fragment. In many (
fragments can be corrected by removing the period and connt
ment to the main clause properly.
Correcting Fragments	
Fragments	Possible Corre
Age discrimination is an important factor in today's society. *Because the number of senior citizens is increasing each year.	Age discrimination is an it in today's society because senior citizens is increasing
The man whose shirt was on fire ran out of the building into the street and began to jump up and down. *Which is one of the worst things that he could have done in this situation.	The man whose shirt was out of the building into tl began to jump up and do one of the worst things th have done in this situatio
Without realizing it, the criminal entered the building through a door that had a very sensitive motion detec- tor. * Setting off a silent alarm that alerted the police that there was a crime in progress.	Without realizing it, the entered the building throi that had a very sensitive tor, setting off a silent al alerted the police that the crime in progress.
The present participle
can be an -ing form
(such-as going, eating,
taking) that IS used as
part of a verb. The
present participle can-
be used I ή the SIX pro-
gressive tenses (/ am
going, I was eating, I
will be taking) or as"an,
adjective (an exciting
story, rising prices, the
leading candidate)
For regular,verbs, the
past participle of a
' verb ends in-Wand is
therefore the same as-
the,simple past tenses J-
For irregular verbs, com-
mon endings include-- -
—en (พritteríjàndVne- --
(gone). The past partici-
ple can be used เท the
six’perfect tenses (I have
fried, I have'been
frying)Jt can also be
used an adjective
(fried shrimp, written
communication)
Ttuy UI1C IWC1VC Jjugiiini IC1M 1C11OUO πιαιιυι
The verb is arguably the central part of any English sentence. In English, 1
twelve tenses that express different combinations of time (present, past, fut
aspect (simple, perfect, progressive). Verb tense errors are one of the most <
errors in ELL writing and speaking. Errors occur in form (lack of -ing: * right ·.
eat my lunch) or usage (wrong tense, here simple present for present progress!'
now I eat my lunch).
Languages handle verb tenses differently. In languages such as Chinese,
no verb tenses per se; instead, adverbs of time—yesterday, before then—indici
actions happened. Other languages such as Spanish and German have verb te
look similar to those in English with some overlap in meaning with those in
but the usages vary. For example, simple present tense (I accompany) in Englis
for habitual actions. While this tense also has that usage in Spanish, this sami
commonly used for future events. In Spanish, you can say, * Tomorrow I accorr
if you want, but in English we need to use future tense to say, Tomorrow I will «I
you if you want.
In addition to the cross-linguistic interference, there are difficulties eve
English because any given verb tense in English can have multiple usages. A <
example is the use of present progressive tense. We primarily use it for act
are happening at this moment (Brian is driving to Vancouver), but this same VI
can also be used for a future event (Brian is driving to Vancouver tomorrow) am
a habitual action (Brian is always driving to Vancouver). However, when we USI
progressive for a habitual action, it often implies anger, disapproval, or anno;
Principal Parts of a Verb:
Base, Past, Past Participle, Present Participle
In English, verbs have four principal forms: the base, the past, the past partici
the present participle. These four principal parts allow US to make all tw(
tenses.
The verb to grade is a regular verb because both the past and past particip
are formed with -ed. In contrast, the verb to take is an irregular verb becausi
and past participle forms are not formed with -ed.
Verb	Base	Past	Past Participle	Present Par
to grade	grade	graded	graded	gradin
	to take take	took	taken	taking
Note that many grammar books do not include the present participle as or
principal parts of a verb because it is always formed by adding -ing to t
whether the verb is regular or irregular.
individually. Many languages have irregular verb forms, and many—but certi
all—of the irregular verbs in English are also irregular in other languages. For I
to be, to have, to go, and to do are irregular in English, French, Spanish, Portug!
German. (I remember Mrs. de Montluzin telling US on the first day of French
orize the forms of être, avoir, alter, and faire, which are to be, to have, to go, a
These four verbs, which are essential to conversation in any language, are irn
French. From the first day, we knew that we had to memorize certain verb for
Review the examples for regular and irregular verbs in all twelve tenses.
Regular verbs: the past tense and past participle forms end in -ed (gradi
graded)
Grade	Simple	Progressive	Perfect	Perfect Prog!
Present Past Future	I grade I graded I will grade	I am grading I was grading I will be grading	I have graded I had graded I will have graded	I have been gra I had been grac I will have beet grading
Irregular verbs: the past tense and the past participle forms do not t
in -ed (take, took, taken)
Take	Simple	Progressive	Perfect	: Perfect Prog]
present past future	he takes he took he will take	he is taking he was taking he will be taking	he has taken he had taken he will have taken	he has been tai he had been ta he will have be taking
Common irregular verbs include be, begin, do, drink, eat, find, get, have, lea
run, send, speak, think, and wear. A longer list can be found in Appendix 2.
-	Form	; Simple Present Tense		
VERB or VERB + —s (for he, she, it)	(a) a fact that is true now		(1) (2)
	(b) a recurring event		(3)
	(c) state or condition		(4)
	(d) a planned future action (with a future time word)		(5) (6)
Question do/does + subject + VERB		How many pens does ea	
Negative do/does + not + VERB (Contractions are possible.)		Houses do not always ha Houses don't always hav	
ELL Error		ELL Is	
including he: * Every day I am work here.		ELLs learn I am, you are, that they unconsciously after the subject pronou	
Simple Past Tense
Form	Usages		
VERB +-ed (Irregular verbs use different patterns: run—ran, go—went, break—broke)	(a) a completed action		(1) I lived in
	(b) an activity that took place regu- larly in the past		(2) In the 19 work aln
	(c) a completed condition		(3) The temp degrees 1
Question! did + subject + VERB		When did you arrive at t	
Negative 1 did + not + VERB (Contractions are possible.)		The committee did not ร The committee didn't sei	
ELL Error		ELLIs	
including be: *Yesterday I was work here.		ELLs learn I was, you wer that they unconsciously after the subject pronow	
1ULU1V Γ			Examples
Form	Usages		
will + VERB	(a) a prediction about a future event		(1) The price of gasoline wi up.
	(b) a decision at the time of speaking (not planned in advance)		(2) [The phone suddenly rinj when you are visiting yot friend's house.] “I'll ansu
	(c) an agreement to do something		(3) If you will go to the stor me, I will cook dinner fo
Question will + subject + VERB		Will Flight 62 arrive on time or not?	
Negative will + not + VERB (Contractions are possible.)		You will not have any gas left over. You won't have any gas left over.	
ELL Errors		ELL Issues	
using simple present tense for future time: *In five minutes, I return here. Please wait.		This is probably a case of native language ference. In Spanish, for example, simple p tense is routinely used for future actions.	
overusing will (instead of be going to): Jo: What are your plans for Friday ใ Ed: *1 will have a party.		ELLs have been taught that will means "f time," so they use will for every future ac For previously planned actions, we usua use be going to, however.	
Progressive Tenses
Present Progressive Tense			
Form	Usages		Examples
am/is/are + VERB + -ing	(a) an action happening now		(1) It's raining really hard.
	(b) an action this {week, month, etc.)		(2) I am working at the beat this week.
	(c) an action (with a future time word)		(3) They are flying to Texas tomorrow.
Question! am/is/are + subject + VERB + -ing		Is the cost of a stamp increasing by 10%	
1 Negative am/is/are + not + VERB (Contractions are possible.)		My cats are not sleeping right now. My cats aren't sleeping right now.	
ELL Error		ELL Issue	
putting non-action verbs in present progressive: *1 am hearing you.		ELLs do not know that non-action verbs not usually occur in the progressive, mos likely from native language interference.	
Form	Usages		
was/were + VERB + -ing	(a) an action in the past that was inter- rupted in the past by another action		(1) I was lit my mor
	(b) a repeated past action (an activity that took place over a long time)		(2) พร. were ding for
1 Question was/were + subject + VERB + -ing		Where was the thief hidi	
1 Negative was/were + not + VERB (Contractions are possible.)		I was not sleeping when I wasn't sleeping when yc	
ELL Errors		-Γ ELL Isr	
omitting -ing: * when I was sleep, someone called me.		ELLs forget the correct fc	
using simple past instead of past progressive: *When I slept, some- one called me.		ELLs may be concentrati the same verb tense (per proverbial direction to น tense).	
Futúre Progressive Tense
Form	Usages		
will + be + VERB + -ing	an action that begins before another action and will be happening at a point of time in the future		You will be ร off work ton going to call
Question will + subject + be + VERB + -ing		In ten years from now, พ working?	
[Negative 1 will + not + be + VERB + -ing (Contractions are possible.)		After this year, the city พ more annual bus passes. After this year, the city พ more annual bus passes.	
ELL Error		. . ELL Is	
This tense is rarely used. Student and teacher time should be critical language issues.			
Present Perfect Tense
Form	Usages	Examples
have/has + PAST PARTICIPLE	(a) an action that happened at an unspecified time in the past	(1)	Jo: I wonder what รนร]ไ like. Sue: I've eaten it before pretty good. (2)	Have you ever flown 0 Concorde?
	(b) a recent action that is important to the current situation or conversation	(3) Ann: Wow, it's hot in 1 Liz: Well, I've turned 0 air conditioner. Just Wc minute.
	(c) an action that began in the past but continues in the present	(4) We have worked here 8 noon.
	(d) repetition of an action before now	(5) I've traveled to Asia m times.
Question have/has + subject + PAST PARTICIPLE	Where have you worked?
Negative 1 have/has + not + PAST PARTICIPLE (Contractions are possible.)	He has not flown on a 747 jet. He hasn't flown on a 747 jet.
ELL Error	ELL Issue
using present tense for present perfect: *1 live here since 1995.	Some languages use present tense to ex "still true" usages of present perfect, es] dally usages (c) and (d).
Form	Usages		]
had + PAST PARTICIPLE	(a) a past action that occurred before another past event, action, or time		(1)	I had ea mom ca (2)	By midr three m
1 Question had + subject + PAST PARTICIPLE		Where hai	you seen this
Negative 1 had + not + PAST PARTICIPLE (Contractions are possible.)		When the voting office c 7 PM, many citizens had When the voting office c 7 PM, many citizens hadt	
ELL Error			ELL Is
using past perfect for a single event: * Millions of years ago, dinosaurs had roamed on the planet.		ELLs do not grasp that p relation to other actions, how long ago the action often mistakenly believe simply much older than example from "millions trigger an unnecessary น!	
Future Perfect reuse
Form	Usages		J
will have + PAST PARTICIPLE	(a) a future action that will occur before another particular future action (or time)		(1)	By next finished this hoc (2)	' When yi tomorrc spoken t problen
1 Question will + subject + have PAST PARTICIPLE		By the year 2050, will th nation have doubled?	
Negative 1 will + not + have + PAST PARTICIPLE (Contractions are possible.)		By the time you get to yc assistant will not have fit By the time you get to yc assistant won't have finis	
ELL Error		ELL Is	
ELLs make few errors with this tense because they do not atte ity, this tense is not used frequently in English.			
	into the present, and may continue into the future (when a speaker wants to empha- size the duration of an action)		
	(b) a general action in progress recently for which no specific time is mentioned		(2) Ken: Wow, your tennis is really good now! Kay: I've been practicing recently.
	(c) an action that began in the past and has just recently ended		(3) Jim: There's green stuff your hair. Dan: Oh, don't worry. I been painting my house will come out with a lil soap and water.
1 Question have/has + subject + been + VERB + -ing		Why has it been raining so much lately?	
Negative 1 have/has + not + been + VERB + -ing (Contractions are possible.)		Many of today's flights have not been lei on time. Many of today's flights haven't been leal on time.	
ELL Error		ELL Issue	
using present progressive tense for present perfect progressive: *1 am living here since 1995.		Some languages use present tense to ex] the "still true" usages of present perfect progressive.	
Form	Usages		
had + been + VERB + -ing	(a) an activity that occurred before another action in the past (when a speaker wants to emphasize the duration of an action)		(1) The p plane befor was a engin
	(b) a long action occurring recently before another action in the past		(2) Greg: the p; Lisa: I been 1
[Question had + subject + been + VERB + -ing		How long had you bet you were promoted to	
[Negative 1 had + not + been + VERB + -ing (Contractions are possible.)		The factory had not be the company closed it The factory hadn't bee: the company closed it	
ELL Error		> - ELL	
This tense is rarely used. Student and teacher time should 1 pressing issues.			
' ' Form '	Usages		Examples
will + have + been + VERB + -ing	(a) a long action that is taking place in relation to another future event (when a speaker wants to emphasize the duration of an action)		(1) By next Friday, we will been working here five 3
	(b) a long action occurring before another action (or point of time) in the future		(2) Wes: Do you want to gc with us after the party tomorrow night? Ben: I don't know. By tl time of the party, I will been standing on my fe eight hours, so I don't 1 if I'll feel like going to £ or not.
1 Question will + subject + have + been + VERB + -ing		How long will we have been living here you retire?	
Negative 1 will + not + have + been + VERB + -ing (Contractions are possible.)		I'm not sure, but we will not have been here for more than 20 years. I'm not sure, but we won't have been liv here for more than 20 years.	
ELL Error		ELL Issue	
This tense is rarely used. Student and teacher time should be directed to moi pressing issues.			
Write the examples or these verb tenses tor the verbs COOK <
on p. 88.)
Verb Tense	Cook	
simple present	1.	2
simple past	3.	4
simple future	5.	6
present progressive	7.	8
past progressive	9.	10
future progressive	11.	12
present perfect	13.	14
past perfect	15.	16
future perfect	17.	18
present perfect progressive	19.	20
past perfect progressive	21.	22
future perfect progressive	23.	24
Match the examples with their correct verb tense by writing the correct lett
to the corresponding example. Some tenses will be used more than
(Answers are on p. 88.)
Example		Verb Tense
1. 		_ I will work.	a. simple present
2. 		_ I was working.	b. simple past
3. 			_ I will have been working.	c. simple future
4. 		_ I had worked.	d. present progressive
5. 		_ I have been working.	e. past progressive
6. 			_ I will be working.	f. future progressive
7. 			_ I work.	g. present perfect
8. 	L	_ I worked.	h. past perfect
9. 		_ I had been working.	i. future perfect
10.	_ I have worked.	j. present perfect progressive
11. 			_ I am working.	k. past perfect progressive
12. 			_ I will have worked.	1. future perfect progressive
13. 		_ I didn't work.	
14. 		_ I wasn't working.	
15. 		_ Have you worked?	
exactly whom their loved ones associate with and where the
sary preposition
2.	I've encountered a problem when I'm trying to insert a recor
trying to build a menu list/ I'll get an error message telling ท
much recursion, what does this mean? Correct
-MS_______________
3.	Between you and® this situation is going to have a very unh
pronoun
4.	My wife and I look forward to working more with the Ma
gram. Founded a decade ago by Theodore Jabil
children and families in the Brooklyn area. (3) wrong prono
___aox\e
5. I had (w|n£ to different therapy services, but Pressure Poim
wrong verb form
6.	The DC-10 jet cracked into two pieces and came to rest with
on its side. (5) wrong word
7.	The campus police department is proud to announce the x
awaited and revised Student Safety Guide. Note that the nan
the Annual Report & Safety Guide to reflect its content more
8.
Team captains are receiving this article because they mighl
_—■—whoever
(whomever would benefit from it the most. (6) wrong word
—
9.	What the bossfdoJ^know won't matter in the end. (7) 3rd pe
tense requires -s in the verb
______
10.	If it(Jvoulidn't liay^) been raining, the kids could have play€
wrong verb form in if-clause
11.	The jurisdiction that includes these seven heavily populai
should have its boundaries redrawn. Correct
12.	The school board's new plan will (hot harà affect the stud
school. (9) double negative
13.	According to the author, when people feel stressed, angry, c
negative energy. This is why viewing negative events causes US
witnessing acts of kindness causes US to feel good. (10) wron;
___those
14.	We cannot letcjhenj) people vote. If we let them vote, they're
right decision. (11) wrong word
have
15.	My opinion is that the manager should @ fired those empl
wrong word
_______________________________
on (irsjown. (15) wrong word
17.	A clear advantage that this particular electronic dictionary software has over its
petitors is the incredible number of words that it can be quickly looked up. Col
18.	If you want to play on the team, please send me an email letting me know that
interested. I need your response no later than Saturday. (14) wrong word
19.	Krashen came.up with the concept of t + 1 to help describe the distance betwi
^person s r	1	,	■ ’
jSersonj) language proficiency and the level of the language in the material,
wrong word
whose
20.	If you are an employee (^ho^) contract expires annually and a renewal is done c
beginning of a semester, you may not be entered into the data system yet. (16) V
word
21.	Yes, rm looking for something that is more stable than my current job, but I hs
been going to job interviews	ทนch. (17) wrong word
22.	Your place was terrific, but I want to say that your warm hospitality and great faci
are what we enjoyed the most and what made the trip so special to Kate anc
Correct
23.	Applicants may submit their paperwork either in person or via email. Note ths
ฝ็ ffect
submission method will	the committee's decision regarding any api
tion. (18) wrong word
24.	This plant can withstand temperatures to five degrees Fahrenheit, which is the ]
at which the plant may doosg^some or all of its leaves (but still not kill the pl
(19) wrong word	,
25.	In a recent ruling by five of the Supreme Court justices EmrK conclusion was
police should have more authority in some cases. (20) wrong word
Pre-Test 2: Eight Parts of speech, p. 40
(Answers, especially examples, will vary. The order of the eight parts of speech
evant.) 1. A noun is the name of a person, place, thing, or quality, (cat) 2. A
a word that shows action or state of being. (wish) 3. An adjective is a wo
describes a noun or a pronoun. (good) 4. A pronoun is a word that can take th
of a noun. (she) 5. A preposition is a word that shows a relationship betwe
word and another word in the sentence, (with) 6. A conjunction is a word th
nects words, phrases, or clauses, (and) 7. An adverb is a word that modifier
adjectives, or another adverb, (carefully) 8. An interjection is a word that
strong emotion. (Ouch!)
adjective 9. preposition 10. adjective 11. noun 12. adjectiv
15. preposition 16. noun 17. adjective 18. adjective 19.
adverb 22. conjunction 23. verb 24. preposition 25. adject
Review of Parts of Speech, p. 63
1.	noun 2. adverb 3. adjective 4. noun 5. adjective 6. cpnj
preposition 9. pronoun 10. adjective 11. noun 12. adjectiv
15. adjective 16. noun 17. preposition 18. adverb 19. cc
noun 22. conjunction 23. adjective 24. adjective 25. noun
28. pronoun 29. noun 30. adjective 31. adverb 32. adverb
tive 35. adjective 36. noun 37. adjective 38. adverb 39. a
Activity 1. Verb Tenses in English, p. 84
Cook: I cook, I cooked, I will cook, I am cooking, I was cooking
cooked, I had cooked, I will have cooked, I have been cooking, I ha
been cooking
Write: I write, I wrote, I will write, I am writing, I was writing, 11
ten, I had written, I will have written, I have been writing, I hat
been writing
Activity 2. Verb Tenses in English, p. 85
l.c 2.e 3.1 4.h 5.j 6.f 7.a 8.b 9.k 10*g ll.d 12.i 13,b 1
.จุ’m
15 Keys to ELL Gramma
This chapter covers 15 grammar issues that are key to teaching gramm
15 issues, or Keys, can be found in the contents in most beginning to
ate ELL books. The 15 Keys presented in this chapter present verb t(
non-count nouns, prepositions, articles, pronunciation of -s aw
clauses, infinitives and gerunds, phrasal verbs, modals, passive voice, a
Though there are certainly many other useful ELL grammar issues, a ร'
ing of these 15 Keys will provide a sound basis for teachers as they pl
their own ELL grammar lessons. (Additional ELL grammar points are ะ
Seat Questions in Chapter 4.)
Each grammar Key opens with a brief explanation of the importar
ular grammar point for ELLs and their teachers. The information fc
point consists of four parts, and for each subcategory of the grammar,
to minimize ELL errors are offered:
•	Part A shows five examples of typical ELL errors made with t
point.
•	Part B includes detailed grammar explanations with useful
examples.
•	Part c briefly highlights how this grammar point is handled 1
languages most commonly spoken by today's ELLs—namely Ara
French, Japanese, Korean, Russian, and Spanish.
•	Part D offers some ideas on how to teach the grammar point,
89
An inflection is a
change in the form of
a word that sFiovvs a
grammatical change,
such as ~ed for past
tense in heeded or -en
for plural in oxen.
Some languages have
few inflections; others
have many. For exam- -
pie, nouns in Japanese
do not have a plurap
inflection, so the same
form is used for singu-
lar and plural. Nouns in
German have several
different plural inflec-
tions based on J .
whether the noun is
grammatically mascu-^
line, feminine; or neu-
tral and whether the
noun is the subject or
object of the sentence.
Nouns in English have/
only two forms’; singCi- '
lar and plural; and by
far the most common
plural inflection is “ร.
book {desu or imasu or arimasu),
In addition to being the most frequently used verb in English,
appears early in many ESL books because it allows students and tea<
to practice a lot of new vocabulary (primarily nouns and adjective;
then prepositional phrases of location) in simple sentences witl
same verb (usually is, initially) used repeatedly: My name is Susan
book is green. I am here. Our test is today. In other words, by using to b
are able to keep the grammar of the sentences very easy for the stU(
so that they can concentrate on understanding how the vocabula
the sentences is arranged to produce the speaker's or writer's inte
message.
In addition to the form be, this common verb has five basic fon
English: am, is, are, was, and were. There are also two other forms thi
taught later: being and been. With a total of eight forms (including b
be is the most inflected verb in English. (Other verbs can have far 1
forms; for example, the verb to work has only four different forms: Í
works, worked, working, and the verb to cut has only three different fc
cut, cuts, cutting.')
I.A. Typical ELL Errors: Noticing the Gap
Can you identify and explain these five common ELL errors with
grammar point?
7. *z howo/ hwetyry ท/)พ-.
2.	*Joseysh/ a/t/b Mark/ ท/) are· เท/ ike/ car.
3.	*z'ทÀlo/ arid/ PakbstaJS/ two CO พทtrLet เท/ Asia/.
-7. Mrs. Wbttòa/ws bs O/C)00cb store/ Mta,ทa/jer. Ws Miyfrbe/tcb.
5.	Woes the> weather bs hot เท/'yowr coMotry?
I am	we are
you are he/she/it is	you are they are
In the simple present tense, be has three forms: am, is, are.
I, you, he, she, it, we, and they are called subject pronouns.
Common ELL Mistakes: What Your ELLs Should Know
1.	Do not use am, is, or are with the wrong subject.
wrong: Joseph and Mark is in the kitchen.
correct: Joseph and Mark are in the kitchen.
2.	Do not omit am, is, or are from the sentence.
wrong: India and Pakistan two countries in Asia.
correct: India and Pakistan are two countries in Asia.
3.	Do not use have for be with these words: hungry, thirsty, right,
wrong, sleepy, tired, lucky, . . . years old.
wrong: The author of this book has 49 years old.
correct: The author of this book is 49 years old.
4.	Do not forget to include the subject.
wrong: My brother's name is Kirk. Is 47 years old.
correct: My brother's name is Kirk. He is 47 years old.
1.8.2.	Simple Past Tense of Be
Singular	Plural
I was	we were
you were	you were
he/she/it was	they were
In the simple past tense, be has only two forms: was and were.
is -> was
are -> were
1.8.3.	Negative Forms
Making the negative of be is easy: you put the \
be. (In other chapters, you will see that negating
more complicated. Students will soon confu
with other patterns, e.g., do not go, might not,
important to practice the negative of be well.)
Present	am not	is nc
Past	was not	
1.8.4.	Contractions
Contractions of the verb to be are possible in b
tive in the present tense but only in negative in
formal, contractions occur much more in spok
ten language. Contractions are one feature of
that can potentially make a speaker sound ทา
important.
Present -.						
Affirmative		Negative		Affirmative		
I am	I'm - ‘	I am not	I'm not	I was	- ‘ -	1ห
yoil are	you're	you are not	you aren't you're not	you were		yo
he is	he's	he is not	he isn't he's not	he was.	-	he
she is 1	she's J	she is not	she isn't she's not	she was 1		sh
it is	it's	it is not	it isn't it's not	it was. *■		it ไ
we are	we're	we are not	we aren't we're not	we were	เ	we
they are	they'rek	they are not	they aren't they're not	they were		the
of to be, are easy to learn. Questions that are answered either yes or no
are called yes-no questions. Questions that are answered with other
answers such as a person, a place, or a time are called U)h- questions (or
sometimes information questions) because the initial word often
begins with a U)h-, as in who, whom, what, why, where, when, or which.
While some initial question words begin with how {how, how many, how
often), they are still referred to as wh- questions.
To change an affirmative statement into a yes-no or wh- question,
you simply move the form of be just in front of the subject—you invert
the subject and the verb.
	yes-no	wh-
Statement	Ana is from Rem.	Ana is from Pern.
Question	Is Ana from Pern?	Where is Ana from?
Short Answer	Yes, she is. (OR: No, she is not.)	Pern. (OR: She is from Peru.)
Contractions are possible: No, she's not OR No, she isn't OR She's
from Peru. However, no contractions are possible in affirmative short
answers. We cannot answer *Yes, she’s or *Yes, I'm.
Books for beginners, especially in EFL situations where ELLs have
less contact with English daily, usually teach yes-no questions over the
course of a few chapters before introducing wh- questions. A universally
effective teaching technique is to build upon previous knowledge, so in
this case, remind students of yes-no questions and then transition to wh-
questions. Be sure to highlight the similarities. Many students know the
wh- words of what, when, where, who, and why. While ELLs probably
know the meaning of these words, at this point they probably have a
rather vague understanding of the grammar of forming wh- questions.
As a result, ELLs at this proficiency level often form questions like
* Where you from? or *Who do you are from?
qucaliuiis IdUlCl Llldll JUSL giving UUL uns linuin
the teacher's presentation that follows here:
T = teacher; ร = one student; c - whole class;.
sentences; / - short break between idea groups I
Class Talk
Whiteb
T: Can one of you tell me your
birthday? . . . Can one of you /
tell me / your birthday? . . .
Yes, Lim.
Lim: June 30.
T:
T.
T:
T.
[T. writ
pirn’s fc
[T. circle
sentenc
an arroi
in front

[T. writ!
June 30th. Ok, June 30th.
Tim's birthday . . . anyone?
Is June 30.
Right. Tim's birthday is June
30th. OK? . . . Now if I am not
sure about Tim's birthday?
Maybe it's the 30th or maybe it's
the 31st or maybe it's the 10th. 1
If I want to know yes or no if '
Tim's birthday is June 30th,
what is my question? . . .
Right. The yes-no question is,
"Is Tim's birthday June 30th?"
Ana, ask me this question now
(points).
Ana: Is Tim's birthday June 30th?
Class, what are two possible
answers?
Yes, it is. No, it isn't.
OK, but now we are going to see
something new, something
different, a new kind of question.
What if I don't want to know yes
or no? What if I don't know
Tim's birthday? What if I have
NO idea when Tim's birthday is.
What is my question going to be?
Who . . .
Who? Who is for people. Is
birthday a person?
No . . .
OK, what is the best question
word for birthday?
T.
C:
T:
C:
T.
C:
T.
[T. write
88, it
[T. write
?
[T. write
[T. cross
then err
word. Who knows which words
in this sentence are the same as,
equal to, when?
ร.· June 30th?
T: Yes, that's right.
T. Question words like when or
who always begin a question,
so let's move this to the
beginning, like this.
T: When we studied yes-no
questions, what do you
remember, what do you know
about is in a yes-no question?
Where does it go?
C: Before.
T. Yes, it goes before, just like this.
T: Yes, that's it. Now we have a
correct question, so let's put
a question mark.
ไ': Can everyone see how yes-no
questions and wh- information
questions are similar? Can you
see this?
C: is Lim's birthday
T: Yes, that's right. Look how is
Lim's birthday is the same in
both questions.
[T. circles June 30th, then crosses
it out lightly, and writes when ?
across the top.]
When?/
Is Lim's birthday^^^L^?)
[Teacher draws anãrdãeo line
with arrow from WHEN to the
front of the sentence, then
crosses out WHEN lightly, and
writes it at the beginning of
the question:]
QVhen is pirn’s bliMay
[T. adds question mark:]
QVken is pirn’s bi/May?
[T. writes the yes-no
question with the wh- question
below so as to line up is
Lint's birthday
à pirn’s biMay June 30^ ?
QViren is SEim’s bliMay ?
[T. should now underline is
Lim's birthday in both
questions:]
à SEiw's billtbday June 30til ?
QVkn is Pirn’s bl/dhday ?
I Language	Notes on to
Arabic	1.	Arabic does not use to be in p does express it in past time. / house special for me. 2.	In past tense, verb forms chai subject.
Chinese	1.	There is a verb to be in Chine only by nouns, as in Mary is 2.	For location (Mary is in the ro (other than to be) is used. 3.	For adjectives, no verb is usee Chinese students may write *
French	1.	There is a verb that functions be in English. 2.	Some expressions that use to thirsty, right, wrong, . . . years < have in French, so common e hungry and *She has 27 years 3.	Verb forms change according more than to be does in Engli 4.	French does not have any pre tenses, so je mange can mean ing. 5.	The present perfect tense for. by the auxiliary have and the verbs of motion use be + past French-speaking students me for We have arrived.
Japanese	1.	Japanese has three different be in English. 2.	To express existence (there is/i uses one be verb with animat cat) but a different be verb wi (a cloud, a car). 3.	For adjectives, no verb is usee Japanese students may write 4.	Verb forms do not change ac< 5.	Subject pronouns are often o 6.	A verb can be a complete sen question Are your reports read} may simply respond *Are or
	error is * Moscow a very big city in Russia. 2. In past, verb forms change according to the subject.
Spanish	1.	Spanish has two different verbs for to be, so Span- ish-speaking ELLs may be confused by the lone to be in English. 2.	Some expressions that use to be in English—hungry, thirsty, right, wrong, . . . years old, sleepy, lucky—use have in Spanish, so common errors include *1 have hungry and *รhe has 27 years old. 3.	Verb forms change according to the subject—much more than to be does in English. 4.	Subject pronouns are usually omitted; the verb end- ings indicate the subject. A persistent error is I like cats. *Are very good pets.
All Languages	1.	Different languages negate in different ways. French puts ne in front of the verb and pas after. Spanish puts no in front of the verb. Japanese changes the middle of the word. (This is called an infix—as opposed to a prefix or suffix.) Many ELLs incor- rectly negate the verb to be by placing no before or after the verb: * I no am a teacher or * I am no a teacher. 2.	Different languages form questions in different ways. Some languages invert the subject and verb; some languages use a special marker at the begin- ning of the question (Arabic) or end of the ques- tion (Japanese) that indicates a question. In contrast, English relies on word order. To form a question in English, the verb to be is moved before the subject. Many ELLs forget to make the inversion and write *You are a teacher?

For ELLs, prepositions
of location (on the
table; in the box) are
often easier to grasp
than prepositions of
time (on Monday; in-
June). Why we say on เก
on the table seems more
logical than why we say
on เก on Monday. Key 6
explains the nuances of -
prepositions in depth.
i I1ND OUT :
; Ask students ol dilkiiiu (list;
I languages to 11 ansi.tie these SIS !
'เ sentences mlo then native Ian J
Mi
[ ο I >1N1 not In>in ( an.ida.	I
I 0 Í a IN a k at hei	I
! 0 I le was a Lcat hci	Ϊ
' 0 I am al the bank now	I
I 0 I am eating now	I
I ( ompaic the forms OÍ be Ιοί I
\ these. SIX sentences \Mi.it (ilf- ;
I fcitutes .lie 1h(je with J nghsh !
I เท turns of lilt veih to /)<'<’/ ฟ
If you are teaching to be, you are probably teaching beginning-
dents, so it is important to concentrate initially on one usage (
keep the vocabulary level of your explanations low.
By controlling the vocabulary level, I mean that you should
pie vocabulary, including familiar words, cognates, and prop
when possible, and you should make an attempt to have tho
appear multiple times. For example, if you are going to use col
to teach be, try to use four or five colors several times instead
ten or twelve colors once. Use words like red, white, blue, and g
colors like tan, beige, and fuschia.
The verb to be can be followed by several grammatical unit:
ing nouns, adjectives, and prepositional phrases. For initial te
strongly recommend choosing one of these three, not a coml
You need to think about examples that you can give that will I
ingful for your students.
If you opt to use examples with nouns, you can talk abou
people:
(name of popular singer) is a singer.
(name of president) is a president.
(name of soccer player) is a soccer player.
If you opt to use examples with adjectives, you can talk aboi
The sky is blue.
A dollar is green.
The grammar book is red.
If you opt to use examples with prepositional phrases, yot
about objects that are in your classroom:
The clock is on the wall.
(name of student) is by the door.
The teacher is next to the board.
If your students are from different places, you can also
information in prepositional phrases.
Heiko is from Japan.
Ahmed is from Kuwait.
Carlos is from Colombia.
All of these examples so far use is, not am or are. If you are
with very low-level students who have little formal training anc
for English study, which is more typical of EFL situations or ร
refugee programs, I would recommend teaching is, are, and am
time. It is not necessary for students to know initially that these
forms of the same verb (to be). In contrast, for ELLs who hav
a full set of examples with seven subject pronouns that refer to people:
I am from the United States. We are from Colombia.
You are from China. You are from Saudi Arabia.
He is from Dubai.	They are from Mexico.
She is from Japan.
Again, notice that all of my examples follow one pattern. I chose origin:
subject + be + from + country name. As I write these on the board, I
would point to a specific student or students in the class that the sen-
tence is about. I would look at Reiko when I write the example about
Reiko, and I would look at Carlos, Maria, and Tomas when I write They
are from Mexico. The lower the proficiency level of your students, the
more you need to use concrete examples in the here and now.
I would start by writing one of your three examples on the board.
Then write only the noun of the second sentence and have students
complete the idea. Your board would look like this:
<_An appie 18 lied.
cA Man is
Let them tell you the word green. If no one knows it, then provide the
word. Keep your class interactive by having a student spell the word for
you as you write it. Before you start writing the word green, say "green."
Make the students repeat it. Then spell it as you write it slowly on the
board: G (write g), R (write r), etc. Again, it is easy to keep students'
attention if you require it by teaching interactively. Then go to your next
example, the grammar book.
A simple way to practice this at this low level of proficiency is with
scrambled sentences. Either on a worksheet or on the board (or over-
head projector or newsprint), write some scrambled sentences:
appà ned is an
do&lan a ฐ/ieen is
Students have to unscramble the sentences. You can also practice capital-
izing the first word of a sentence and punctuating with a final period.
You can make the activity more challenging but still within students'
level as follows:
tíie ike Mae is on desfe book
Canada wkte oj Mg เธ lied the and
Notice how these examples still practice is and follow the pattern
subject + is + color. It is a mistake to include patterns such as present
progressive tense at this point (e.g„ The man is sleeping). This kind of
sentence is acceptable if your students are reviewing be, but for low-level
students, this selection represents extremely poor planning on the
teacher's part and is likely to cause confusion.
express in Englisn. we nave a tense called simple present tense
used to express actions that happen repeatedly, such as I play ter
Saturday mornings. However, we need a different tense, present pi
sive tense, to express an action that is happening right now, as ii
playing tennis now. In addition, we need yet another tense, present ]
tense, to express an action that began in the past and is still true c
pening now, such as I have played tennis since 2005. Clearly, expi
actions in the present time is not as "simple" as it might initially a
As you can imagine, the situation for ELLs is even hazier.
2.A. Typical ELL Errors: Noticing the Gap
Can you identify and explain these five common ELL errors wil
grammar point?
1.	*1 MH/i/H/thi/S àtyfer albofwy adu/bt l/fe.
2.	* The/ solution to wty problem ίίΗ/t depend/ 0 ห/ another per
3.	working your liRci^aT the/bank/non/?
4.	* Moderห/ COOK are/ honing wnch/ better tirei than/ 0ห/ the/[
ร. WoyoirkMrt/iwrkedatthii bank/ท่หre/the/latttiw&t sanry
Much of the time, the tense of a verb in English logically m
the time of the action. However, there is sometimes a difference be
the time of an action and the verb tense that is used to express
example, present progressive tense (also called present contii
tense) is logically used for actions that are happening right now..
name of the tense actually implies, the action is progressing or ha
ing at the present moment. Thus, a student in this course migl
Right now I am reading this book. However, that same student can al
the same verb tense to indicate future time and say, I am reading a
ent book tomorrow. To be sure, this lack of exact match between the
and its time is disconcerting to many ELLs and, as expected, le;
confusion.
Verb Tense	Example -	Meaning
Simple Present	I study Chinese every day.	a habitual or repeating action
Present Progressive	I am studying Chinese today.	a current action
Present Perfect	I have studied Chinese since 2006.	an action that began in the past but continues to be true
Present Perfect Progressive	I have been studying Chinese all morning.	an action that began in the past but is continuing now (with emphasis on the fact that it is still happening)
No ESL textbook and no teacher should ever try to teach all these
verb tenses at the same time. Traditionally, these verb tenses would be
interspersed with other tenses like the simple past and past progressive.
However, a usual order of presentation within the twelve verb tenses in
English is: simple present -> present progressive -> present perfect ->
present perfect progressive.
Some L2 researchers and materials writers, however, advocate teach-
ing present progressive tense first because that tense is much more fre-
quent in English usage than simple present tense. The counterargument
for the more traditional order with simple present first is that ELLs can
learn the base form of a verb first (e.g., run, decide, cook) before learning
an expanded version (e.g., running, deciding, cooking'). You should follow
the curriculum that your school has established, but you should pay
attention to the language in your ELLs' textbooks to see which of these
four tenses is actually used more often.
2.B. Grammar Explanation
2.8.1.	Simple Present Tense
We use simple present tense for habitual or repeated actions.
Example: Every day I walk from my house to the bus stop.
Now-
Pivst	
\z	V	\z	>z	\z	z	\z	\z	xz	V	V
A A A A A /	I A A A A A >
1 walk	we waiK
you walk	you walk
he/she/it walks	they walk
The simple present tense takes the form: VEi
-8 for third person singular can be pronounced i:
/s/ (cooks), /z/ (lives) 1 /az/ (sneezes). The reasor
pronunciations are explained in Key 8. (In this b<
between slashes: /k/; /a/, and /t/ are the three
cut.)
Some verbs are irregular in spelling yet eve
study -> studies (not studys), go -> goes (not gos), do
have -> has (not haves).
ÈLLs learn the simple ;
present of be '/ am, you
are, Mshc/it is, wo are,
they arc), so well that
they accidentally tic'ude
ล form of bo when they
reefy want to say only
the subject pronoun.
Therefore», an error such -
as ■·'/ am walk (instead
of the intended ! am
■//diking) is a natural,
expected error in Eng-
lish acquisition. 5
Common ELL Mistakes: What Your ELL
1.	Use VERB + -s only when the subject is he
person singular).
wrong: Laura cook scrambled eggs for bn
correct: Laura cooks scrambled eggs for bl
2.	Remember to change -y to -i and add -es
-y to -i if a vowel precedes : day -> days, bo1
to add -es after o, sh, ch, and ร.
wrong: My baby sister crys when she is hl
correct: My baby sister cries when she is h
3.	Do not use be with verbs in simple presen
wrong: I am walk to school every day.
correct: I walk to school every day.
2.8.2.	Present Progressive Tense
We use present progressive tense for actions tha
now.
Example: Right now I am walking from 1
office.

Now-
1 am walking
you are walking
he/she/it is walking
we are walking
you are walking
they are walking
The present progressive tense takes the form: am/is/are + VERB + -ing.
The -ing form is called the present participle. Use am, is, or are accord-
ing to the subject; that is, the verb must agree with its subject.
To create the present participle, add -ing to the base form of the
verb. Follow these spelling rules:
1.	Drop the final -e before adding -ing: take -> taking, write -> writing.
2.	Double the final consonant if there is only one vowel before it:
cut -> cutting, begin -> beginning.
3.	Do not double the final consonant if there is not one (and only
one) vowel before it: end -> ending, keep -> keeping, read -> reading,
close -> closing.
Common ELL Mistakes: What Your ELLs Should Know
1.	Don't use VERB or VERB + -s for actions that are happening
just now or only once.
wrong: We study very hard for tomorrow's test.
correct: We are studying very hard for tomorrow's test.
2.	Don't use -ing for actions that happen every day or all the time.
wrong: The earth is going around the รนท once a year.
correct: The earth goes around the รนท once a year.
3.	Don't forget to use be.
wrong: My baby brother crying now.
correct: My baby brother is crying now.
4.	Be careful with tire spelling of the present participle.
wrong: cuting, siting, planing, eatting, helpping, openning
correct: cutting, sitting, planning, eating, helping, opening
5.	Don't use present progressive if the verb does not show an
action (as opposed to a state of being). Examples of verbs that
are rarely in progressive tenses are: own, possess, like, love, need,
want, have, seem, feel, be, prefer, remember, forget, believe.
wrong: I am owning two cars.
correct: I own two cars.
When
" posss
used ii
tenses
a car).
exp res
have
goad
a baby
tenses
When
action
option
a goo<
I iiiway
limo Ü
When
owner
only o
have
Example: I have walked in this park ever
the past two years.
pfost
Now-

Singular	Plural
I have walked	we have walked
you have walked	you have walked
he/she/it has walked	they have walked
The present perfect tense takes the form: have/h
For the auxiliary (or helping) verb have, use ha\
the subject.
Past Participle for Regular Verbs. The past
verb is the same as its past tense. You add -ed tc
verb. This -ed ending is pronounced in three d
/ad/. See Key 8 for more detailed information.
Follow these spelling rules:
1.	For verbs that already end in -e, just adc
sneeze -> sneezed.
2.	Double the final consonant if there is onl
step -> stepped, rob -> robbed.
3.	Do not double the final consonant if then
one) vowel before it: end -> ended, ask -> เ
Past Participle for Irregular Verbs. Commc
participle forms of irregular verbs include -en, -1
done, and torn, but there are other possibilities. So
the same for present, past, and past participle as
put, put. Another pattern is different vowels, especi
sang, sung or ring, rang, rung. The good news for I
small number of all the verbs in English are irregu
to memorize the irregular forms that are most I
Teaching Technique 9 and Appendix 2.)
whole life.
correct: I was bom here and I will die here. I have lived here
my whole life.
2.	Do not use have or has with the wrong subject.
wrong: Sarah have rented the same apartment since 2005.
correct: Sarah has rented the same apartment since 2005.
3.	Use the correct past participle with present perfect tense.
wrong: Sarah has already complete all the homework.
correct: Sarah has already completed all the homework.
2.8.4.	Present Perfect Progressive Tense
We use present perfect progressive tense to express an action that began
in the past but is continuing now with emphasis on the fact that it is still
happening.
Example: I have been walking in this park for almost an
hour.
How-
pfost:
ΪΙΛΛ‘r เพ &
I have been walking
you have been walking
we have been walking
you have been walking
he/she/it has been walking they have been walking
The present perfect progressive tense takes the form: have/has +
been + VERB + -ing. For the auxiliary verb have, use have or has accord-
ing to the subject. In this tense, been never changes.
1.	Do not torget to use have or has with Dee
past participle.
wrong: I been waiting for the bus for aln
correct.· I have been waiting for the bus fo
2.	Do not use present progressive tense for a
(even though it is happening in present ti
for or since is used.
wrong: I am waiting for the bus for almc
correct: I have been waiting for the bus f(
2.8.5.	Negative Forms
	Negative For
Simple Present	I/you/we/they + do + not + VERB he/she/it + does + not + VERB
Present Progressive	I am + not + VERB + -ing you/we/they are + not + VERB + -ir he/she/it + is + not + VERB + -ing
Present Perfect	I/you/we/they + have + not + PAST he/she/it + has + not + PAST PARTI
Present Perfect Progressive	I/you/we/they + have + not + been + he/she/it + has + not + been + VERI
Of the four tenses for expressing present time,
negate is simple present tense.
In simple present tense, a negative takes the :
VERB. Do not is used with I, you, we, or they; do
she, or it. ELLs consistently and frequently :
(1) omission of do/does (*I not understand), (2
watch TV every morning'), and (3) including -s (*T
sells fresh fish).
In present progressive tense, negating is easy 1
auxiliary be as shown on page 92: am not, is r
were not.
to add not after a main verb. Instead, you must add the auxiliaries do or
does (or did for past, as you will see on pp. 128-30) and the word not.
Common ELL Mistakes: What Your ELLs should Know
1.	Do not forget to use do not or does not with simple present
tense.
wrong: I no speak French well.
correct: I do not speak French well.
2.	Do not use am, is not, or are not with the base form of a
verb. Use do not or does not only.
wrong: The man is not like this food.
correct: The man does not like this food.
3.	With simple present tense, use -8 for he/she/it only one
time in the verb. If you have does, then the verb cannot
have an -s, too.
wrong: This soup doesn't smells good.
correct: This soup doesn't smell good.
4.	Do not use don't, doesn't, or didn't to negate verbs in
present perfect or present perfect tenses. Don't confuse don't
have with haven't. Don't confuse doesn't have with hasn't.
wrong: We don't have eaten at that restaurant yet.
correct.· We have not eaten at that restaurant yet.
wrong: I applied for a visa to visit Brazil, but the Brazilian
embassy doesn't have returned my passport yet.
correct: I applied for a visa to visit Brazil, but the Brazilian
embassy hasn't returned my passport yet.
Ill It
int(
■	is Γ
t y°1
atü
h Ian
"ELI
Ian
' cur
■	go)
nee
f nol
tad
Lea
1 mir
tau
เท Γ
1 Enc
th(
wit
not
hav
1 au>
on I
eat
Π0-
eat
If your students are
exposed to the
non-standard form
ain't in songs or in
conversation, they
. should^be made aware.
of its meaning and
non-standard status. If
1 your ELLs will not be
' exposed to this word,
there is no need to
„ learn about it.
Verb Tense	Affirmative
Simple Present	—
Present Progressive	lam-} I'm
	he/she/it is -> he's/she's/it's
	you/we/they are -> you 're/we're/they're
Present Perfect; Present Perfect Progressive	I/you/we/they + have -> I've/you've/we've/they've
	he/she/it + has -* he’s/she’s/it's
NOTE: Another way to negate here is to use th( tions and add not. For example, he is not -> he are not -> they aren't OR they're not.	
Explain to your ELLs
h that Linda's can
mean three different
things: Linda is (Linda's
here), Linda has
(Linda's taken your _
keys), or possessive
(Where IS Linda's car?).
It IS necessary to prac-
tice each of these -
three forms separately'
and then practice them
1 all together.1 You-
; should appreciate how
hard it is for ELLs to
know which form IS -
being used in rapid
conversation.
Common ELL Mistakes: what Your EL
1.	There is no contraction for am not.
wrong: I amn't from northern India.,
correct: I am not from northern India, c
northern India.
2.	Only use -'s for has when it is used as ar
main verb.
wrong: Linda's bought a new car. It's an
system.
correct: Linda's bought a new car. It has
system.
because it requires the addition of a form of the auxiliary do. In the
other three tenses, you invert the auxiliary (be for present progressive
and have for both present perfect, and present perfect progressive).
Tense	Interrogative Form
Simple Present	do + I/you/we/they + VERB does + he/she/it + VERB
Present Progressive	am I + VERB + -ing are + you/we/they + VERB + -ing is + he/she/it + VERB + -ing
Present Perfect	have + I/you/we/they + PAST PARTICIPLE has + he/she/it + PAST PARTICIPLE
Present Perfect Progressive	have + I/you/we/they + been + VERB + -ing has + he/she/it + been + VERB + -ing
Common ELL Mistakes: What Your ELLs Should Know
1.	For simple present tense, remember to use does with he, she,
and it. Use do with other subjects.
wrong: Do Luke like hockey?
correct: Does Luke like hockey?
2.	For simple present tense, do not put -8 on the verb in yes-no
questions. Use only the base (simple) form of the verb. For
he/she/it, you need only one -s in the question.
wrong: Does Valerie goes to class every day?
correct: Does Valerie go to class eveiy day?
3.	Do not begin simple present tense verb questions with am, is,
or are unless the main verb is to be.
wrong: Is Mary own a sports car?
correct: Does Mary own a sports car?
4.	For questions using present progressive, begin with am, is, or
are, not do or does.
wrong: Do you wearing a new tie today?
correct: Are you wearing a new tie today?
present perfect tense.
wrong: How many international trips <
your life?
correct: How many international trips ]
life?
2.C. Native Language Interference:
Compare English with other Languages
1 Language	Notes on Preset
Arabic	1.	Arabic has a present tense fo the action is not finished. 2.	There is no progressive form 3.	English present perfect tense Arabic by the present form o depending on the exact meal present perfect example in El 4.	The endings of the verbs char subject. In fact, the verb in Ar inflected than in English, whi VERB (you like) and VERB + - 14 separate verb endings, inc for I, (male) you, (female) yoi (male) they (two), (female) tl we (more than two), (male) } (female) you (more than two) than two), and (female) they (
Chinese	Chinese verbs do not have differ tense. Instead, time adverbiais st always are used to convey the tin
French	French has verb tenses that appe English system, but there are im 1.	French has no progressive ten speaking ELLs write *It rains 2.	English present perfect is renc past in French according to tl present perfect. Thus, I have a past, but I have lived here since ent. In fact, a common error 2004. 3.	The endings of verbs change a
tnese constructions CIO not overlap pertectly witli
English.
3.	There is no future marker; instead, present tense is
used with appropriate time adverbs.
4.	Japanese has at least two conditional forms; one is
very similar to English and the other is stronger and
means if and only if or provided that. In either case,
the word if (ทพรhi) is not required because the spe-
cial verb form indicates conditional.
5. Subject pronouns are often omitted.
Korean	1.	Like Japanese, basic Korean word order is subject- object-verb, so the verb is near the end of a sentence. 2.	Simple present and present progressive exist, but there is no perfect aspect. 3.	Verbs do not have endings for the various subjects.
Russian	1.	Russian has simple present tense. 2.	Russian has no progressive tenses per se, but pres- ent progressive may be expressed by using the imperfect aspect with the present tense. 3.	When present perfect tense refers to a past action that is still true, such as I have lived here since 2005, Russian uses present tense. A common error is *1 live here since 2005 or *1 am living here since 2005.
Spanish	Spanish has verb tenses that appear to mirror the Eng- lish system, but there are many differences. 1.	English present perfect is rendered by present, past, or present perfect in Spanish according to the spe- cific meaning of present perfect. 2.	Spanish has a future tense and can also use be going to as English does, but simple present tense is often used with an appropriate future time adverbial. As a result, Spanish speakers often say *In a little while, I cook dinner or *If you need a ride to the store, I take you. 3.	The endings of verbs change according to the subject. 4.	Subject pronouns are usually omitted; the verb end- ings indicate the subject.
will form negatives by placing no before the X
*1 no like onions or *she no work here.
2.	ELLs have difficulty understanding the differe
negating the verb have (I have a car = I don't h
car) and the auxiliary verb have in present pel
tense (I have studied = I haven't studied). Be pr
for this question.
3.	The use of the auxiliary verbs do and does in c
tions is unique to English. Many ELLs will WI
questions with subject-verb inversion or regu
statement word order: * Uses more fuel a car 01
pick-up truck? or *The trip takes six hours?
I FIND OUT I
\ ( on รน 11 a < on II 111 II \ll look sill 11 '1
'1 111 Ilium Ulis 111 im 1 000 \ Old )
I In most lonlint tislhooks พ<_I
I ixpul 1 high 111 111 I bl I OÍ pnsiiilij
I tcnsi \uhs hill เร this till <asi?|
I 11st 1 iLibi II mill all (V c 1\c ร». IbI
I 11 piiSk nu d md lo whal ixlint ΐ
I Lalเร 111' ilk Mills)	I
2.D. Ideas for Teaching
This section presented four tenses that express some form of
time. Simple present tense is usually used for habitual actions,
progressive is usually used for actions that are happening
moment. Present perfect is a very difficult tense because it has
four distinct meanings, some of which involve the present. Pres
feet progressive tense is used for actions that began in the past a
tinue now, with emphasis on the duration of the action.
Simple present tense and present progressive are usually co
a beginning class. Present perfect is covered at the intermediate c
times upper-intermediate levels. Present perfect progressive is
after present perfect has had an opportunity to sink in. One ph
non of ELL teaching that you will observe with these tenses is tl
seem to handle the first tense—no matter which one is taught fi]
fine, but when they are introduced to a second and third tens
lems begin to occur because at that point, there are several for
verb tenses) competing in the learners' heads. The more tenses
ELL studies, the greater the mental battle as the ELL attempts to
ber the form of the tenses and their correct uses.
Simple present is taught first even though we know that pres
gressive tends to occur much more frequently in spoken Engli
simple present. Simple present is covered first, I think, because
tion and sequencing. If your students study simple present first
is easier to follow with present progressive next. Any time yc
something, you should always put yourself in your ELLs' shoes
yourself, "What have I learned already that is likely to be confus
what I am about to learn?" ELLs manage fine with simple presei
which they incorrectly (over)use in lieu of other tenses. Beginni
A simple follow-up activity for present progressive is charades. Write
out actions on small slips of paper. Ask students to sit in a circle. One
student comes to the front of the class, takes a strip of paper, and
demonstrates the activity. Students must respond only with the pattern,
You are VERBing. For example, they must say, You're dancing. You're walk-
ing. You're jumping as they try to guess the person's action. Only state-
ments or questions that are worded in present progressive can win
points.
Present perfect tense is perhaps the most difficult of all tenses
because this tense has at least four very distinct uses (covered elsewhere
in this book). I recommend teaching each of these uses separately. The
easiest use, which should be taught first, is for an action that began in
the past but continues until now: I have worked at this company since
2000. Ask ELLs to think of actual situations that began in the past and
are still true. Ask them to arrange their sentence in this concrete format:
1.	I work at this company.
2.	I began this action in 2000.
3.	I have worked at this company since 2000.
The most difficult use for ELLs to produce on their own is a past
action that is relevant to the present: I am shocked by the news today that
the price of gasoline has risen again. Bring in newspapers and ask your
ELLs to search for present perfect in the opening paragraphs of five to
ten articles. Because writers must quickly build background information
for readers, they frequently use the present perfect tense in the first two
or three sentences of their article.
Present perfect progressive is an upper-intermediate verb tense. Like
present perfect, this tense is difficult for ELLs to produce on their own,
but it is easier because it does not have the number of potential uses
that present perfect does.
In Spanish, Arabic, Japanese, and other languages, there are
like those in English, but the tenses have somewhat differed
sider the situation of an ELL who wants to tell a story in pas
ELL has seven choices, including: I have eaten. I ate. I had eati
ing. I had been eating. I used to eat. I would eat.
First, the ELL has to learn how to make the seven form!
or have eatingใ Ate or Bated? Had been eating or had been eat
tion to having to learn these seven different options listed :
OUS paragraph, the logical question for the ELL is when ti
form. Which past tense is the most appropriate to use in a
tion? As a teacher, can you explain the difference betwee
short sentences at the end of the last paragraph? If native ร]
a hard time distinguishing these, imagine how tough it is f
distinguish these forms.
3.A. Typical ELL Errors: Noticing the Gap
Can you identify and explain these five common ELL errc
grammar point?
1.	* According to the, report) dozens of people, did nc
their tax Iftfr motion,.
2.	* when, ΐ à dimer last night) my uncle, called, to
3.	* Hour many people, did,you, talked, to al the party
I.	*By the time ΐ uras old, enough to trote, Iparticipa
local canipalgns.
5.	*1)0you, have
everfloum, on, a, 747jtcmbo jet?
Simple Past	I ate dinner at 8 PM.	a single past event
Past Progressive (Continuous)	I was eating dinner when you called.	a past action that was happening (when it was interrupted by another)
Present Perfect	I have eaten at that restaurant.	a past action (indefinite time) that could happen again
Past Perfect	I had eaten dinner before you called.	a past action that was completed before a second past action
Past Perfect Progressive	I had been eating dinner before you called.	an action that began in the past before a second past action (with emphasis on the duration of the action)
Used to and Would	When I was still single, I used to eat dinner in front of the TV. I would put my food on a plate, and then I would take it to the small table in front of the TV. Then I'd eat dinner while I was watching TV. Now that I'm married, things have changed, and we eat at the dining room table.	Used to: an action that happened many times in the past but is no longer true; frequently opens a past narrative Would: refers to smaller actions that happened repeatedly in a past narrative but are no longer true
perfect progressive -> used to -> would. You should
that your school has established, but you shouli
language in your ELLs' textbooks to see which of
used more often.
3.B. Grammar Explanation
3.8.1. Simple Past Tense
We use simple past tense for an action that was C(
Example: Yesterday I walked from my hoi
stop.
Now-
pfost
------------------------------------------
Singular	Plural
I walked	we walked
you walked	you walked
he/she/it walked	they walked
The simple past tense usually takes the form:
ending can be pronounced in three different ways
/ad/ needed. The reasons for these pronunciation
189-90.
Spelling the past form is problematic. Son
while others may be doubled. Study these spellin
•	For verbs that end in -e already, you add or
•	Some verbs are irregular in spelling: stuc
studyed). For verbs that end in consonant
the -y to -i and then add -ed: study -> Stu:
end in vowel + -y, just add -ed: play -> pla
•	The rules for whether or not to double tf
when adding -ed (seemed vs. *seemmed) an
opened, nappen	nappenea, visit visited. (See IfeaciungTech-
nique 9.)	Longe
1 verbs
There are approximately 60 frequently used irregular past tense ’ such c
verbs in English. These patterns are varied, do -> did, go “> went, cut -> Sparta/
cut. See Appendix 2.	slayjs
Common ELL Mistakes: What Your ELLs Should Know
1.	Don't use VERB or VERB + -8 in the past tense. Don't forget to
use -ed.
wrong: Laura cooks scrambled eggs for breakfast yesterday.
correct: Laura cooked scrambled eggs for breakfast yesterday.
2.	Do not use was/were with verbs (other than to be) in simple
past tense.
wrong: I was walk to school yesterday.
correct: I walked to school yesterday.
3.	Don't forget to change -y to -i and add -ed.
wrong: My baby sister ciyed last night.
correct: My baby sister cried last night.
4.	If a verb ends in consonant-vowel-consonant (C-V-C) (in its
stressed syllable), don't forget to double the consonant before
adding -ed.
wrong: She stoped the car to answer her cell phone.
correct: She stopped the car to answer her cell phone.
long II
dashio
teachi
sakec
becau
ignore
Englis!
you te
tense
most I
your E
know;
and th
than >
ELLs fi
or we
. cal the
/ was
I walk<
action
learne
have t
Γ well ti
v learne
chunk
• nature
past te
We use past progressive tense for an action that
another action interrupted it. In other words, the
was continuing when the second action occurred
sive for the first or longer action and use simp]
action (i.e., the one that interrupts the first).
Example: The rain started while we were 1
park.
พ่๗พ r wp'ibo พ	NOW'
-c-----E------------------------------------------
Singular	Plural
I was walking
you were walking
he/she/it was walking
we were walking
you were walking
they were walking
The past progressive tense takes the form: wa:
The -ing form is called the present participle. Us
ing to the subject.
To create the present participle, add -ing to
verb. Follow the spelling rules outlined earlier on
Common ELL Mistakes; what Your ELI
1.	Do not use was/were and a verb without -
past progressive tense.
wrong: When I got my first job, I was live
correct: When I got my first job, I was livi
2.	Don't mix up past progressive tense and si
wrong: I cut the onions. Then I was putti
correct: I cut the onions. Then I put them
3.	Be careful with the spelling of the present
wrong: cuting, siting, planing, eatting, he
correct: cutting, sitting, planning, eating, ]
4.	Don't use past progressive if the verb does
(as opposed to a state of being). Examples
rarely in progressive tenses are: own, posses,
want, have, seem, feel, be, prefer, remember, f
wrong: From 2000 to 2007,1 was owning
correct: From 2000 to 2007,1 owned two
Singular	Plural
I have walked	we have walked
you have walked	you have walked
he/she/it has walked	they have walked
The present perfect tense takes the form: have/has + PAST PARTICIPLE.
For the auxiliary verb have, use have or has according to the subject. The
past participle is the third principal part of any verb.
Past Participle for Regular Verbs. The past participle of a regular verb
is the same as its past tense form. You add -ed to the base form of the
verb. Follow these spelling rules:
1.	For verbs that already end in -e, just add -d: create -> created,
sneeze -> sneezed.
2.	Rules for when to double the final consonant are discussed on
pp. 116-17.
3.	Pronunciation rules for past participle -ed can be found on
p. 189.
Past Participle for Irregular Verbs. Common endings for the past par-
ticiple forms of irregular verbs include -en, -ne, or -n as in chosen, done,
and torn, but there are other possibilities. Some irregular forms are the
same for present, past, and past participle as in cut -> cut -> cut or put ->
put -> put. Another pattern is different internal vowels, especially i -> a
-> น as in sing -> sang -> sung or ring -> rang -> rung. The good news for
students is that of all the thousands of verbs in English, only a relatively
small number are irregular. The bottom line: Students must memorize
the irregular forms that are most commonly used. (See Appendix 2 for a
list of past participles.)
Usage No. 1: Past Action or Situation that Conti
Example
José: How long have you worked at Carpet พ
Sara: I've been there for 18 years. In fact, I've พ
there longer than any of my supervisors!
José: What do you do there?
Sara: I used to work on the assembly line, but
1995, I've been with the sales force in th
office.
- ,	Now
VA>st
We can use present perfect to talk about a past
continues now. (It can be affirmative or negative
that it still continues.) In this example, Sara tell;
at this same company for 18 years. This means t
years ago and still continues today.
Usage No. 2: Recent Past Action that Is Important
Example
Amber: It's hot in here, why don't you turn on
conditioner?
James: Actually, I've just turned it on. We have
wait a few minutes to feel it. Can I helf
with the reports?
Amber: Thanks, but I've already finished them,
they are.
Now
pfost	.....
-----------------------X-----------------
We can use present perfect to talk about a past
short time ago and that is still important to tl
this example, Amber is complaining about t
room right now. James explains to Amber that t
conditioner. When James says, I've just turned it
action is finished but that it is still important t
In other words, there is a connection between hi
American English, Usage No. 2 can also use simple past tense.)
Usage No. 3: Past Experience, Indefinite Past Time
Example	Key Words
Katie: Susan's just gotten back from China. She told me she had a great time. Sean: That's wonderful news. She must be tired. That was really a long trip. Katie: I wonder how many hours it is from here to China. Have you ever gone there? Sean: No, I've never gone there, but my uncle had traveled there many times. In fact, he went there last month. He has to go there on business.	ever never many times (others: before, already)

We can use present perfect to talk about a past experience. In this situa-
tion, one person wants to know if a second person has ever done a partic-
ular action. In this example, Katie is telling Sean that Susan has just
returned from China. Katie wants to know if Sean has ever traveled to
China. She uses the common question, Have you ever ...ใ Notice that
went is in simple past tense because it refers to a specific past event. In
other words, went refers to definite past time, not indefinite past time.
Usage No. 4: With Yet (indicates a past indefinite action)
Example	Key Words I
Mike: We don't have much time. Are you almost	
ready?	
Kent: Give me just a few more minutes, Mike.	
Mike: What about the travel report and the salary	
sheets? Have you finished them yet?	yet (in a
Kent: I've already finished the salary sheets, but I	question)
haven't finished the travel report yet. I only	yet (in a
need a few more minutes, okay?	negative)
No พ-
Pa>st
PM/tiM'L·
Saleh: How was the movie that you went to sei
night?
Marcos: Don't waste your money! That was the ไ
movie that I have ever seen in my life.
Saleh: Wow, I'm surprised. You know it's the IT
expensive movie that anyone in Hollywi
has ever made.
โ, cost
__________________________
Nour
_____________
OR
pfost
_______________________
________________________
Nour
OR
Pcost
Nour
_____________________
_________________________
We usually use present perfect with a superlative
movie is the best, we mean that it is the best that พ
point in time.
Mother:	Is that the third paper that you have had to write for that class this semester?	the third . . .
Bernadette: Yes, but it's the first paper that the teacher	the first. . .
has asked US to complete on the computer. Mother:	So what are you worried about now? Bernadette: I'm not good at using the computer. Mother:	You have to practice! This seems like the	the
hundredth time that I've told you that you	hundredth
need to practice!	time
Pívst
Νοω-
PlA/tlWe,
When we say, It's the first paper that he's asked US to complete on the com-
puter, we are connecting all the past papers to the present paper, so we
use present perfect because present perfect connects a past event and the
present time or a present event.
Usage No. 7: Repetition of an Action before Now (Exact Time Is Not
Important)
Example	Key Words
Weiping: Can you believe it? There's another test next Monday! Paolo: Yeah, it's crazy. We've had six tests so far this month. Weiping: You know, in my biology class, the teacher has given only one test this semester. Paolo: Well, that's not good either. If you did badly on that one test, then your grade for the course is in trouble. Weiping: Maybe so, but I've had a lot of classes like that here.	six... so far one . . . this semester a lot
Ptwt
Notv-

dent at this school. All three of these time peril
We could not use present perfect if specific pai
month, last semester, or when Weiping was a studen
Common ELL Mistakes: What Your EL
1.	Do not forget to use have or has with the
wrong: I was born here and will die her
whole life.
correct: I was born here and will die her
my whole life.
2.	Do not use have or has with the wrong ร
wrong: Sarah have already completed al
correct: Sarah has already completed all
3.	Do not use be here with present perfect te
wrong: Sarah is already completed all th
correct: Sarah has already completed all
4.	Do not use present perfect with any sped
words.
wrong: I have gone to Mexico several tin
college.
correct: I went to Mexico several times พ
5.	Do not use simple past tense with action;
continuing.
wrong: I lived in this same apartment si]
correct: I have lived in this same apartmc
รนท set.
Noitf
Posit		V2	
			
	had	set	
walked
■may
เดึร
[sun 1i
: pèrfe
I tpry i
won
I told j
I Wfj/f
Í Key '
; rtiatk
Singular	Plural
I had walked	we had walked
you had walked	you had walked
he/she/it had walked	they had walked
The past perfect tense takes the form: had + PAST PARTICIPLE.
Common ELL Mistakes: what Your ELLs should Know
1.	Do not forget to use the past participle after had.
wrong: I had work for the bus for almost 20 years.
correct: I had worked for the bus for almost 20 years.
2.	Do not use past tense when past perfect is required.
wrong: when the company went bankrupt, I worked there for
20 years.
correct: When the company went bankrupt, I had worked
there for 20 years.
------XXX1------------x^
had been	started
walking
Singular	Plural
I had been walking	we had been walk
you had been walking	you had been wal
he/she/it had been walking	they had been wa
The past perfect progressive tense takes the
VERB + -ing.
Common ELL Mistakes: what Your ELL;
1.	Do not forget to use had with been follow
participle.
wrong: I been waiting for the bus for almi
when you arrived.
correct: I had been waiting for the bus for
when you arrived.
2.	Do not use past progressive tense for an on
wrong: I was waiting for the bus for almo!
you arrived.
correct: I had been waiting for the bus for
when you arrived.
Used to			 Would	
Singular	Plural	Singular	Plural
I used to walk	we used to walk	I would walk	we would walk
you used to walk	you used to walk	you would walk	you would walk
he/she/it used to walk	they used to walk	he/she/it would walk	they would walk
Used to expresses two ideas:
1.	the idea that a past action happened repeatedly, but it is no
longer (usually) done now
When I was a teenager, my dad and I used to go fishing
almost every weekend.
2.	a past fact that is no longer true
When I was a teenager, my family used to live in Mexico.
Would expresses only one idea (which it shares with used to):
1.	the idea that a past action happened repeatedly, but it is no
longer (usually) done now
When I was a teenager, my dad and I would go fishing
almost every weekend.

them, which in turn makes their papers
"off" to a native speaker. For past repeat!
lar, English almost always requires used t
IMPORTANT: Notice that when nati
past narrative, we often utilize used to t<
then would for all the internal details of
ELL:	When I was a teenager, ท
fishing almost every weel
early and drove to the la]
all day. We took the fish
for dinner. Yes, my dad a
about every weekend.
Native speaker: When I was a teenager, ท
go fishing almost every ท
get up early and would d
would stay there all day.
fish home and would fry
Yes, my dad and I used ti
every weekend.
2.	Don't use would for non-actions.
wrong: When I was a kid, I would hate
correct: When I was a kid, I used to hate
3.8.7. Negative Forms
Tense	Negative Fc
Simple Past	SUB! + did + not + VERB
Past Progressive	I/he/she/it + was + not + VERB + you/we/they + were+ not + VERB
Past Perfect	SUB) + had + not + PAST PARTI
Past Perfect Progressive	SUBJ + had + not + been + VERI
Used to	SUBJ + did + not + use to + VER
Would	SUBJ + would + not + VERB
stood), (2) use of be (*I was not watch TV last night), and (3) including
-ed (*The clerk did not charged me the correct price).
In past progressive tense, negating is easy because you negate the
auxiliary be: was not, were not.
Present perfect tense forms the negative by adding not after the aux-
iliary verb: have/has not.
Both past perfect and past perfect progressive tenses form the nega-
tive by adding not after the auxiliary verb: had not.
Used to forms the negative in the same manner as any other verb:
did not + use to. Note that you must omit the -d. A common native
error is to include it: บ didn't used to like coffee, but now I do.
Would is a modal, and the negative of all modals involves putting
not afterward: would not.
To summarize, past expressions that involve an auxiliary verb are
negated by adding not after them. In contrast, simple past and used to
are main verbs, and it is not possible to add not after a main verb.
Instead, you must add the auxiliary did.
Common ELL Mistakes: what Your ELLs should Know
1.	Do not forget to use did not with simple past tense.
wrong: I not understood the directions well.
correct: I did not understand the directions well.
2.	For simple past tense, do not use was not or were not. Use
did not only.
wrong: The man was not like the food because it was too
salty.
correct: The man did not like the food because it was too
salty.
òdiiy.
correct: The man did not like the food t
salty.
4.	For past progressive, do not forget to use ■
wrong: When the war was just begin, a :
out against it.
correct: when the war was just beginnin
spoke out against it.
5.	Do not use don't or doesn't to negate ve
tense. Don't confuse don't have with hax
doesn't have with hasn't.
wrong: We don't have eaten at that resta
correct: We haven't eaten at that restaura
6.	Do not use didn't to negate verbs in past
confuse didn't have with hadn't.
wrong: When we met you, we didn't ha
for very long.
correct: When we met you, we hadn't liv
very long.
7.	The negative of used to is did + not + US
write used.
wrong: I didn't used to like animals, so
get any pets for me.
correct: I didn't use to like animals, so ท
get any pets for me.
Contractions here are not difficult. Several combinations are possible as
seen in this chart. (Only those parts of the verbs that can be contracted
are included here.)
Verb Tense	Affirmative	Negative
Simple Past	—	did not ■ไ> didn't
Present Perfect	I/you/we/they + have -> I've/you've/we've/they've	have not -> haven't
	he/she/it + has -> he's/she's/it's	has not -> hasn't
Past Perfect; Past Perfect Progressive	I/you/he/she/it/we/they + had -> I'd/you'd/he'd/it'd/we'd/they'd	had not -> hadn't
Used to	—	did not -> didn't
Would	I/you/he/she/it/we/they + would -> I’d/you'd/he'd/it'd/we'd/they'd	would not -> wouldn't
Another option for negative contractions is to use the existing affir- mative contractions and add not. For example, I have not -> I haven't OR I've not; we had not -> we hadn't OR we'd not.		
The
be <
bee
had
WOÍ
dep
forr
3.8.9. Forming Questions
Just as with negating, the only problematic tense is simple past and the
expression used to because they require the addition of the auxiliary
did. In the other tenses, you simply invert the auxiliary (was/were for
past progressive, have for present perfect, had for past perfect and past
perfect progressive, and the modal would).
Tense	Interrogative Form
Simple Past	did + SUBJ + VERB
Past Progressive	was + I/he/she/it + VERB + -ing were + you/we/they + VERB + -ing
Present Perfect	have + I/you/we/they + PAST PARTICIPLE has + he/she/it + PAST PARTICIPLE
Past Perfect	had + SUBJ -r PAST PARTICIPLE
Past Perfect Progressive	had + SUBJ + been + VERB + -ing
Used to	did + SUBJ + use to + VERB
Would	would + SUBJ + VERB
wrong: Did Valerie attended class yesterc
correct: Did Valerie attend class yesterda)
, The structure have +
NOUN/PRONOUN +
PAST PARTICIPLE (as
in Did you have your
' work done when you
went to class?) IS a
very complex structure
that very few4ELLs,
know about, let alone.
; actually use. Àn ELL
who asks Did you Have
done your work'... ?
I is probably jot -
ί attempting this”; .
L advanced structure.
เ Instead, the' eLl has
most likely confused
* Did you have done'
with Have you done?
2.	Do not begin simple past tense verb ques
were.
wrong: Was Mary own a sports car?
correct: Did Mary own a sports car?
3.	For questions with past progressive, begin
not did.
wrong: Did you wearing a new tie when
boss yesterday?
correct: Were you wearing a new tie whei
boss yesterday?
4.	Do not use did in the question form of tl
tense.
wrong: How many international trips dil
your life?
correct: How many international trips ha
life?
5.	Do not use did in the question form of tl·
wrong: Did you have finished the projec
called?
correct: Had you finished the project befi
6.	In questions with used to, be sure to dro]
wrong: How many children did families
century ago?
correct: How many children did families
century ago?
Compare English with other Languages
Noles on Past Verbs
Language
Arabic	1.	Arabic has a past form that means that the action is finished. 2.	There is no progressive form. 3.	English present perfect can be rendered in Arabic by the present form or the past form, depending on the exact meaning of the present perfect in English. 4.	The endings of the verbs change according to the subject.
Chinese	1.	Chinese verbs do not have different forms to mark tense. Instead, time adverbiais such as yesterday or before the war are used. 2.	Verbs do not change form according to the subject.
French	French has verb tenses that appear to mirror the Eng- lish system, but there are differences. 1.	French has no progressive tenses. Thus, a French-speaking ELL may say *John called when I ate dinner (instead of when I was eating dinner). 2.	English present perfect is rendered by present or past in French according to the specific kind of pres- ent perfect. 3.	The most common way to express simple past tense in French is with a tense whose form is similar to present perfect in English. Thus, Marie a fini son travail (literally "Marie has finished her work") can be translated as either Marie finished her work or Marie has finished her work, depending on the context. 4.	The endings of verbs change according to the subject.
Japanese	1.	Japanese has distinct forms for simple past and past progressive, but there are no separate perfect tenses. 2.	The different meanings of English present perfect can be expressed with special constructions. A sentence in the recent past such as I've just eaten is rendered by a special construction consisting of past tense with an equivalent word for just. However, a present perfect verb whose action is still true such as I've lived here since 2000 would use a form of present tense because the action of the verb is still true. 3.	Japanese has a special structure to express the have you ever meaning of present perfect, as in Have you ever flown on a 747 jet? (This is rendered literally as *747 jet inflew-event made is there? or *Is there the
	rally Have you ever flown on a ELLs may produce errors such or * Since 2000,1 live here. 4. Japanese ELLs have a difficull feet tense.
Korean	1.	Korean has distinct forms for progressive, but there are no 2.	The different meanings of En| can be expressed with special past sentence such as I've just past tense with an equivalent still true present perfect sentei here since 2000 would use a fc because the action of the verb 3.	Korean ELLs have a difficult t tense.
Russian	1.	Russian has simple past tense 2.	Russian has no progressive te progressive may be expressec feet aspect with the past tens 3.	When present perfect tense re that is finished, such as I hav Russian uses past tense. 4.	Russian ELLs find past perfec gressive tenses challenging.
Spanish	1.	Spanish has verb tenses that English system, but there are 2.	English present perfect is ren or present perfect in Spanish cific kind of present perfect, t refers to a current situation 0 3.	The endings of verbs change a 4.	Subject pronouns are usually endings indicate the subject. rained a lot recently.
All Languages	1.	The use of the auxiliary verb verbs is unique to English. M negatives by placing no befor ers no saved any money. 2.	ELLs have difficulty understan negating the verb have in simj. car -> I didn't have a car) and tense (I had studied - I hadn't for this question.
3.D. Ideas for Teaching
To express past time in English, ELLs have at their disposal at least five
tenses and two expressions (used to and would). Beginning students usu-
ally study only simple past tense. At the intermediate level, ELLs study
past progressive and present perfect. At the upper-intermediate or low-
advanced levels, ELLs study past perfect and past perfect progressive. At
the advanced level, ELLs learn about the nuances that used to and
would can give to a story being told in the past.
Learning to add -ed to base verbs to create simple past tense is not
difficult. The hard part for many ELLs is mastering how to negate and
how to ask questions. Teaching simple past tense involves four stages:
affirmative, pronunciation of -ed, negative, and question.
To teach the affirmative form, show students how it is related to
simple present tense. On the board, draw two columns. Write every day
and yesterday at the top of each. Begin with three regular verbs. Write the
verb with the word I in each column.
every day:	yesterday
I		I		
I need	I needed
I want	I wanted
I grade	I graded
I , FINffl
' IJnd a 1 000-WÇ
I liansciipl OÍ a li
I Look Ιοί all oic
I tense veibs B
I usages DoesU
I dominate?
Notice how all these three example verbs end in the sound of either /d/
or /t/. I intentionally use only /d/ or /t/ verbs because I know that these
verbs will add /sd/ as an extra syllable. I am not going to teach the pro-
nunciation of -ed yet, but we want to start with the least confusing verbs
first. Use verbs that have a strong extra syllable pronunciation because
this matches what the students expect to see. (If you use watch or raise,
then students will ask you why you don't say watch*ed or raise*ed as two
syllables. While this is a valid question, you should avoid the scenario
that creates this question—at least on day one.)
pronunciation of -ed. Ask students to tell you a
They will tell you some irregular verbs that they k
as went or did, but just say that those verbs are Sf
ied later. Your board should have four columns i
above Column 1, but do not put any header on
now.
Past Tense	
	
The three columns will be for verbs that end
/d/, and verbs that add an extra syllable /ad/. At tl
tion is not on the board. As students tell you a V
column and then write it in the appropriate colui
someone says work, write worked in the first co]
column because worked ends in /t/. If the next vei
in the first column and the fourth column. At this
curious why you are not writing anything in the o
explanation. If students ask, tell them that you
what the system is. After eight verbs, your board 1
Past Tense		
woiiked		wo liked
wanted		
needed		
oQosed	eQosed	
pitepaited	pftepafted	
faked		faked
watched		watched
piayecf	piayed	
Ullllg d.UUU.L Lilt. piUllLUJA-LdLlUll VI LHC U1J.CC VVUlUo. noiv LllCp 0LU.U.C11LO LU
analyze closed, prepared, and played. Then ask the same about wanted and
needed. If no one has any idea, let the students call out five more verbs.
Write the past tense form in the correct column. If no one is able to
guess that it is the final sound of the -ed form, tell them that there are
three ways to pronounce the -ed. If they cannot hear the ending, put the
word in a phrase so that the -ed is followed by a vowel sound. This
combination usually helps ELLs hear the /t/ or /d/. For worked, use the
phrase she worked all morning. Say it three times. Make the students say it
with you. Ask students what word they hear in the middle. Many will
say that they hear the word tall! By the end of this activity, the headers
/t/, /d/, and /ad/ should be over the three columns.
For the negative and question form, help students visualize the -ed
being cut and then traveling to the auxiliary did. For negatives, your
board could look like this:
Write example in past; leave space in between.	Jน o/ty	cMed th hauls.
Ask students what tense it is and how they know; circle the -ed.	บนพy	caiO the bank.
Draw an X over the -ed and then an arrow to just after Mary.	๙นafty	ca$M th batik.
Now just below the arrow pointing to the space next to Mary, write did.	Üน(Ifty did	oaêà the batik.
Add not.	บนa/ty did not	oa$M th batik.
Ask students what the pattern is; write รบBJ + under Mary, did not + under did not, and VERB under call.	บนa/ty did not SUB) + did not	oaU the bank. +VERB
When teaching the pattern for questions, do something similar by
showing that the -ed is cut and transformed into did. Then show that
did travels all the way to the beginning of the question.
veru i discs IU express rumre 1 line
The ultimate irony of the English verb tenses to express future -
that we have a future tense that uses will + VERB (We will travel),
rarely use this future tense. Instead, it is much more common to
going to (We are going to travel) or even just present progressive
(We are traveling) for future actions. We also have two other future
that are rarely ever used: future perfect tense (We will have travele
future perfect progressive tense (We will have been traveling'). In ac
to having to learn these various tenses and their uses, ELLs need tc
out which tenses are more critical to them and their language net
4.A. Typical ELL Errors: Noticing the Gap
Can you identify and explain these five common ELL errors wi
grammar point?
1.	*lfyow donlt haves received cuts es-mallfrom my boss
by tomorrow-afternoon/, call M& Osnd I will talk to hin
personally.
2.	Pam: what plans cloy OSO and Tom honesfor tomorrow
John: *Wesgo to the, bench/ with/ somesfriends who are/
visitingfrom California/.
3.	*T’m leaning now, but I promises to endyowjisisSt CCS soon
I wiltget homes tonight.
J. General of Myfriends going to helps mes when/1 moves 0,
of My apartment.
ร. Pants: why do yow want this stantps?
Tom: *1 will writes 0/ Letter to My grosndparents, and I
want to mall it right Ctway.
Verb Tense / Expression	Example	Meaning
Be going to	We are going to fly to New York tomorrow.	an event in the future, especially one already planned
Simple Future	If the weather clears up soon, Flight 87 for Paris will depart from this gate about an hour from now.	an event in the future, especially one that is scheduled or expresses strong desire to do something
Present Progressive	We are flying to New York tomorrow.	an event in the future
Simple Present	1.	Flight 8 7 for Paris departs from this gate about an hour from now. 2.	If the weather clears up soon, we will be able to play tennis.	1.	a future action marked by a specific future adverb 2.	a future action in a dependent clause (no future tense permitted in a dependent clause)
Future Progressive	If you call at 8 PM, I will be eating dinner, so please call before then.	an action that will be taking place at some point in the future
Future Perfect	By the time that you are 50 years old, you will have visited 50 countries.	an action that will be finished by a specified time in the future
Future Perfect Progressive	By the time I see you again, I will have been working at this company for 30 years.	how long an action has been happening at a future point; focus is on the duration
Obviously, we do not teach all these verb tenses at the same time.
Traditionally, these verb tenses would be interspersed with other tenses,
but future tenses usually come after some of the various present and
past tenses. It is important to note that although the word will is the tra-
ditional way to mark future time, there are many other ways that are
actually more common, including the use of be going to and present pro-
gressive tense.
Example: In an hour, I am going to walk fro
to the bus stop.

Now-
Singular	Plural
I am going to walk
you are going to walk
he/she/it is going to walk
we are going to wall·
you are going to wal
they are going to wa
A verb with be going to usually takes the form: I
Common ELL Mistakes: what Your ELLs
1.	Don't forget to use be.
wrong: Laura going to cook scrambled egg
tomorrow.
correct: Laura is going to cook scrambled e
tomorrow.
2.	Don't forget the word to. It is a small but ve
wrong: Our boss is going miss work tomoi
correct: Our boss is going to miss work ton
3.	Don't use -s or -ed or -ing with the verb al
wrong: I believe that Olga's going to studic
correct: I believe that Olga's going to study
Ill aUUlLlUJLl/ we List will LU dt»K SUlllCUllt: LU นบ ชบแICLlllllg; YVIU yuu ΓΙβψ
me with this work? (Sometimes the meanings of be going to and will
overlap, but sometimes they do not. For a comparison, see p. 77.)
Example: Jim: I'm so tired. I don't know if I can stay
awake to finish this report.
Ken: OK, I will get you a cup of strong coffee.
Nour
POAÍ	Put owe.
	
	X	»
Singular	Plural
I will walk	we will walk
you will walk	you will walk
he/she/it will walk	they will walk
The simple future tense takes the form: will + VERB.
Common ELL Mistakes: What Your ELLs should Know
1.	Do not use to after will.
wrong: Andrea will to study more if she has more free time.
correct: Andrea will study more if she has more free time.
2.	Do not add any endings (-S, -ed, or -ing) to verbs after will.
wrong: Shawn will helps Jim with the work.
correct: Shawn will help Jim with the work.
3.	Use be going to (not will) to talk about a future event that
you have already planned.
A: I need someone to help me with this homework
tomorrow. Can you help me?
wrong: B: Sorry, but I can't help you. I will visit my aunt.
She's in the hospital.
correct: B: Sorry, but I can't help you. I'm going to visit my
aunt. She's in the hospital.
Píost
Now-
Singular	Plural
I am walking
you are walking
he/she/it is walking
we are walking
you are walking
they are walking
The present progressive tense takes the form
-ing. The -ing form is called the present partici]
according to the subject.
Rules for creating the present participle are O1
Common ELL Mistakes: what Your ELI
1.	Don't forget to use be.
wrong:	Tomorrow we cooking red b<
correct:	Tomorrow we are cooking re
2.	There must be a clear future time establish
tion, either by the speaker or by the previc
unclear time: We are cooking red beans an
Now? Tomorrow?)
correct:	Tomorrow we are cooking re
We use simple present tense to express future actions in two ways.
Usage No. 1: With a Future Time Adverb
Example: I leave for Miami tomorrow.
PiVSt	Now
---------------------------------------------X--------------»
This usage usually occurs in only a few sentences in a conversation or
paragraph. It is rare to have multiple examples.
Usage No. 2: In a Time Clause
Example: When I arrive in Los Angeles tomorrow night,
I will call you.
Prost	Now-	7	Pl4/tow&
		—			
It is not acceptable to use will (or be going to) in a time clause. You may,
however, see will in a dependent clause, but the meaning is different, that
is, it is not a time clause. The meaning of will in a dependent clause is "if
you agree to do something." For example, If you will call me tonight, I will tell
you everything about John means "if you agree or promise to call me tonight,
then and only then will I tell you the information about John."
Singular	Plural
I walk	we walk
you walk	you walk
he/she/it walks	they walk
Common ELL Mistakes: what Your ELLs Should Know
1.	Do not use simple present tense for a future action without a
future time marker.
wrong: I leave for Miami.
correct: I leave for Miami around noon tomorrow.
2.	Do not use will or be going to in a future time clause. Use
simple present tense.
wrong: As soon as your plane will arrive, please call me and
I'll pick you up.
correct: As soon as your plane arrives, please call me and I'll
pick you up.
Example: I will be walking from my house
around noon tomorrow.
Now-
Pwt
Singular	Plural
I will be walking you will be walking he/she/it will be walking	we will be walking you will be walking they will be walking
The future progressive tense takes the form: wi]
Common ELL Mistakes: what Your ELLs
1.	Do not forget to use be and a present partii
progressive tense.
wrong: when you call tomorrow, I will str
test on Monday.
correct: when you call tomorrow, I will be
big test on Monday.
2.	Do not use future progressive tense for a sh
though it is happening in future time.
wrong: If you need help tomorrow, I will 1
correct: If you need help tomorrow, I will;
before you leave your place.
Now
Pa, ft	A Fwtu, \'1 V?	
	Λ X	
Singular
I will have walked
you will have walked
he/she/it will have walked
Plural
we will have walked
you will have walked
they will have walked
The future perfect tense takes the form: will + have + PAST PARTICIPLE.
Common ELL Mistakes: what Your ELLs should Know
1.	Do not use future perfect without reference to a second future
action or event. (A common marker is the preposition by or
the phrase by the time.)
unclear time: I will have taken my driver's license test.
correct:	By the time I see you again, I will have taken my
driver's license test.
2.	Do not use any future tense in a time clause.
wrong:	By the time that you will have completed this
task, it will be almost midnight.
correct:	By the time that you have completed this task, it
will be almost midnight.
Example: I will have been walking for ab(
the time you leave your place.
Now-	
		\
	wi] been พ
Singular	
I will have been walking you will have been walking he/she/it will have been walking	we will hav you will ha 'they will ha
The future progressive tense takes the form:
VERB + -ing.
Common ELL Mistakes: what Your ELI
1.	In future perfect progressive tense, do not
and the present participle.
wrong:	As of next Friday, I will be พ
20 years.
correct:	As of next Friday, I will have
for 20 years.
2.	Do not use future perfect progressive with
second future action or event. (A comma
preposition by or the phrase by the time.
unclear time: I will have been working her
correct:
By next Friday, I will have be
20 years.
Tense	Negative Forms
Be going to; Present Progressive	I am + not + VERB + -ing you/we/they are + not + VERB + -ing he/she/it + is + not + VERB + -ing
Simple Present	I/you/we/they + do + not + VERB he/she/it + does + not + VERB
Simple Future	SUBJ + will + not + VERB
Future Progressive	SUBJ + will + not + be + VERB + -ing
Future Perfect	SUBJ + will > not + have + PAST PARTICIPLE
Future Perfect Progressive	SUBJ + will + not + have + been + VERB + -ing
Of the five tenses and two expressions for expressing future time, the
most difficult to negate is simple present tense, which was discussed on
p. 106.
In be going to and present progressive tense, negating is easy
because you negate the auxiliary be: am not, is not, are not.
Negating is also easy for simple future, future progressive, future
perfect, and future perfect progressive because you negate will: will not.
To summarize, all of these future expressions except simple present
tense involve an auxiliary verb, and an auxiliary verb is negated by
adding not after it. In contrast, simple present has a main verb, and it is
not possible to add not after a main verb. Instead, you must add the
auxiliaries do or does.
Common ELL Mistakes: What Your ELLs Should Know
1.	With be going to, don't forget to use the correct form of be.
wrong: The bus driver not going to drive fast today.
correct: The bus driver is not going to drive fast today.
2.	Do not use don't, doesn't, or didn't to make negative of will.
wrong: Kathy doesn't will attend the meeting tomorrow.
correct: Kathy will not attend the meeting tomorrow.
Be going to; Present Progressive	I am -> I'm
	he/she/it is -> he's/she’s/it's
	you/we/they are -> you're/we're/they're
Simple Future; Future Progressive; Future Perfect; Future Perfect Progressive	SUBJ + will -> I'll/you'll/he'll/ she'll/it'll/we'll/they'll
Simple Present	—
NOTE: Contractions can also be formed by add mative contractions: I'm not, you're not, he's not,	
4.8.10. Forming Questions
Just as with negating, the only problematic te
because it requires the addition of the auxiliari
other tenses, you simply invert the auxiliary (am,
and present progressive and the modal will).
1	Tense	Interro£
Simple Present	do + I/you/we/they does + he/she/it + V
Be going to; Present Progressive	am + I + VERB + - are + you/we/they + is + he/she/it + VER
Simple Future	will + SUBJ + VER1
Future Progressive	will + SUBJ + be +
Future Perfect	will + SUBJ + have
Future Perfect Progressive	will + SUBJ + have
1.	Do not use do, does, or did in a question with will.
wrong: Do you will help me with this homework?
correct: Will you help me with this homework?
2.	Be sure that the subject comes just after the auxiliary verb
in questions using be going to, present progressive, simple
future, future progressive, future perfect, and future perfect
progressive.
wrong: How many times people in California will have
experienced severe earthquakes before they decide to
live in a more tranquil area?
correct: How many times will people in California have
experienced severe earthquakes before they decide to
live in a more tranquil area?
4.C. Native Language Interference:
Compare English with other Languages
Language	Notes on Future Verbs
Arabic	Arabic often uses present tense with future time mark- ers to indicate future time for an action.
Chinese	Verbs do not have different forms to mark tense. Instead, Chinese relies on time adverbiais such as tomorrow or by 2025.
French	1.	French has a future tense. However, there is no sin- gle word for will. Instead, word endings on tire verbs indicate future tense. French-speaking ELLs may write *The president will arrives tomorrow. 2.	These verb endings change according to the subject. 3.	French can also use be going to as English does, but French has no progressive and instead uses only go, so French speakers may write * Tomorrow I go play tennis with Marie. 4.	Simple present tense is often used with an appro- priate future time adverbial.
Japanese	1.	Japanese has no future marker; instead, present tense is used with appropriate time adverbs. 2.	Subject pronouns are often omitted.
	,1.พ.^^	1 vwp.
Russian	1.	Russian has simple future ter 2.	Russian has no progressive te progressive may be expressed feet aspect with the future ter 3.	Russian has a special structur plan + verb that is often used actions. 4.	Simple present is often used : 5.	Verb endings vary according 1
Spanish	1.	Spanish has a future tense. H single word for will. Instead,1 verbs indicate future tense. 2.	These endings vary according 3.	Spanish can also use be going lish does, but Spanish uses pi Therefore, Spanish speakers ท go mail these letters later or *11 later. 4.	Simple present tense is often priate future time adverbial. 5.	Subject pronouns are usually endings indicate the subject.
All Languages	1.	Negating the auxiliary verb un to is unique to English. Many tives by placing no before the will save enough money. 2.	ELLs often confuse when to it the auxiliary verb (will, has/ha when to use the auxiliary vert Many ELLs will incorrectly for form of do or regular statemei many people do you will invite tt *when the war will end?
Many beginning students learn the word will before their course, so in
theory they know how to express future time. The unfortunate thing is
that will is not the main way in English to talk about the future. Yes, will
means future, but it is not nearly as common as the expression be going
to, so you should start with be going to.
On the board, create three columns labeled yesterday, every day, and
tomorrow with the subject I and a blank written under each. Your goal is
to take verbs that students in the class shout out and write them, with
class help, in all three time slots.
yesterday	every day	tomorrow
I	I	t
		
i. :FIND \
I I low do spoken
! wiilten language;
ί they Heat inline ;
I 500 ssoiel เ XI c JI
I on till sum topic
I ofltn any subs <
I action and wlmli
> used ÍOI those li
I (hue am dlih r
I in tilt st two gelid
Ask the class for any verb. A student says work. Ask for the past tense
of work. When someone says worked, say, Yes, but say it with I. When
someone says I worked, then write I worked in Column 1. Move to Col-
umn 2. Get someone to say, I work. Write that. Then for the last column,
ask about tomorrow. Some students might say, will, but tell them that
will is possible for future, but this is not the number one way to express
future. Don't write the answer yet. Ask, Does anyone know gonna or going
to? Most likely, at least one student does. Then you should write I am
going to work. Your board should now look like this:
yesterday	every day	tomorrow
1	I	ΐ
I worked'.	ΐ work.	I MWyodty to work.
Try to elicit one more regular verb before doing an irregular verb.
Working with your class, you should try to put seven to ten examples on
the board.
In another class meeting, you should work on differentiating when
will is used and when be going to is used. You should teach your stu-
dents that be going to should be their default way of expressing future.
At the intermediate level, students learn that present progressive can
be used for future time: I'm working tomorrow. This structure should not
be taught to beginning students as it will only cause confusion. Begin-
ning students have just learned that present progressive is for current
actions and be going to is for future. To tell them otherwise is too much
for the average beginning student.
Future perfect tense and its progressive tense are for advanced stu-
dents. These two tenses are used so infrequently that I recommend skip-
ping them if possible. If you must cover them, I would dedicate the
minimum time possible.
152
Key 5: Count and Non-Counl Nouns
ELL Grammar Key 5ะ
Count and Non-Count Nouns
Most native speakers have not heard os the terms count and non-count
for grammar and do not know what they mean. (Non-count nouns are
also called mass nouns.) As native speakers, we have not needed to
know why we can say three assignments but not * three homeworks even
though homework and assignments are synonymous. We might find it dif-
ficult to explain why a large house can have many chairs and much furni-
ture but never *much chairs and * many furnitures. Finally, even the most
sociable of US has rarely if ever thought about the difference between 1
have a few good friends and I have few good friends. Understanding the role
of count and non-count nouns can help you answer these questions and
avoid *much problems and *many turmoils in your ESL classroom.
5.A. Typical ELL Errors: Noticing the Gap
Can you identify and explain these five common ELL errors with this
grammar point?
1.	*lfl could; have; ary pet Lk> the· world, I wouldprefer to
have; cat because; it is very clear; ordfrierdly arÒMAb.
2.	*1 Idee; how Mr. JohrsoK· teacher, but one· thing that
I dorlt like· about his dors is that he·gives US. so Many
homeworks every Kight.
__3. *My Mother war eleireriaay school.· tecdicrfrom, 1.992. to
2007, Mid she· taught kurdreds of studert dur tug iftbs
twee·.
4.	Miler: โ)0 yOU; krcw exactly how Many people· attended the·
party?
Nook: *No, I doeit (crow-, but there; were; 0; lot of.
5.	I was tkirklrg of dropping out of school) but 1 tabbed it over
with My urcle·. *Η·&gave; MS; 0; really good; advice· about
My future;, ord I decided to stay ir school. I have; never
regretted this dedsioM
Key 5: Count and Non-Count Nouns
153
5.B. Grammar Explanation
5.B.I. Count Nouns
Nouns that name things you can count are called count nouns. Count
nouns can be singular or plural.
Singular	a house	a book	my cousin	one reason
Plural	some houses	ten books	my cousins	reasons
All singular count nouns must have an article (indefinite: a, an;
definite: the) or some other determiner before them.
Some ELLs whose first language does not have indefinite articles
(e.g., Arabic, Chinese, Hmong, Malay, Japanese, Korean, Russian, Viet-
namese) routinely omit a and an. In addition, many ELLs—even those
whose native languages have a and an—mistakenly omit the indefinite
article when descriptive adjectives come between the determiner and the
noun, so be sure to demonstrate some examples of this combination.
Determiner is a large
grammatical category
that includes (1) articles
(a, an, the), (2) demon-
strative adjectives (this1
that, these, those),
(3) numbers {one, two,
ten), (4) possessive
adjectives (my, your, his,
her, its, our, their), and
(5) quantifiers (many,
each, several).
Determiner	Determiner ■+ Noun	With a Descriptive Adjective
Articles	a cat	a black cat
Demonstrative	that book	that interesting book
Number	one reason	one specific reason
Possessive	my class	my worst class
Quantifier	each problem	each serious problem
There are a few idiomatic expressions where singular count nouns are
used with no article: have dinner, in school, on vacation, at home, at work,
by phone. See Key 6.
5.B.2. Non-Count Nouns
Nouns that cannot be counted are called non-count nouns.
Foods	sugar	rice	flour	salt	mustard
Liquids	milk	water	juice	coffee	oil
Ideas	honesty	importance	intelligence	peace	wisdom
Nature	snow	scenery	thunder	sunlight	hail
Collective Words	luggage clothing	furniture fruit	advice vocabulary	research makeup	homework money
The word fruit is gener-
ally non-count, but the
word vegetable is count.
Homework is non-count,
but assignment is non-
count. There seems to
be no way to predict
whether a given
word is count or
non-count.
154 •ะ::· Key 5: Count and Non-Count Nouns
Native speakers sometimes use nun-count foods and liquids in a
countable sense, but they are referring to containers or servings, not the
thing. I'or example, two coffees means two cups of coffee and two sugars
means two packets of sugar. This information should not be included in a
beginning lesson about nun-count nouns. Likewise, / like chickens refers
to a count noun (i.e., the animal), but / like chicken refers to a non-count
noun (i.e., the meat).
Many non-count nouns may be used in a countable sense, but the
meaning changes to type of. for example, the word cheese is a non-
count noun. You may sometimes see the word cheeses used in a counta-
ble sense, but here cheeses means types of cheese, as in France produces
more than sixty cheeses. The use of non-count nouns in a countable sense
is not so common and should be taught only to ELLs with advanced
proficiency (if at all).
3.	Words to Count Non Count Nouns
it is not possible to count non-count nouns, but sometimes we do need
to quantify a non-count noun. Notice the quantifying phrases such as
two pounds of, three or four pieces, and a glass of in the following examples:
a.	What did you buy? I bought two pounds of ground beef.
b.	How much of the furniture is new? Not much—just three or four
pieces.
c.	Are you thirsty? Yes, give me a glass of chocolate milk.
Quantifying phrases:
liasy Tor ELLs	More Difficult for DLLs
The quantifying words for foods and liquids are the easiest because they are concrete nouns: cup, bowl, slice. ® a cup of sugar •	ก bowl of rice •	a bag of flour •	a teaspoon of salt •	a glass of milk •	a can of ju ice •	a loaf of bread ° น slice of cake •	a piece of chocolate	ELLs have trouble with the quantifying word piece, which they associate with something that is broken: •	a piece of luggage •	a piece of furniture ° a piece of advice •	a piece of research •	a piece of my (your, his, etc.) mind •	a piece of wisdom
Key 5; Count and Non-Count Nouns
155
5.B.3. How Many? vs. How Much?
To ask about the quantity of a noun, English uses two question phrases:
how many? and how much? We use how many to ask about count nouns
(e.g., How many -people are there? How many hours did you work?), and we
use how much to ask about non-count nouns (e.g., How much money did
you spend? How much information did they give you?).
English is one of the few languages that uses two different words to
ask about quantity. In many languages, there is only one word you can
use when you want to ask about the quantity of a noun. In French, there
is only combien, and in Malay, only berapa. The distinction between how
many and how much is relatively easy for all ELLs to learn, but keep in
mind that, at least initially, your ELLs may be confused by the mere idea
of having two expressions that match one mental slot in their native
language.
5.B.4. Many vs. Much
We use many with plural count nouns. We use much with non-count
nouns. When in doubt, it is always correct to use a lot of with both count
and non-count nouns.
	many	mu ch f	M lot of J
Count	many books	—	a lot of books
Nou-Count	—	much money	a lot of money
Note that we omit the preposition of if thênoun is not used:
Sharon: How many people attended the meeting?	___________________________________
Gaik	Tdon't know A lot. (NOT: *A lot of.) I think about
thirty people were there.
One teaching point for advanced ELLs concerns the word much. We
use much with non-count nouns, like much money, much time, or much
information. We can use much in negative statements (ไ don't have much
money left) and in questions (Does a lawyer make much, money?). How-
ever, we don't usually use much in affirmative statements. Read these
sentences, which are grammatically correct, and you'll see that some-
thing sounds a little strange to a native speaker:
1.	1 have much money. Better: I have a lot of money.
2.	Much equipment is needed. Better: A lot of equipment is
needed.
3.	To make a great cake, you should use much butter. Better: To
make a great cake, you should use a lot of butter.
156
Key 5: Count and Non-Count Nouns
When we use a little with a
non-count noun, it refers to the
quantity, of the non-count noun.
Thus, a little sugar refers to the
quantity of sugar and means that
you don't have a lot of sugar.
However, when we use a little
with a count noun such as car, it
refers to the size of the car, not
the quantity of cars. A little car
means that the car is not big. It
does not refer to the quantity or
number of cars; there is only one
car and it is little.
A common ELL error is the use of
the word only with few or little,
which is not possible. A few
and a little have a positive mean-
ing, but few and little have a
negative meaning. We can say
only a few or only a little, but we
cannot say *only few people or
*on/y little time because few and
little have a negative meaning
and cannot be used with the
5.B.5. A Few / A Little
We use d Jew with plural count nouns. We use a little with non-count
nouns.
■1.	"·-■ '·'■·· -■.··■Lv/.. .'·······■	1.:-/,;.:	a few	a Utile
Count	ล few books	—
Non-Count	—	a little money
5.B.6. A Few vs. Few; A Little vs. Little
The distinction between 1 have a Jew friends and I have Jew friends is not
one that should concern beginning or intermediate proficiency ELLs; in
fact, this distinction is an advanced-level grammar point. When we say a
few, we are being positive. We are saying that the person does indeed
have some friends. In contrastt few friends has a negative connotation.
The same distinction exists for a little and little. A person who has a
little time might be able to help you if you need his or her help, but a
person with little time is too busy to help you.
5.B.7. Advanced Quantity Expressions
Once ELLs have mastered the use of a few, a little, many, and much, it is
time to provide explicit instruction in variations of these quantifying
terms. Using more explicit terms will improve ELLs' speech and writing.
The terms listed are not synonyms and need to be considered in context
multiple times to learn them well. NOTE: Words in red can be either
count or non-count.
0% A	no, not any, a (complete) lack of	no, not any, a (complete) lack of
	few a lack of	little a lack of
	a few	a little, a bit of
	some	some
	several, a number of	
V 100%	a great number of, a great many, ล good number of, a lot of, lots of, plenty of	a great deal of, a large amount of, a substantial amount of, a lot of, lots of, plenty of
Key 5: Count anã Non-Count Nouns
157
	Common ELL Mistakes: What Your ELLs Should Know 1.	Do not use a singular count noun without an article or other determiner. wrong: job	apple	reason	best choice delicious sandwich comet: a job an apple that reason the best choice a delicious sandwich 2.	Non-count nouns do not have a plural form, so do not add -s. wrong:	homeworks	equipments	advices informations	clothings correct:	homework	equipment	advice information	clothing 3.	Do not use an article or other determiner before a non-count noun. With non-count nouns, you cannot use a or an for the same reason you cannot use one (or two or ten). wrong:	a homework	an equipment	an	advice an information	a clothing correct:	homework	equipment	advice information	clothing 4.	Use many and a few with count nouns. Use much and a little with non-count nouns. wrong: much problems	a few difficulty correct: many problems a little difficulty	-
	5.	Avoid using much in affirmative statements. It is not necessar- ily wrong, but it can sound strange in some cases. unusual: She's rich. She has much money. better: She's rich. She has a lot of money. 6.	Do not use a lot of without a noun after it. Add a noun or drop the preposition of. wrong: Do you have any good reasons for quitting your job? Yes, a lot of. I'm really ready for a change too. correct: Do you have any good reasons for quitting your job? Yes, a lot. I'm really ready for a change too.	
158
Key 5: Count and Non-Count Nouns
5.C. Native Language Interference:
Compare English with other Languages
Language
Notes on Count and Non-Count Nouns
All
Languages
Arabic
Chinese
French
Japanese
1.	Making such an important grammatical distinction
between count and non-count nouns is unique to
English, so many ELLs of various first language
backgrounds experience difficulty with this lan-
guage point.
2.	None of the seven languages discussed here has sepa-
rate words for many and much. For example, French
has only beaucoup and Japanese has only lakusan.
1.	Arabic nouns have singular, dual, and plural forms.
(A dual form involves a suffix that means "two"
much as -s in English means "two or more.")
2.	Singular forms are not preceded by the word one;
likewise, the dual form is not preceded by the word
two. (In Arabic, kitab means "book" and kitabain
means "two books." The word ithnain means "two,"
but you cannot say ithnain kitbain. This combination
is redundant and translates as "two two books.")
3.	Plural forms of nouns in Arabic often involve internal
changes to a word; English usually adds the suffix -s.
4.	The plural form is used with three to ten, but singular
is used for eleven or more. In Arabic, kitab means
"one book," kitabain means "two books," and kutub
means "books." For three to ten books, kutub is used;
foiLeleverLonmorer-the-singular- form-kitab is-used?—
1.	Most nouns have only one form (i.e., there is no
plural form). (There is a suffix for plural, but it is
used for human nouns only, e.g., women, children).
2.	Indefinite and definite articles do not exist, but
there is a word to express this and that.
1.	French nouns are similar to English nouns in that
nouns have singular and plural forms.
2.	Some nouns (e.g., abstract nouns) do not have a
plural form.
3.	Some nouns that are non-count in English are count
in French and therefore have plural forms. Common
errors include * informalions and * homeworks.
1.	Nouns have only one form; there is no difference
between singular and plural.
2.	An elaborate system of counter words is used with
nouns, similar to two cups of coffee or two sheets of paper
in English. However, almost all Japanese nouns
require a counter, which is not the case in English.
Key 5: Count and Non-Count Nouns
159
Korean	1.	Nouns have both a singular and a plural form. For plural meaning, however, sometimes the singular form suffices. 2.	An elaborate system of counter words is used with nouns, similar to two cups of coffee or two sheets of paper in English.
Russian	1.	Russian nouns have a singular and a plural form. 2.	Some nouns that are non-count nouns in English are plural count nouns in Russian (*She has a lot of moneys).
Spanish	1.	Spanish nouns are similar to English nouns in that nouns have singular and plural forms. 2.	Some nouns (e.g., abstract nouns) do not have a plural form. 3.	Some nouns that are non-count in English are count in Spanish and therefore have plural forms, so com- mon errors include informations and * homeworks.
5.D. Ideas for Teaching
The general concept of count and non-count is usually taught in a
beginning-level class. Thus, when teaching this, you should, limit your
language to easy vocabulary. Finer points such as not using much in affir-
mative statements are taught at higher levels.
If we consider frequency of the words involved in count and non-
count, many and much occur more often than a few and a little, so it
makes sense to focus on many and much initially. If we examine many
and much further,Jw_e_fi.n(Lthat-the-phrases how many and how much------------------------------
are more frequent than the single words many and much, so 1 would
start with these two common phrases: how many and how much.
It is almost always a good idea to involve the students in your teach-
ing. One way to present this grammar point is to write these six ques-
tions on the board:
students are in this room? (answer = 12)
letters does the word classroom have? (answer = 9)
■time do you spend in this class every week?
(answer = 3 hours)
money do you have with you right now?
(answer = 40 dollars)
gasoline can 1 buy with 54? (answer = about 1 gallon)
watches do you own? (answer = 2)
160
Key 5: Count, and Non-Count Nouns
:	FIND OUT :
; -Examine a -250-word excerpt of;
! text written by a native speaker !
! (e.g., from a newspaper or the ;
; Internet).,..Underline.all.the I
1 nouns. How many are count? !
; How many are non-count? ;
! Which modifiers are used in ;
! front of singular count nouns? !
; Which are used with plural '
! count nouns? Which are used 1
; with non-count nouns? .	;
Make sure that the answers are true for your class of students. Tell
students you want to ask a question that matches the answers on the
board. Some students will know how many and others may know only
how much. Teach these one by one. (You can let students work alone Ol-
in pairs for a minute or less.) As you go over these, write whatever the
students tell you. If there is disagreement, ask them to tell what they
know about how many or how much.
When all six answers are on the board, if they are correct, then as a
group, talk about the difference in usage between how many and how
much. If two answers are wrong, then say, "Two of these are wrong. Who
knows which two are wrong?" If no one can guess which, then correct
the two that are wrong. Then ask the class again to figure out what the
pattern is. After the pattern has been discussed, ask students to generate
four more examples. Write those examples on the board (or ask students
to come to the board to write out their examples or ask four students to
come up to the board to write out four examples from classmates).
If no one gets the answer, just tell students the pattern. After you tell
them the pattern, explain it again. Then go over the examples one by
one. (Your board should have only six to ten examples at this point.)
Now give more examples with blanks and let them fill them in. After
some students get the pattern, have those students come up with more
examples that you will write on the board. At all times, involve your stu-
dents.
Follow this with a short pattern drill in which you rapidly call out a
noun and students have to say the question, How many do you have?
T:	cats
Class: How many cats do you have? 
T:	money
Class: How much money do you have?
Do this for about one minute. Follow this pattern drill with a commu-
nicative drill, that is, one in which students' answers are unknown to the
rest of the class and therefore matter. Do drill as before, but now one
student will ask another student as a follow-up.
T:	cats
Class:	How many	cats do you	have?
T:	Maria, ask Paula.
Maria:	Paula, how	many cats do	you have?
Paula: I don't have any cats.
T:	sugar
(The drill continues.)
161
ELL Grammar Key 6:
Prepositions
Prepositions are small words, but they are perhaps the most difficult
words to use correctly in another language. Common English preposi-
tions include at, for, from, in, of, on, to. Why do we say on Monday but
in June7. Why do we say fall in love, with someone and be married to someone
but gel divorced from someoneใ There are no logical explanations, which
means that ELLs must learn the usage of a grammar area that has rela-
tively vague rules—especially from an ELL's point of view.
Key 6: Prepositions
6.A. Typical ELL Errors: Noticing the Gap
Can you identify and explain these five common ELL errors with this
grammar point?
1.	if you, wwnt to travel to Bradl, you, must have, a, visa,. You, CMC
find, the, visa, application, with all the, directions on, the, Bradl-
ÍMC Embassy’s website,. Modi,your passport, the, application,, a,
small, photo, and, a, money order for $100 to the, address lusted,
on, the, website,. *After that, all you, have, to do is wait your pass-
port to come, baric with a, Bra,zlliMC tourist visa, be it.
2.	*1 wart to tharlcyou, so muchfor to caff me white, I urns be the,
hospital. Your call meant a, lot to me,.
3.	I was plamnlny to call you, last Sunday to ash you, whetheryou,
would, be,free, on, Tuesday to meet or not. * However, I was
Involved â asrldewt Last Sunday, and, 1 couldnlt call you,.
hope, you, understand.
4.	I was happy to yet your email, and, I was especially ylad to
hearyour news. *1 know-you, are, very busy now-, so thanks for
wrote, out, email at this time,, if you,yive, meyour phone, num-
ber, I CMC call you, so we, CMC talk, more,.
5.	*My friend ord I bouyht arc apw'tment lie Aryentina,, so I’m,
pretty sure, that I’llyo there, on, Auyust. That’s when, I have,
my nest vacation,, hefart, I’m, tryiny to fund a, cheap'flyht
now-.
162
Key 6: Prepositions
6.B. Grammar Explanation
6.B.I. Why Prepositions Are So Difficult
As all ELLs and their teachers know, prepositions are one of the most
difficult areas of English for EEEs to master. Even after years of study,
advanced proficiency ELLs will still make errors with prepositions.
One difficulty may be that individual prepositions do not translate
well from one language to another. In English, you say, I am married to
Urn, but in Spanish and french, you say 1 am married with lint. Consider
the English word on in these five common examples: on the mall, on the
table, on Friday, on Main Street, on second thought. These are all very differ-
ent meanings of on, and a second language would be unlikely to have
one word that would work equally well for these same five examples.
A second reason may be that a language may not have any word at
all to express the same concept. Consider the preposition along, as in
They walked along the river. The preposition along in this case means "to
continue the length of," but some languages may use a different expres-
sion to communicate this idea, rather than having a word that translates
exactly.
A third reason may be that one language requires a preposition after a
certain word but another language does not. For example, in Japanese, you
say, I walk the park, but in English you say, I walk through the park. In French,
you say, I entered in the room, but in English, you say, 1 entered the room.
A fourth reason may be that one language does not use prepositions
in the same wayjhat we do in English. In English, prepositions come
before the noun, so they are called PRE-positions, with pre meaning
"before." In Japanese, prepositions come after nouns, sometimes with a
possessive marker in between,-SO-Oui-English-sentence,- /-go to -the post
office for stamps is rendered stamps' (yes, possessive!) purpose post office to
I go. Thus, Japanese has postpositions. In other languages, such as Hun-
garian, there are no separate words that equal English prepositions.
Instead, inflections (prefixes, infixes, and suffixes) are made to the noun
to indicate the preposition. In Hungarian, with my cat is rendered as
cat/my/with, but it is one word instead of three.
Fifth, prepositions are used in many idioms, and an idiom defies
translation. An idiom is by definition a group of words in which the
meanings of the individual words do not add up to the meaning of the
whole group of words. For example, when you say, the bottom line and a
piece oj cake, there is no line and there is no cake. Many idioms make use
of common prepositions, as in these ten examples: in love with someone,
(it's) up to you, lU odds with someone, in and out (not out and in), off and on
(OR: on and off), down the road, with a grain of salt, of course, sort of kind of.
Finally, given that there are so many commonly used prepositions
and that each one can have several meanings and then multiple usages,
it is logical that it takes a long time to master prepositions.
Key 6: Prepositions
163
6.B.2. Prepositions and Prepositional Phrases
A preposition is a word that shows the relationship between a noun (or
pronoun) and the rest of the words in the sentence. Prepositions have
many purposes, but they often give US information about place, time,
and direction.
place:	at the bank, in my car, near the store, on Main Street, under the sofa
time:	at 10:10, before noon, for a few hours, on Friday, in 2009
direction:	from the post office, to the post office
The combination of a preposition and its object (noun or pronoun
and any modifiers such as articles or adjectives) is called a prepositional
phrase.
on Tuesday
in the middle
at a secret location
PREP + N
PREP + ARTICLE + N PREP + ARTICLE + ADJECTIVE + N
One area of prepositions that confuses ELLs is the location of prepo-
sitional phrases within a sentence. A prepositional phrase can come at
the beginning, middle, or end of a sentence.
beginning:	In northern China, the weather can be very cold.
middle:	Zina worked in northern China for several years.
end:	Dr. Kevin Ford teaches at a college in northern China.	*'
When a sentence has both a prepositional phrase of place and of
time, we generally put the place phrase before the time phrase. (HINT:
Alphabetically, p comes before T, so remember place before time.)
not usual: Engineers discovered oil
time place
[in 1901 in Texas
เท northern China,
the winters can be
very harsh. We usu-
ally use a comma
after a preposi-
tional phrase that
begins a sentence.
However, no comma
is used when the
prepositional phrase
"occurs^atthe^end oT
the sentence: The
winters can be very
harsh in northern
China.
place time
in Texas [[in 1901
usual:	Engineers discovered oil
When we have two prepositional phrases of place or two of time in
the same sentence, we generally arrange them from smaller to larger, as
seen in these examples:
place: Your bilingual dictionary is
[ไท the kitchen .
____________________
time: Our meeting was I at 3 pm] [on Mondayj
in the box	[on the table
164
Key 6: Prepositions
6.B.3. 70 Common Prepositions
Some lists have more than 150 prepositions, but they contain rare
prepositions such as abaft and amícl. liLLs are already worried enough
about prepositions; teachers should not compound this situation by
introducing prepositions that students will never need. This list contains
70 common prepositions and example sentences. The alphabetical list is
arranged in three groups: one-word prepositions {about), two-word
prepositions {due to), and three-word prepositions (on lop ο/').
One-word prepositions:
1. about	This book is about a family who gets lost in the mountains.
2. above	I have a small reading lamp above my bed.
3. across	The Washington Bridge is the best way to go across the river.
4. after	1 hope to have more free time after June lsl.
5. against	Why are you against the President's plan?
6. along	In the early morning, people run along the east bank of the river.
7. among	Laura Vinson is among the best tennis players in the world.
8. around	Two squirrels were running around the oak tree.
9. as	For Halloween, I'm dressing up as Dracula.
10. at	
(+ place) (+ time)	When I travel, I prefer to stay at that hotel. The flight arrived promptly at 11:37.
11. before	The flights that leave before 9 AM are not full.
12. behind	The little girl is hiding behind that tree.
13. below	If your final score is below 70, you will not pass the course.
14. beneath	Beneath these rocks, you might find a spider or a snake.
15. beside	My cat usually sleeps beside my bed.
16. between	Between you and me, I don't think he is a good leader.
17. beyond	People who can't swim well shouldn't go beyond those rocks.
18. but	Most restaurants in this area are open every day but Monday.
Key 6: Prepositions
165
19. by (+ time) (+ -self) (+ place)	By noon, most of the seats had been taken. Of course it is more expensive if you live by yourself. My car is parked by the train station.	
20. despite	Despite my money problems, I am thinking about buying a car.	
21. down	The rat ran down the tree.	
22. during	During my last vacation, I spent two weeks in Mexico.	
23.	except 24.	for	You can call me any day except Thursday.	
(+ person)	1 believe that this gift is for you. Happy birthday!	
(+ period)	My husband and I lived in Montreal for five years.	
25. from	This gift is from my wife and me.	-
26. in		
(+ period)	The price of oil may double in the next five years.	
(+ place)	Was George Washington born in Virginia?	
(+ time)	My sister got married in 2005.	
27. inside	If you look inside the refrigerator, you'll find some soft drinks.	
28. into	Please put your coins into the machine if you want a sandwich.	
29. like	I prefer subtle colors like tan and gray.	
30. near	San Diego is not near Sacramento.	
31. of	What is the title of your favorite book?	
32. off	The little boy fell off the bed, but he was not hurt.	
33. on		
(+ street)	Our house is on Jasmine Avenue.	
(+ surface)	There is a map on the back wall in my classroom.	
(+ day)	The store is closed on Sunday.	
34. onto	The cat jumped onto the table where the meat was.	
35. opposite	There are some apartments that are opposite the park.	
36. over	The small plane had difficulty flying over the mountain.	
37. past	If you walk past the lake, you will see dozens of ducks.	
38. since	I have worked here since 1999.	
166
Key 6: Prepositions
39. than	Mexico City is larger than Toronto.
40. through	Al dusk, hundreds of birds were flying through the trees.
41. throughout	Throughout her lifetime, my grandmother saw some huge changes in our society.
42. till	As a farmer, he worked from dawn till dusk.
43. to	Driving from here to Miami takes about six hours.
44. toward	We walked toward the park, but then we decided not to go there.
45. under	Your socks are under the bed.
46. until	To finish the project, we worked until 11 PM.
47. up	We watched a squirrel run up the tree.
48. upon	The cat was sleeping upon the sofa.
49. with	The director asked me to go with him to the meeting.
50. within	Everyone must finish the test within the announced time limit.
51. without	Without any extra help, Josh managed to get an A in math.
Two-word prepositions
52. according to	
	Accordingjtoj:hisjiÍctio-naryr-this-word--has--multi·-
	pie meanings.
53. ahead of	If you need to hurry, you can get in line ahead of
	me.
54. as for	Bill liked the book. As for me, 1 wasn't able to finish it.
55. because of	We started eating here because of your recommendation.
56. close to	Do you live close to the bank on Smith Street?
57. due to	The flight was cancelled due to the bad weather.
58. far from	We walked an hour and were then far from our hotel.
59. instead of	I'd like Lea instead of coffee, please.
60. next to	Who would like to live next to a cemetery?
61. prior to	Prior to arrival, you should complete this tourist card.
Key 6: Prepositions
167
Three-word prepositions
62. in addition to	In addition to Monday, I can meet on Tuesday or Friday.
63. in back of	There is a huge tree in back of our house.
64. in case of	In case of emergency, call 911.
65. in front of	Our house is the only one without a tree in front of it.
66. in lieu of	For his birthday, he requested that we donate money to a local charity in lieu of giving him a gift.
67. in place of	Would you mind giving me ten dimes in place of a dollar bill?
68. in spite of	In spite of the cooler temperatures, we went to the beach.
69. on behalf of	I'd like to thank you on behalf of my entire family.
70. on top of	Your briefcase is on top of the coffee table.
6.8.4.	at เ on เ in for place and time
	sma] )	ler PLACE	A	TIME sma เ at McDonald's	/at\	at 5:00 PM ) on Green Street	/ on \	on Monday	Iler	
	bigg	in San Francisco	/	\ in July in California	/	in	X in summer ' in the United States 	\jn 1996	J er	big	ger	
Learn these special idiomatic phrases:
•	in the morning
•	in the afternoon
•	in the evening
•	at night
168
Key 6. Prepositions
1. Use at for very specific places or times.
	Place. Use at with the name of a place or with an address with a number. (A)	He studies at Boston University. (B)	1 live at 653 Maple Drive.	Time. Use at with clock times. (C)	Please come at noon. (D)	The class ends at 1:20.
We use on with names	2- Use on for "medium "-sized places or times. of streets, roads.	-	...		
avenues, lanes, drives, and highways, but we use at if the street address contains a spe- cific number. We say on Jasmine Avenue but at 330 Jasmine Avenue.	Place. Use on for streets, roads, avenues, etc., when there is no number. (E)	I live on Maple Drive. (F)	There were many cars on the highway yesterday. (G)	Los Angeles is on the Pacific Coast.	Time. Use on/with days. (H)	His birthday is on March 15. (I)	What did you do on Saturday?
The use of the definite article the with names	ว. Use in for large places or times.	
of seasons is optional.	Place. Use in for cities, states,	Time. Use in for months,	
Both the summer and summer are correct.	and countries. (J)	They live in Paris. (K)	We grew up in Florida. (L)	Florida is in the South. (M)	Moscow is in Russia. (N)	Bill is not here now. He's in the kitchen. (O)	You can sleep in the front bedroom.	seasons, and years. (P)	The weather is hot in July. (Q)	The weather is hot in the summer. (R)	I was born in 1979.
Key 6: Prepositions
169
Common ELL Mistakes: What Your ELLs Should Know
1.	Do not use in with specific names of businesses or the like.
wrong: 1 work in Burger King.
correct: I work at Burger King.
2.	Do not forget to use a preposition.
wrong: My sister is England now.
correct: My sister is in England now.
3.	Do not use at with years or with cities or other geographical
locations.
wrong: 1 was born at 1967.
correct: I was born in 1967.
wrong: San Francisco is at California.
correct: San Francisco is in California.
4.	Don't use in for streets or days.
wrong: He lives in Maple Street.
correct: He lives on Maple Street.
wrong: I called Sam in his birthday.
correct: I called Sam on his birthday.
5.	Be careful with prepositions for special idiomatic phrases
with morning, afternoon, evening, and nights
wrong: I watch TV in the night.
___correct:__LwatchJV_at_night____________________________________
Regardless of native
language, ELLs tend to
overuse in (instead of
at) with names of
businesses. Big
Macs® are sold at
McDonald's, not */ก
McDonald'ร. Mickey
Mouse lives at
Disneyworld®, not
★in Disneyworld®.
170
Key 6: Prepositions
6.B.5. Problem Prepositions
Certain pairs of prepositions and post-preposition words such as ago
cause confusion for some groups of Ells. Spanish speakers, for example,
have a difficult time with for and since while Arabic speakers have trou-
ble with before and ago.
a. for vs. since
for	We use for with a period of time. We use for to answer the question I low long7. With for, the answer is the period of time: I've worked here for ten years.
since	We use since with the name of the start of the time. We use since to answer the question How long? With since, the answer is the period of time but it is expressed by saying when the action began: I've worked here since 2000.
wrong: correct:	They visited franco since two weeks. They visited France for two weeks.
b. before vs. ago (for past time)
	before	We use before with the name of a specific point of time such as before Monday, before June, before computers were invented. We use before to answer the question, When (did something happen) ?	
	ago	We use ago with the name of a period of time. I'Ve use ago to answer the question, How long in the past (did something happen)?	
	wrong: My parents called me before two days. correct: My parents called me two days ago.		
c. in vs. after (for future time)
in	When talking about the future, we use in with a general period of time. We use in to answer the question, When will something happen?
after	When talking about the future, we use after with the name of a period of time. We use after to answer the question, When specifically will something happen?
wrong: The new cars will be available after two weeks. correct: The new cars will be available in two weeks.	
Key 6: Prepositions
171
d. for vs. during
for	We use for with a general period of time. We use for to answer the question How long:
during	We use during with the name of a period of time. We use during to answer the question When?
wrong: correct:	They visited France during two weeks. They visited France for two weeks.
e. verbs of motion: enter, go, return
enter +	0	Generally, we do not use a preposition after enter.
go + to		Some ELLs use go with no preposition, but you must use to (or in).
return to		Some ELLs use return with no preposition, but you must use to.
wrong:	The students enteredX the room between 8:30 and 8:45.	
correct:	The students entered the room between 8:30 and 8:45.	
wrong:	Some people went the party on Saturday night.	
correct:	Some people went^to the party on Saturday night.	
wrong:	They will return their country in two more weeks.	
correct:	They will return to their country in two more weeks.	
Sometimes no preposition
is possible. เท English, we
enter a room, but many ELLs
will incorrectly say * enter in a
room. For ELLs, these small
prepositions "sandwiched"
between two major con-
cepts, the vsà of motion
and the plac*e, are very hard
to hear (or ndt hear) in rapid
conversation.
The word home does not
use a preposition after verbs
of motion. ELLs may mistak-
enly say *go to home or
*return to home, but these
combinations are incorrect
6.8.6.	Adjective/Noun/Verb + Preposition Combinations
For no apparent or logical reason, many adjectives, nouns, and verbs
must be followed by a certain preposition.
ELLs can learn these preposition combinations in one of three ways:
rote memorization, direct teacher instruction followed by practice,
and/or massive exposure to them through extensive reading. All three of
these techniques can work, but the first two are recommended for ELLs
who are on a tight schedule. For very young ELLs who will have years of
exposure to English, the third option is good, but exposure works espe-
cially well after direct teacher instruction because direct instruction
increases the likelihood that learners will actually notice certain features
in the language, in this case, preposition combinations. In singing (i.e.,
repeating) a seemingly simple song such as "Old MacDonald Had a
Farm," learners are not just singing the line "and on his farm he had a
(duck, cow, etc.)." They are in fact indirectly learning that we say on a
farm in English, not *in a farm.
172
Key 6: Prepositions
For adjectives, we are accustomed to something, happy about
something, and proud of something.
For nouns, we want to know the answer to something, the cost of
something, and the reason for something.
For verbs, we agree with someone, we count on someone, and we
worry about someone. Why we say about in one case and for or with in
another is not rule-governed, so it is up to good teachers to help their
students learn these combinations as quickly and easily as possible.
Alphabetical lists of 53 adjectives + preposition combinations, 80
noun + preposition combinations (including prepositions followed by
nouns), and 30 verb + preposition combinations follow. These lists can
serve as a source of reference information as well as springboards for
making you more aware of the hundreds of other word combinations
involving prepositions. These lists focus on commonly used preposition
combinations.
ELLs tend to use the base
form of a verb after preposi-
tions, but the correct form is
a gerund: afraid of flying,
interested in going, sorry
about leaving. Use gerunds
after prepositions.
6.8.6s. Adjectives + Prepositions		
1.	accustomed to 2.	acquainted with 3.	afraid of 4.	all right with 5.	angry about/at 6.	annoyed by 7.	bad at 8.	bad for 9.	bored with/by 10.	certain about/of 11.	composed of 12.	^concern edabout- 13.	confused about 14.	confusing to 15.	different from 16.	disappointed in/with 17.	divorced from	18.	embarrassed by 19.	excited about 20.	familiar with 21.	famous for 22.	far from 23.	frustrated with 24.	full of 25.	good at 26.	good for 27.	guilty of 28.	happy about/with 29.. harmful to	 30.	important for/to 31.	in favor of 32.	innocent of 33.	interested in 34.	involved in/with 35.	known for	36.	married to 37.	necessary for 38.	okay with 39.	opposed to 40.	proud of 41.	pleased with 42.	ready for 43.	related to 44.	responsible for 45.	satisfied with 46.	sick of - 47.- similarto 48.	sorry about 49.	successful in 50.	sure about/of 51.	surprised at/by 52.	tired from/of 53.	worried about
Key 6: Prepositions
173
6.8.6b. Nouns + Prepositions; Prepositions + Nouns
	Noun + Preposition	Preposition + Noun	
	1.	advantage of 2.	advice on 3.	alternative to 4.	answer to 5.	application for 6.	benefit of 7.	cause of 8.	center of 9.	confusion about 10.	cost of 11.	decision to 12.	decrease by/in/of 13.	demand for 14.	difference between/in/of 15.	example of 16.	experience in/with 17.	excuse for 18.	fall in/of 19.	increase in/of 20.	invitation to 21.	interest in 22.lack of 23.	matter with 24.	middle of 25.	need for/of 26.	opinion of	1.	at church 2.	at home 3.	at present 4.	at war 5.	at work 6.	at your convenience 7.	by car/bus/air mail 8.	by credit card 9.	by hand 10.	by law 11.	by mail 12.	by mistake 13.	for lunch 14.	for sale 15.	in advance 16.	in a hurry 17.	in danger 18.	in charge of 19.in debt 20.	in general 21.	in love 22.	in my opinion 23.	in school 24.	in shapt’ 25.	in stock 26.	in the hospital	.·
	27.	price of 28.	problem with 29.	question about 30.	reason for 31.	reply to 32.	request for 33.	rise in, of 34.	solution to 35.	source of 36.	tax on 37.	trouble with	27.	in time 28.	in trouble 29.	in writing 30.	on a trip 31.	on business 32.	on hold 33.	on purpose 34.	on sale 35.	on the phone/computer 36.	on television 37.	on time 38.	on vacation 39.	on your mind 40.	out of date 41.	out of order 42.	under pressure 43.	with reference to	
174
Keγ 6: Prepositions
6.B.6c. Verbs + Prepositions
1.	agree to/with 2.	argue about/ with 3.	ask about/for 4.	apologize for 5.	be accustomed to 6.	be used to 7.	belong to 8.	complain about 9.	count on 10.	depend on	11.	disagree about/with 12.	dream about 13.	explain (some- thing) to 14.	forget about 15.	give to 16.	introduce to 17.	keep on 18.	laugh at 19.	listen to 20.	look at/for	21.	look forward to 22.	pay attention to 23.	speak about/to/with 24.	stare at 25.	study for 26.	talk about 27.	thank someone for 28.	think about/of 29.	work on 30.	worry about
Common ELL Mistakes: What Your ELLs Should Know
1.	Be sure you use the correct preposition for the word combina-
tion that you are using.
wrong: I complained the homework. (Mistake: no
preposition)
wrong: I complained <Xthe homework. (Mistake: wrong
preposition)
correct: I complained about the homework.
2.	If you use a verb form after a preposition, the verb must end
in -ing. (This form is called a gerund, which is a verb form
—used as^mounMTereür is~as an~ob)e~ct of theprepDsMõhi)
wrong: I complained about do the homework. (Mistake:
wrong verb form)
correct: I complained about doing the homework.
3.	With adjectives, one of the most common errors is using the
preposition for too often.
wrong: We are happy Mi' the professor's decision. (Mistake:
wrong preposition)
correct: We are happy about the professor's decision.
Key 6: Prepositions
175
6.B.7. Common Idioms
Idioms are groups of words whose overall meaning is different from the
meanings of the individual words. Prepositions are often polysemous,
that is, having multiple meanings, so it comes as no surprise that this
ambiguity affects the many idioms that use prepositions. Why do we say
once in a blue moonใ What about on cloud nine or a horse of a different
color ? A short list of some of the most common idioms in English fol-
lows; it is by no means complete. Study these prepositions and how they
do or do not contribute toward the overall meaning of the idiom. Study-
ing this list should help train your eye to recognize idioms, especially
those with prepositions, in your students' reading and content material
so that you can plan your teaching accordingly.
1. at the eleventh hour	21. jump to a conclusion
2. be a piece of cake	22. keep an eye on
3. be fed up with	23. keep an eye out for
4. be on the go	24. keep (stay) in touch
5. be on the road	25. live from hand to mouth
6. beat around the bush	26. lose track of
7. bent out of shape	27. make a mountain out of a
8. by the skin of one's teeth	mole hill
9. can't make heads or tails of	28. Not on your life!
something	29. on the cutting edge
10. down in the dumps	30. on the dot
11. for ages	31. on time
12. get a kick out of something	32. once ii>a while
13. get on one's nerves	33. over one's head
14. get out of hand	34. sleep on it
15: go with thedlow	35. state of the art
16. in over one's head	36. step on it!
17. in the black	37. under the weather
18. in the red	38. until you're blue in the face
19. in time	39. wet behind the ears
20. jump all over someone	40. with bells on
176
Key 6: Prepositions
6.	c. Native Language Interference:
Compare English with Other Languages
Language	Notes on Prepositions
All Languages	1.	Prepositions do not translate well from one lan- guage to another. No two languages have the same set of prepositions. 2.	All ELLs—regardless of native language—may exhibit persistent errors with prepositions. (Articles and prepositions are two of the last grammatical areas that ELLs acquire.) Making errors with prepo- sitions is a natural part of English acquisition. 3.	Even when one preposition appears to be the same in both languages, actual usage may be different. The following example is from Spanish, but dozens of similar examples can be found between English and all languages. Spanish has the preposition en, which appears to equal English in. While there are many areas of overlap, there are many more exam- ples where Spanish uses different prepositions and even no preposition for English in.
same usage
en la manana = in the morning
en la cocina. - in the kitchen
en mi opinion - in my opinion
different vivo en la calle Orange =
preposition I live on Orange Street
----------——en-este-momento~=~at thisnnoment/mvTate
estoy pensando en un regalo =
I'm thinking about a gift
no
preposition
entramos en el hotel =
we entered the hotel
4.	Almost all ELLs have problems with at, on, and in
because these three common English prepositions
may be expressed by one, two, three, or more prepo-
sitions in different languages. For location, Arabic
often uses fi, French uses (I, en, and dims, Japanese
uses ni and to a lesser extent de, and Spanish uses
en. French has three prepositions, but each of them
may at different times be translated as at, on, or in.
No other languages uses these three prepositions in
the same way as in English does.
Key 6: Prepositions
177
Almost All Languages	A surprising feature of English for most ELLs is that English allows prepositions to separate from the objects and occur at the end of an utterance. This is called stranding and usually happens with wh- questions and adjective and noun clauses. , What are you waiting for? This is a normal question in English, but many languages would say For what are you waiting1 This is the booh which ] told you about. This is a nor- mal example of an adjective clause in English, but the word order in many languages is This is the book about which J told you. I don't know which country they are fighting against. This is a normal example of a noun clause in English, but the word order in many languages is I don't know against which country they are fighting. In English (and other Germanic languages, a few dialects of French, and some African languages), speakers have the option of stranding or not strand- ing, but in most languages, prepositions cannot be stranded to the end of a sentence. You can expect that your ELLs will almost never strand their prepositions. You should also expect that many of your ELLs will be confused by stranded sentences that they encounter in their reading or listening. They cannot grasp the sud- den appearance of with, about, or another preposition at the end of a sentence with no apparent object.
Arabic	Arabic-speaking ELLs often misuse in/after for future - a ท (Lago/beganforp asm *Ι-Ή see-you after three days;-*!— did this work before two weeks.
Chinese	Chinese has both prepositions and postpositions.
Japanese	Japanese has postpositions, not prepositions.
Spanish	The Spanish preposition en looks like our English in, so Spanish speakers tend to overuse in: *1 work in Washington Bank, *J will see you in Monday, *The steak is in the plate.
178
Key 6: Prepositions
i FIND OUT I
; Ask students of different first lan- ;
! guages to translate the following 1
' six sentences into their native I
• language and label each word. ;
I Compare the use of prepositions I
J with English. Predict what errors ;
1 speakers of those languages 1
1 would be most likely to make ;
■ with prepositions.	'
1 @ Las Vegas is in Nevada.	>
! ê The office is near the bank	>
1 on Park Avenue.	I
>	@ We went to the beach on	!
; Memorial Day.	I
'1 © Her sister works at Siemens.	!
>	T She is afraid of dogs.	!
; © Maria is married to Pierre.	;
6.D. Ideas for Teaching
1 offer three suggestions for teaching prepositions to ELLs—regardless of
their proficiency level. The first maxim in teaching prepositions to ELLs
is that there are many possible lessons on prepositions. There are prepo-
sitions to indicate meaning such as place (ill Miami) or time (in June),
and there are prepositions that have more of a grammatical than seman-
tic function such as interested in a topic. Second, mastering prepositions
takes a great deal of time. In terms of time, I do not mean that you
should necessarily spend more time on prepositions. Instead, 1 mean
that ELL acquisition of prepositions requires a longer period of time
than other grammar points do—even with instruction. After your
instruction, you should expect mistakes to continue. Finally, this need
for time to acquire prepositions requires that your lessons should pro-
vide opportunities for ELLs to practice and receive feedback on their
preposition use. Prepositions are often unstressed in natural conversa-
tion, so ELLs can hardly hear, let alone actually notice and then learn
correct preposition usage without a teacher or textbook pointing it out.
ELLs need activities that allow them to see and hear the various ways in
which prepositions are used.
Beginning students tend to focus on very common prepositions
with concrete, non-idiomatic meanings. This would include under the
desk, on the desk, and in the desk. To teach these, you can bring a ball (or
any object) to class and move it from place to place, asking students
about the location of the ball. Write the answers on the board so that
The word than can be
----------------------a-prep OS i-ti o n-^Korea-is—
bigger than Taiwan),
but the word that is
never a preposition.
Some languages such
as French and Spanish
may render than and
that with the same
word instead of two as
in English, so speakers
of these language may
confuse than and that.
A common error occurs
when comparing two
things: *Colombia is
larger that Ecuador.
students can hear àd see the examples. Perhaps the hardest preposition
information covered at the beginning level is clarification about at, on,
and in with place and time.______________________
Intermediate students must deal with confusing pairs (or trios) of
prepositions and similar words. Examples would be since vs. for, for vs.
during, in vs. after (for future), than vs. that, and before vs. ago in addition
to the usual persistent problems of at, on, and in.
At the upper-intermediate and advanced levels, students become
familiar with verbs, adjectives, and nouns that combine with certain
prepositions like excel in. At this level, ELLs learn to use gerunds after
prepositions (excel in fixing cars), and they study common idioms, spe-
cial units of meaning that often include prepositions, like fall in love, be
up to, and on the other hand.
At the advanced level, all lessons revolve around reviewing and con-
solidating the multitude of preposition information that ELLs have been
exposed to at that point. At the upper-intermediate and advanced levels,
ELLs are learning new vocabulary that often requires certain preposi-
tions. For example, once they learn the word relevant, ELLs need to know
that it is followed by the preposition to if there are additional words
after it (e.g., some relevant information but information that is relevant to
our request).
179
ELL Grammar Key 7:
Articles
Most English speakers recognize three articles: the indefinite articles a
and an and the definite article the. Articles are problematic because
some languages have no articles (Chinese, Japanese, Malay, Polish, Rus-
sian, Thai, Vietnamese), some have only the definite article (Arabic),
and others have the same articles as English but their usage does not
overlap exactly (French, German, Spanish). For ELLs, these little words
can wreak havoc with their English, but there is another article problem
that occurs as well: the use of no article, as in I don't like coffee.
Key 7: Articles
7.A. Typical ELL Errors: Noticing the Gap
Can you identify and explain these five common ELL errors with this
grammar point?
1.	"Everyfondly dreams about comfortable and Injurious
kouse. For thispool, somepeople· try to save a, sufficient
oMwurt of พน) rtey to buy coyr eat plasse to live,.
2.	I Like thisyraremar book because Lt explains everything so
well. *After rending this book, I CMC understand tke iwuns
and tke verbs musk better. I stilb need kelp· witk tke
adjectives.
3.	"There are พtarty reasortsfor being komeless, including tke
LouresLussatioib, tkenaturaldisaster, and tke alcoholism.
4.	* Tke Lip kt bs Mb importantfartor in hour muck people
enjoy working in their offices, offices should hare Lots of
windows to allow-as musk sunshine น'b os possible.
ร. Thankyow so พน'ukfor the document thatyow sent tree. *1
will reak it carefully and then sendy00b a,feedback about
its content as well as its format.
180
Key 7: Articles
A common error for
some language groups
learning English is to
omit all articles
because their lan-
guages have no arti-
cles. An especially
common but serious
error is the omission of
an article of any kind
before a singular
count noun: */ have
cat and two dogs. *lf
you get pet, you will
be happy. */ think the
best pet is cat because
it can be very affec-
tionate. This type of
error is particularly
common among speak-
ers of Chinese, Japan-
ese, and Russian.
7.B. Grammar Explanation
7.B.I. Indefinite Articles a and an
We use the indefinite articles a and an only before singular count
nouns. We use a and an with singular count nouns that are not specific
and arc being mentioned for the first time.
A penguin is a small black and white bird.
A simple computer serves many purposes.
An igloo is a dwelling that is made of ice.
Indefinite Articles:
Rule	Example
1. Use a before a noun or an adjective (+ noun) that begins with a consonant sound.	a feather, a gray feather
2. Use an before a noun or an adjective (+ noun) that begins with a vowel sound.	an idea, an absurd idea
3. Remember that words begin- ning with the letters h or น can be problematic. The use of a and an depends on the beginning sound of the word.	a hat, an hour The word hat begins with the consonant sound /h/, but hour begins with a vowel sound because the letter h is silent.
	a university, an umbrella The word universit)’ begins with the consonant sound /y/, but umbrella begins with a vowel sound. The use of a or an is determined by the next word's initial sound, not its spelling.
•Key 7; Articles
181
7.8.2.	The Definite Article the
There are several different situations in which we use the definite article
the in English.
Definite Article: the	!	
Rule	Example
1. Use the when you are talking about some- thing specific.	general: All of US have an umbrella. specific: The umbrella next to the door is not mine.
2. Use the when the speaker and the lis- tener are talking about the same specific item.	general: Every kitchen has a refrigerator. specific: William, don't forget to close the refrigerator!
3. Use the for the second and all other references to the same noun.	first reference: James and 1 bought a new computer last month. second reference: The computer lets US access the Internet really quickly.
4. Use the with the superlative form of an adjective, which means with the word most or with the ending -est.	comparative: In a jewelry store, gold is more expensive than silver. superlative: In a jewelry store, dia- monds are the most expensive item.
5. Use the for the names of countries that look plu- ral, including countries that end in -s or have 	the-word s-umtedr-union,— republic, or kingdom.	the Philippines, the Netherlands the United States, the Soviet Union the Dominican Republic, the Republic of Angola the United Kingdom, the Kingdom of— Saudi Arabia
6. Use the for the parts of something. (Exception: In general, we do not use the for body parts.)	general: In a kitchen, there is a stove, a refrigerator, and a clock. parts: I went to Mary's new house last night. Pier kitchen is beautiful. The refrigerator is silver, the stove is black, and the clock above the door has really big numbers on it.
7. Use the with most bod- ies of water except individual lakes.	the Mississippi River the Pacific Ocean the Mediterranean Sea the Great Lakes (but Lake Michigan)
8. Use the with geographic parts of the globe and geographic areas, deserts, and peninsulas.	the equator the Middle East the Gobi Desert the South
182
Ke)' 7: Articles
Many ELLs tend to
overuse the when
they want to refer to
the whole category of
something. Common
errors include *The
basketball is my
favorite sport and */
think the basketball
players are the great
athletes. เท addition, it
is not common to use
any article with abstract
nouns, so we do not
say * People need the
patience, *The absence
makes the heart grow
fonder, or * The silence
is golden. We call
this usage the ทนแ
article (0).
7.8.3.	No Article
In English, there are a few situations in which we do not use any article
with a noun. In these cases, many other languages require the use of the,
so a common ELL error is overuse of the.
No Article: (0)	
Rule	Example
1. When you want to talk about a category or group in gen- eral, use no article.	general: Cats can be great pets. specific: The cats in the pet store are expensive.
2. Use no article before abstract nouns such as feelings or ideas.	wrong: A person's future suc- cess depends on the education. correct: A person's future suc- cess depends on educa- tion. wrong: The patience is a virtue. comet: Patience is a virtue.
Common ELL Mistakes: What Your ELLs Should Know
1.	Do not use a singular count noun without an article (or other
determiner).
wrong: *’job, apple, reason, best choice, delicious sandwich
correct: a job, an apple, the reason, the best choice,
---------——a delici ous^sandwich
2.	Do not use a with a noun that begins with a vowel sound.
wrong: a hour, a heir, a honorable colleague, a hourly rate
correct: an hour, an heir, an honorable colleague,
an hourly rate
3.	Do not use the with a plural count noun that refers to the
whole category.
wrong: I don't trust the politicians. They are an ornery bunch
of people.
correct: 1 don't trust politicians. They are an ornery bunch of
people.
4.	Do not use the with abstract nouns or ideas.
wrong: The education is the most important thing in my life.
correct: Education is the most important thing in my life.
Key 7: Articles
183
7.C. Native Language Interference:
Compare English with other Languages
'Language	> .■๖	Notes on Articles ÇC ,	",/r รุ่
Arabic	1.	Arabic has a definite article. 2.	Unlike English, Arabic requires the definite article with abstract nouns: *The honest)1 is important. 3.	The definite article is used for specific things as in English, but it is also used in Arabic when referring to the whole group. In Arabic, you must say, *My favorite sport is the tennis and *1 am afraid of the spiders. 4.	Arabic has no indefinite article.
Chinese Japanese Korean Russian	1.	These languages have no articles. Some of these lan- guages have a word for this and/or that, so students may overuse these two words in lieu of articles. 2.	ELLs who speak these languages exhibit persistent errors with articles. (Articles and prepositions are two of the last grammatical areas that all ELLs acquire.)
French Spanish	1.	These languages have indefinite and definite articles. 2.	The definite article is used for specific things as in English, but it is also used when referring to the whole group. In these languages, you must say, *My favorite sport is the tennis and *1 am afraid of the spiders. 3.	The definite article must be usecT with abstract nouns: *The honesty is important for the nice trips. 4.	Indefinite articles are not used when talking about	
	professions: * My mother is teacher. 5. Unlike English, both French and Spanish have sin- gular and plural forms of their indefinite and defi- nite articles. ELLs of these languages may ask you about the plural of the in English, a question that may seem strange until you consider this grammar in these languages.
184
Key 7: Articles
; Ask students of different first lan- ;
I guages to translate the following !
; sentences into their native lan- ;
> guage. Compare differences in '
article usage. Can you predict any I
; ELL errors with articles?	;
l ê 1 have a brother. He is the ;
I	best brother in the world. '
'< @ Politicians are corrupt in I
, many countries.	;
I @ I lived in Colombia before I '1
; moved to the United States. ;
! @ I don't like cookies or choco-1
; late. I prefer things that are;
I	not sweet.	‘
; @ If you buy a car, you need to I
! take care of it.	\
7.D. Ideas for Teaching
Like prepositions, articles take a great deal of time to be acquired by
ELLs. On the surface, the learning load does not appear to be so great
with articles. While there are more than 150 prepositions in English,
there are only two common kinds of articles in English: indefinite (a,
an) and definite (the), from an ELL point of view, there are times when
we use no article, but ELLs are inclined to use something. Thus, even if
we count everything here, there are only four articles (a, an, the, 0).
Because there are only four, each article has to do many different tasks.
In planning a class on articles, it is important to know how articles
are used within the native language of your students. Some languages
have no articles at all, including Chinese, Japanese, and Russian. Arabic
has a definite article. Some languages have articles that appear to be
equivalent to ours, but the usages do not overlap exactly: French, Ger-
man, Spanish.
At beginning level, ELLs learn (1) a singular count noun must have
something in front of it, and this is usually a or an, (2) the for more spe-
cific usages, (3) the or 0 with geographical terms, and (4) 0 for general
meaning. The first point applies mainly to languages that have no arti-
cles at all. If your students speak languages that have indefinite articles,
like Spanish or French, you do not have to worry about (1). Teach your
Chinese, Japanese, or Russian students that every time they learn a new
noun, they should write down the noun with a or an in front. They
should write down a book, a cat, and an excuse. They need to get used to
including a or an. ELLs will never have any reason to write book, cat, or
excuse as bare houns, so learning them as bare nouns is useless and
counterproductive. You should have separate lessons on each of the
usages of these articles. One reason that article Instruction is difficult for
ELLs is that lessons on articles naively present several usages on one or
two pages as if they were just one small issue. This would be the equiva-
lent of teaching seven or eight distinct verb tenses all at one time, some-
thing that no grammar book would ever advocate.
At the intermediate level, ELLs consolidate information on articles.
At this point, a or an is no longer a problem, but definite articles may
still cause some problems. Common errors in intermediate writing
include overuse of the, as in */ think the honesty is the most important
human characteristic.
At the advanced level, instruction no longer deals with global rules.
Instead, teacher instruction on articles, if it occurs, takes place in the
form of feedback on individual expressions or idioms, such as once upon
a time, not once upon the time.
Key 8: Pronunciation of -s and -ed
185
ELL Grammar Key 8:
Pronunciation of-s and -ed
Consider these four verbs: wrapped, begged, hissed, worked. Can you find
the odd verb in terms of pronunciation? Of these four verbs, which one
has a different finai sound from the other three? (The answer is begged
because it ends in /d/ while the others end in /t/.)
Now consider these four nouns: bees, birds, cats, dogs. Which of these
living creatures has a different final pronunciation from the other three?
(The answer is cats because it ends in /s/, but the others end in /z/.)
Native speakers are not usually consciously aware that we have three
pronunciations for -5 (/s/, /z/, /az/) and three pronunciations for -ed
/t/, /d/, /ad/). Teachers need to understand the pronunciation variations
of these two grammar markers so that they can better understand their
ELLs' linguistic needs.
8.A. Typical ELL Errors: Noticing the Gap
Can you identify and explain these five common ELL errors with this
grammar point? The pronunciation of three words within each sentence
is indicated. Concentrating on the ending of each word, identify which
one word in each sentence has been pronounced incorrectly by the ELL.
1. *[ome, cais [cai + /ร/] are, deeping by the, trees [tree, + /s/] that we, planted [placet + /dd/] last year.	
2. *Tke,police,followed [follow + /ร d/] the, speeding car 0Kd	
proceeded [proceed + /dd/] to interrogate the, driver and	
her passengers [passenger + /z,/]. 3.	*Tke, most popular asdmals at the, zoo are, the, monkeys [monkey + /s/7, giraffes [giraffe, + /s/]) aKdeiephsnts [elerhart + /s/J. 4.	* There, are, many reasons [reason, + /z,/] why thejisdges	
[judge, + /ฐ z,/] reached [reash, + /dd/7 their verdict so quickly. ร. *พken, spring arrived [arrive, + /3 d/]J the, seeds [seed + /z,/7 that ske, kad planted [plant + /dd/7 a, month, earlier begom, to sproutf'OM, the, earth.	
186
Ke)’ 8: Pronunciation oj -s and -ed
8.B. Grammar Explanation
8.B.I. The Scope of -s and -ed
You might be wondering—quite logically—why pronunciation is being
discussed in a grammar book. Two of the most basic, frequently used
grammar markers are -s and -ed. While these markers may appear to be
just two little suffixes, each carries in reality quite an important grammar
load in English.
The marker -s is used in English for two parts of speech: verbs and
nouns. With verbs, -s is used for third person singular (he/she/it works).
With nouns, -s is the plural marker (cats). Therefore, every time you talk
about what a person usually does, all the verbs are in third person singu-
lar with -.S'. With nouns, -s is the usual way to form the plural. In fact, all
but a handful of the thousands of nouns in English form their plural
with —s. With nouns, it is also used to mark possession, for example,
Pat's, Mary's.
Many people associate the marker -ed with simple past tense (work-
worked-worked). In addition, -ed is used for past participles (■work-worked-
worked). However, because past participles are used in three
tenses—namely, present perfect, past perfect, and future perfect—the -ed
is involved in a total of four tenses. Four of twelve tenses may not seem
to be a substantial number, but simple past and present perfect are
among the most frequently used verb tenses in English. In addition, past
participles can also function as adjectives (The captured prisoner was sent
back to jail), so the -ed form occurs much more widely than just in verbs.
Elsewhere in this book, we have focused exclusively on the grammar
of these two markers with little reference to any pronunciation problem.
If the pronunciation of these common markers were straightforward as
is the case with other markers such as -ing, -ly, or -ness, there would be
_____________no need for this discussion.______________________________________________________
When I ask native speakers with no ELL training or experience how
to pronounce -s, they often think I am posing a trick question. They
routinely reply, "Well, -s is /s/, right?" The answer is no. The marker -5
has three possible pronunciations, /s/, /z/, /az/, and the most common
one is not /s/ but /z/.
Similarly, when asked about the pronunciation of -ed, native speak-
ers overwhelmingly answer /ad/. For -ed, there are three possible pro-
nunciations—/t/, /d/, /ad/—and the most common one is not /ad/ but
rather /d/. In fact, /ad/ is the least common in actual usage.
These pronunciations are not exceptions and are not due to the
native speaker's accent, dialect, age, gender, or any other individual fac-
tor. The reason that the pronunciation of the marker -s is /s/ in cats but
/z/ in dogs is the same reason that the marker -ed is /1/ in worked but /d/
in begged: the pronunciation depends completely on the final sound of
the word before the marker is added—and this pronunciation depends
on a physically different, unconscious action that we refer to as voicing.
Key 8: Pronunciation of -8 and -ed
187
8.B.2. Voiced and Voiceless Sounds
When you speak, air passes through your mouth and/or nose to produce
sounds. Variations of these sounds are produced by altering the place
where the sound is made, by altering the manner in which the sound is
made, or by altering voicing.
First, we can alter where the sound is made. The vowel in beat is
made near the top front of the mouth while the vowel in but is made
near the middle of the mouth. Say these words together several times,
and then say just the two vowel sounds together. You should hear the
difference. If not, pay attention to how your jaw drops as you say these
words in succession: beat, bit, bait, bet, bat, baht (Thai currency; pro-
nounce it just like the a in father), boot, boat, bought, but, bit, bout. Can
you pronounce beat at the back of your mouth? What about bout at the
front of your mouth? No, you can't. Each sound has its assigned place of
articulation.
Second, we can alter the manner of articulation, which means that
we can vary how a sound is produced. Pronounce /f/. Can you feel that
you are making the sound of /f/ by the friction created by forcing the air
to pass through the gap between your top teeth and your bottom lip?
Pronounce /b/. Can you feel that you are actually stopping the air for a
split second? With these two sounds, it is the friction or stopping of air
that produces the sounds.
The final way to alter the pronunciation of a sound is by vibrating
your vocal cords, which are located in your larynx (colloquially, your
voice box) in your neck. Put your finger on your Adam's apple. Pro-
nounce /s/ and then pronounce /z/. Can you feel the increased vibration
for /z/? Notice that both /s/ and /z/ have the sarne place and manner of
articulation; the lone difference is in voicing. We say that /s/ is voiceless,
without vibration, and /z/ is voiced, with vibration.
-----Just~aS“WÍtlาเ -/-s/~an:d~fz/— many-ot]aer- con so naทt “Sound S“OCCur “in-
pairs, including /p/-/b/ and /t/-/d/. Say /p/. Now say /b/. Both of these
sounds are produced in the front of the mouth by stopping air. They
have the same place and manner of production. The only difference is in
voicing: /p/ is voiceless and /b/ is voiced.
All vowel sounds
in English are
voiced sounds. เท
fact, the word vowel
comes from Latin
vocalis, which means
"voice." Therefore,
nouns that end in a
vowel sound form their
plural by adding /z/:
plays, bees, flies, bows,
views. Likewise, verbs
that end in a vowel
sound form their past
tense by adding /d/:
stayed, keyed, tried,
glowed, chewed.
188
Key ร: Pronunciation of -s and -ed
A minimal pair is
two words that differ
in only one sound
(phoneme). Examples
include cab - cap and
have - half. Minimal
pairs are useful in prac-
ticing the pronuncia-
tion of difficult sounds.
When common vocab-
ulary items are used,
the pair serves to illus-
trate pronunciation
contrasts. However, it
is important to note
that very few useful
minimal pairs exist for
less common sounds
such as the soft th and
the hard th. For
instance, the minimal
pair of thy - thigh does
contrast these sounds
well, but how useful
are these words in
everyday or academic
English?
Some voiced consonants, such as /m/ and /n/, do not have a corre-
sponding voiceless panner. All vowels in English are voiced. 'Illis chart
shows which sounds are voiced and which are voiceless. ('This chart uses
modified IPA symbols. Use whatever system of symbols that is meaning-
ful to you.)
All English Sounds
■ Voiced	■ Voiceless	- -	
/๖/ cab		/p/ cap
/d/ grade		/t/ grate
/8/ bag		/!</ back
/v/ have		/f/ half
/z/ rise		/s/ rice
[) 1 surge		|c] search
[3] or (zh) massage		[ร] cash
[Ò] bathe		Ιθ] bath
/!/ call		—
/โท/ name		—
เท/ can		—
/η/ song		—
/r/ purr		—
all vowels play, see, try, go, buy, etc.		—
.8..JB.3..-Pronunciation-of—รช้-/-ร/7-/z/—/-ซีz/---------------
In English, we use -5 to mark the plural of nouns (e.g., cat, cats) and to
make third person singular of a verb (e.g., I need, he needs). Note that
this —5 unit is sometimes spelled -65 (e.g., watches, dishes), but this varia-
tion involves spelling, not pronunciation.
This -5 unit can be pronounced three ways in English:
Pronunciation of-ร		
Ending Sound	Add This Bound	Examples
Voiced /d/, Μ, /g/, /๖/, /δ/, เ\เ, Μ, /ท/, /η/, /r/, all vowels	/z/	beds, loves, bags, Rob's
Voiceless N. /f/. ผ. /ΡΛ /<-¥	/s/	bets, lefj's, socks, wraps
Other /s/, /z/, /if, /§/, /V	/az/	Bess's, raises, watches
Key ร: Pronunciation of -8 and -ed
189
8.8.4.	Pronunciation of -ed: /t/, /d/, /ad/
This -ed suffix can be pronounced three ways in English:
Pronunciation of -ed
Ending Sound	■ ■....■■	Add This Sound	Examples	'
Voiced /-/, /v/, /g/, /๖/, /δ/, /!/, /m/, /η/, /η/, /r/, all vowels	/d/	raised, loved, bagged, robbed
Voiceless /s/, /fl, /]</, /p/, /6/, /c/, /§/	Λ/	voiced, laughed, backed, dropped
Other /d/, /t/	/ad/	needed, wanted
Source: The Art of Teaching speaking: Research and Pedagogy for the ESL/EFL Classroom.
(Folse, 2006), p. 241.
8.8.5.	Hearing the Final Sound
Sometimes the best way to help students hear these three differences is
to put an example word in a phrase in which the next word begins with
a vowel. By doing this, the final ending joins with the beginning vowel
sound of the subsequent word as in these examples: He bagged all of the
cans. He backed all my ideas. In the first example, bagged all produces the
sounds of the word doll while backed all protfuces the sounds of the
word tall.
------------------doll--------------------Tall
He bagged all of the cans. He backed all my ideas.
พ	พ
For many students (and native speakers), it is much easier to hear the
final /d/, /t/, /s/, or /z/ when the next word begins with a vowel sound. It
is important to try to say the whole phrase as naturally as possible, which
means at normal speed. If you pronounce the words individually, it is
much more difficult to hear the sounds because you are not pronouncing
them naturally, as you would in an ongoing conversation.
190
Key δ’: Pronunciation of -s anil -eci
Common ELL Mistake: What Your ELLs Should Know
I. Do not consider the last written letter of the original word;
consider the last sound.
wrong: halted - hake ~ /d/ because it ends in til!.' letter <■
correct: baked = bake + /1/ because it ends in the sound /!</
comet: laughed = laugh + /t/ because it ends in the sound /โ/
8.C. Native Language Interference:
Compare English with Other Languages
1 language	
All Languages	1.	Most ELLs expect a one-to-one correspondence between a letter in English and its sound, but Eng- lish is notorious for allowing multiple pronuncia- tions of letters, as with the six pronunciations for the letters ough in cough, rough, dough, through, bough, and bought. 2.	Initially, all ELLs will mispronounce every -s as /s/: goes */gos/ and shoes */shus/. 3.	Initially, all ELLs will mispronounce every -ed as a separate syllable /ad/: slapped */slap«ad/ and lived */liv»ad/. 4.	AU ELLs are surprised to find that -5 can .be_.piQ—
	nounced /s/, /z/, or /az/ and that -ed can be pro- nounced /t/, /d/, or /ad/. Beginning students will unconsciously repeat these endings correctly (robbed with /d/ and wrapped with /t/), but once ELLs see the form of the word on the board, they will say *rob*bed and *wrap*ped with two separate syllables.
Arabic	The phoneme /p/ does not exist, so Arabic speakers have difficulty with the distinction cab-cap, which forms the plural with /z/ and /s/, and rub-wmp, which forms the past tense with /d/ and /t/.
Chinese	1.	Verbs and nouns are not marked for singular and plural, so the concept of word endings may sur- prise Chinese-speaking ELLs. 2.	Consonant clusters, such as desks and clasps, are especially difficult to pronounce.
Key 8: Pronunciation of -s and -ed
191
French	1.	Like most ELLs, French speakers tend to pro- nounce all -5 endings as /s/ instead of including /z/ or /az/. 2.	French does not have either of the th sounds in English (this or think), so French-speaking ELLs find it difficult to pronounce words that end in these sounds, particularly when followed by an additional ending (bathes or Keith's).
Japanese	1.	Verbs and nouns are not marked for singular and plural, so this is a new concept in English. 2.	Most Japanese words end in a vowel sound (sushi, sake, sayonara), with the lone exception being /n/ (Nihon [Japan], Nissan, gohan [rice]). Consonant clusters in English are difficult.
Korean	1.	Verbs and nouns are not marked for singular and plural, so this is a new concept in English. 2.	The phoneme /p/ does not exist in Korean, and Korean ELLs often substitute /f/ instead. This may cause pronunciation problems of plural endings after /p/-/b/ (caps, cabs) as well as past tense end- ings after /f/-/v/ (laughed, loved).
Russian	1.	When Russian speakers begin to learn English, they tend to read and pronounce English words the way they are written. 2.	Russians have trouble with /Θ/*, which is rendered as /t/. This problem may impact whether the past tense ending is rendered as /d/ or /t/, the -5 is ren-
		dered-as /z/- or /■ร/, or the endingisTnaistakenlyren- dered as an extra syllable /ad/ or /az/. 3.	/v/ and เพ/ are confusing. English does not have final /■พ/; a final พ letter influences the vowel sound. 4.	English /r/ is problematic.
Spanish	The phoneme /v/ does not exist, and Spanish speak- ers often misuse /b/ instead. This may cause pronun- ciation problems of verb endings after /v/-/b/ (lives, robs) as well as past tense endings after /v/-/b/ (lived, robbed).
192
Key ร: Pronunciation of -ร anti -ed
■ What ..is the most common;
I sound to make nouns plural in !
; English? Make a list of 25 ani- ;
; mal names at random. (HINT: If;
; you get stuck, pretend that you ;
; are walking by the animals at a ;
! zoo.) Eliminate any animals !
; that have irregular plurals such ,
' as deer —» deer or mouse mice. ;
; Determine the percentage ofI
; your words that end in /s/, /z/, ;
i and /az/.	Í
8.D. Ideas for Teaching
EL1.S at all levels will repeat an inflected word such as monkeys or talked
correctly with the /z/ and /t/ endings respectively, but once they see the
spelling of the word, they may revert to pronunciations ending in /s/
and /ad/ because of spelling interference. For beginners in particular, the
teaching point is that spelling and pronunciation of these endings are
not related, but you should anticipate this kind of interference.
l;or beginners, it is helpful to present the words grouped according
to sounds instead of the usual alphabetical listing.
		
cats	horses	rats
dogs	lions	snakes
giraffes	monkeys	turkeys
		
/s/	/z/	/sz/
cats	dogs	horses
giraffes	lions	
rats	monkeys	
snakes	turkeys	
For beginning learners, it is not necessary to go into depth as to
why cats ends in /s/ and dogs in /z/, but if you present the words
in groups according io the finai sound and emphasize these final
sounds even indirectly, students can benefit from this pronunciation
foundation. An especially helpful way to focus attention on these
endings is to practice the words in phrases where the next word begins
with a vowel sound. In this way, it is much easier to hear the
actual sound. For example, put the animal names in a sentence
where the next word is are: The cats are here. The dogs are there. The
giraffesare here. The lions are there. In these four sentences, you can hear
the alternating /s/-/z/ sounds: cats are /s/, dogs are /z/, giraffes are เรเ, and
lions are /z/.
For very young learners, you could choose a song that has ล prepon-
derance of -s endings pronounced as /z/. In reality, a song is nothing
more than ล drill set to music. Learners repeat the words to the song
without realizing that they are actually assimilating a very important
language pattern. Another good point is that songs produce no student
papers and, therefore, require no teacher grading time.
Key 9: Adjective Clauses and Reductions
193
ELL Grammar Key 9:
Adjective Clauses and Reductions
Consider: The sentence that you are reading right now contains an
adjective clause. Do you know which words make up the adjective
clause? The answer is that you are reading right now. This clause describes
the word sentence. Though most ELLs can understand the gist of this sen-
tence, the grammar of it can be a bit perplexing. They may ask you, Why
are there two verbs? or What is the purpose of the word that?
To express the same idea of this sentence, we could also omit the
word that and say, The sentence you are reading right noil.' contains an adjec-
tive clause. In fact, in spoken English, this second sentence may be more
common. (Both are correct English.) Can you always omit the word that
from adjective clauses? Consider: The sentence that has twelve words
seems hard to understand. No, we cannot say, *The sentence has twelve
words seems hard to understand. Why? (The answer is in Key 9.)
If your students are reading English texts or listening to English,
they are being exposed to adjective clauses a great deal because adjective
clauses—whether "full" or "reduced"—are very common in English.
Even frequent exposure to this particular structure is usually not enough
to learn it well. Your ELLs need a teacher with knowledge of this gram-
mar point to help them figure out this important structure.
A clause is a group
of words with both a
subject and a verb.
The two kinds of
clauses are independ-
ent and dependent.
There are threeTinds
of dependent clauses:
adjective, adverb, and
noun.
9.A. Typical ELL Errors: Noticing the Gap
Can you identify and explain these five common ELL errors with this
grammar point?
1.	* The, lawyer inforwsd, alb of US that the, dwcuMtett urns
sty (teal iv, 1991 csasek to be, valid, ir, 2001.
2.	* where, did,you, put the, letter that I wrote, be yesterday?
3.	* To chesk, out a, booh frowt, the, dowttowr,public, library,
patrons KS&d, a, special card, who has their currett askdress
at the, top.
9.	* Mar vir, Browtt best-selling booh that written, in, 2007
caused, weary prob lewis let, the, business csMMutttty.
ร. * Congress watts to hnowthe, Korses of the, barks what are,
willing to invest 'นt our esoKOMy WOW-.
194
Key 9: Adjective (Hillises and Reductions
9.B. Grammar Explanation
9.B.I. What is an Adjective Clause?
An adjective clause is a clause that describes or gives more information
about a noun. An adjective clause usually begins with who, that, which,
whom, or whose, and these initial words are called relative pronouns. As
you will see, that, which, and whom are sometimes omitted from adjec-
tive clauses.
Adjectives are usually single words that describe a noun. A typical
position in a sentence is immediately before the noun. In contrast, adjec-
tive clauses go after the noun.
■ * .m3	
(additional idea: big)	ADJECTIVE + NOUN 1 rented a [big1 house.
(additional idea: the	NOUN + ADJECTIVE CLAUSE
house had six bedrooms)	I rented a house(that had six bedrooms;.
เท formal language, a
distinction is always
made between who
(for subjects) and
whom (for objects).
เท everyday informal
language, who is used
as either a subject or an
object,____________________
9.B.2. Use of Relative Pronouns
A relative pronoun is a pronoun in an adjective clause. The most com-
mon relative pronouns are who, whom, that, and which. In general, who,
whom, and that can be used for people, and that and which can be used
for things.
Other relative pronouns include whose (The girl whose arm is broken
loves sports), where (พ6 saw the place where the accident occurred), and
wuhen-{-I~don-t-~remembei~the~date-when~they~got-marriedf.------------------
People	who, whom	1.	A person who builds houses!is a carpenter. 2.	I hope to meet the person '[whom you hired].
Things	which	3. This book is the type of litera- ture (which Matt likej;.
People or Things	that	4.	A person [that builds houses!is a carpenter. 5.	This book is the type of litera- ture [that Mat?H kesjj.
Key 9: Adjective Clauses and Reductions
195
9.B.3. Relative Pronouns as Subjects and Objects
in Adjective Clauses
The relative pronoun in a relative clause can function as the subject or as
an object in the clause. It is much easier for ELLs to work with adjective
clauses where the relative pronoun is the subject, so it is important for
you to understand the difference between the two well before you begin
teaching this grammar point. At some point, ELLs need to learn both
positions, but in terms of instruction, it may be more prudent to work
first with the subject types and then the object types. At the very least,
knowing this distinction can help teachers predict ELLs' difficulties and
thereby plan their instruction accordingly.
who	SUBJ	SUBJ + VERB 1. A person|who builds houses! is a carpenter.			
	OBJ	0 (who is only a subject in formal language)			
whom	SUBJ	0 (whom is only an object)			
	OBJ	OBJ 4- SUBJ + VERB 2. I hope to meet the person |whom you hired .			
that	SUBJ	SUBJ + VERB 3. This book is the type of literature that is interesting to me .			
	OBJ	4.	OBJ + SUBJ + VERB This) book/is the\type of literature		
			that Matthew likes .		
which	SUBJ	SUBJ 4- VERB			
		5.	This	book	is the type of literature
			which is interesting to me .		
	OBJ	OBJ + SUBJ+ VERB 6. This/book/is the Jtype of literature which Matthew likes |.			
Both that and which
can be used for adjec-
tive clauses that refer
to a thing, yêwever,
some grammar books
make a distinction
between that (for
clauses with necessary
information, known as
restrictive clauses)
and which (for clauses
with extra information,
known an non-
restrictive clauses).
Consider: One incredi-
ble country that I
visited in 2007 was
Peru. vs. Peru, which
1 visited in 2007. was
incredible. When ELLs
first learn about
adjective clauses, the
that/which distinction
is not taught. Instead,
ELLs are taught that
either word is OK to
refer to things.
196
Keγ 9: Adjective Clauses and Reductions
9.B.5. Reduction of Adjective Clauses
What is the function of -ing words in sentences such as On domestic
flights lasting III least three hours, Il meal is served or Students needing extra
help can go to the writing center·’ It can't be the main verb—because the
sentences already have a main verb. It can't be an adjective—because
adjectives come before nouns, not after them. If this -ing word in the
middle of the sentence seems strange to you, you can now empathize
with the plight of your ELLs.
In this section, you will see that these -ing-words are reduced adjec-
tive clauses, 'rhe good news is that ELLs generally have little to no diffi-
culty understanding the content of sentences containing adjective
clauses. The bad news, however, is that English also allows adjective
clauses to be reduced, and these reductions are not only common but
also tricky to produce. In fact, even young native readers have some dif-
ficulty with texts that contain adjective clause reductions. There are two
common ways to reduce adjective clauses:
	Omitting SUB? + be: When an adjective clause has who/which/that as the subject and any form of be, these two parts may be omitted without changing the meaning of the sentence. This reduction affects prepositional phrases, present participles, and p^st participles. who/which/that + be -> 0	Prepositional Phrases la.	The magazines (that are| on the table belong to me. lb.	The magazines on the table belong to me.
		Present Participles 2a. People [who are] living in the dorm now will get a refund. 2b. People living in the dorm now will get a refund.
		Past Participles 3a. The students [that had been] chosen for the contest were very happy. 3b. The students chosen for the contest were very happy.
	Reducing SUBJ + VERB: When an adjective clause has who/which/that as the SUB) + VERB, these two parts may be changed to the -ing form (present participle) without changing the meaning of the sentence. who/which/that + VERB -» VERB + -ing	4a. On domestic flights [that last] at least three hours, a meal is served. 4b. On domestic flights lasting at least three hours, a meal is served. 5a. Students [who need] extra help can go to the writing center. 5b. Students needing extra help can go to the writing center.
Key 9: Adjective Clauses and Reductions
197
Common ELL Mistakes: What Your ELLs Should Know
1.	Do not forget to use a relative pronoun (who, that, which).
wrong: The book has 250 pages is on the table.
correct: The book that has 250 pages is on the table.
correct: The book which has 250 pages is on the table.
2.	Do not use the wrong word to begin a relative clause. Do not
use which for people or who for things in relative clauses.
wrong: The student which made 100 on the test is from China.
correct: The student who made 100 on the test is from China.
correct: The student that made 100 on the test is from China.
3.	Do not include a pronoun after the verb of a relative clause.
wrong: The man that we spoke to Ijãáín is Mr. O'Leary.
correct: The man that we spoke to is Mr. O'Leary.
4.	Don't forget to omit both the subject and the verb be. You
can't omit just one of them.
wrong: The book that written in 1991 caused many problems.
wrong: The book was written in 1991 caused many problems.
correct: The book written in 1991 caused many problems.
comet: The book that was written in 1991 caused many
problems.
correct: The book which was written in 1991 caused many
problems.
9.C. Native Language Interference: Compare English with Other Languages	
Language	Notes on Adjective Clauses
Arabic	1.	As in English, relative clauses come after the noun. 2.	The relative pronoun in Arabic does not make a dis- tinction between human (who, whom) and non- human (that, which), so Arabic speakers may produce *This is the book who I bought. 3.	The object pronoun in a relative clause is included in Arabic, so Arabic speakers will say *Mrs. Wilson is the teacher that we like /Dt'. 4.	Clause reductions are not possible.
198
Key 9: Adjective Clauses and Reductions
Chinese	1.	Adjective clauses appear before the noun, not after ás in English. 2.	No reductions of adjective clauses arc possible. 3.	Chinese learners have great difficulty with relative clauses, often avoiding this construction in favor of using several smaller sentences.
French	1.	As in English, relative clauses come after the noun. 2.	No reductions of adjective clauses arc possible. 3.	The relative pronoun in l-'rench is different for sub- jects (qui) and for objects (que). Thus, french speak- ers frequently make errors such as, *The book who is on the table belongs to me (because who is the subject of is on the table and in French must be rendered by qui, which usually means who) and *The book what we read is on the table (because what is the object of we read about and in French must be rendered by que, which may mean what, that, or which).
Japanese Korean	1.	Adjective clauses appear before the noun, not after as in English. 2.	There is no relative pronoun, so there is no distinc- tion between who/whom/that/which. Word order and placement of the clause before the noun indicate an adjective clause. 3.	No reductions of adjective clauses are possible.
Russian	1 As in English, relative clauses come after the noun. 2.	The same relative pronoun is used for humans and things, so who/whom may be interchanged with 	whidt/thaL-RussiamELLs-may write -Ths person which you met lives in this apartment. 3.	Russian sets off dependent clauses with a comma, so a frequent punctuation error in English is *Here is the book, that you bought.
Spanish	1.	As in English, relative clauses come after the noun. 2.	No reductions of adjective clauses are possible. 3.	The relative pronoun in Spanish is que, a poly- semous word that can mean what, which, that, or than depending on the context. Thus, Spanish speakers frequently make errors such as *This is the dictionary what we use in our class and *The leader which we studied about fought for civil rights.
Key 9: Adjective Clauses and Reductions
199
4. Spanish allows for subject-verb inversion in adjec-
tive clauses, so common mistakes include * This
happened al the time when explored the New World
Christopher Columbus and * The first play that wrote
Shakespeare ivas Henry VI. Notice how the subjects
Christopher Columbus and play come after their
respective verbs explored and wrote.
9.D. Ideas for Teaching
The term adjective clause may sound like a very exotic and rare grammar
component, but even beginning-level materials contain adjective
clauses. Before teaching this grammar point, check your own knowledge
first. As the teacher, you should understand three things about adjective
clauses well. First, you should know the most common adjective clause
markers {who, whom, etc.) and thereby be able to identify an adjective
clause instantly. Second, you should know when the marker may be
omitted, thereby "tricking" the student into thinking that he or she has
come upon a new sentence instead of part of the same sentence. Third,
you should understand adjective clause reductions well.
Demonstrate how you can embed one sentence inside the other:
! FIND OUT !
; Examine a content book (a ■;
; science book or a business web- !
! site) written by native speakers. \
[Identify ail adjective clauses ;
J (both fulluand reduced "forms).;[
; Tor fhoseâat describe a. person, [
; how many use whò/whom and ;
■ how many use That? พhat per- I
! centage. of clauses are full and ;
; what percentage are reduced? ί
1.	2.	3.
The book has 200 pages. The book is on the table.	the book is on the table	*fhe book that is on the table has 200 jpages.
		
After you have demonstrated this, then let students work with three
or four pairs of sentences to create new sentences with adjective clauses.
Armed with this information, choose a paragraph from reading
material that is appropriate for your students' proficiency level. The
paragraph ideally would come from another of your students' books,
their reading or composition book, for example.
With beginning students, you could ask them to underline adjective
clauses inside a reading passage. It is imperative that you give them a
"cleaned up" version of the reading, which means that you have made
sure that there are no reductions, no clauses with whose (not beginning
level) and preferably none with whom. You want only who/that + VERB +
-s. Examples include The book that is on the table has 200 pages and The
man who is standing by the door drives a red. sports car.
200
Key 9: Adjective Clauses and Reductions
With intermediate students, ask them to identify the adjective
clauses, but also ask them to come up with the two original sentences.
Combining two sentences to practice adjective clauses can some-
times produce multiple answers. In addition to The book that is on the
table has 200 pages, the answer could have been The book that has 200
pages is on the table. Therefore, it is important that you discuss all possi-
ble answers as a class. 1 think that teaching adjective clauses can be sim-
ilar to teaching in a math class where the math teacher checks
homework by asking if anyone else got a different answer and then ask-
ing that person how he or she arrived at that answer. In isolation, both
of these answers are correct. Within a larger piece of writing, one would
be preferred due to the purpose of the sentence: to tell the number of
pages or to tell the location of the book. This type of grammatical com-
parison is useful for intermediate and higher-proficiency? ELLs.
Intermediate students will practice not only who/that in the subject
position but also whom/that in the object position. Intermediate ELLs
will also practice omitting the relative pronouns in the object position.
At this level, students need to be told to include more adjective clauses
in their writing. Make it a specific part of the assignment, such as Write a
paragraph about the causes of the Vietnam War. Use and. underline our four
new vocabulary words in your paragraph: presume, liable, logical, detrimental.
Use and put a box around at least two adjective clauses in your paper.
Advanced students are expected to be able to understand full and
reduced adjective clauses in their reading and listening material. In addi-
tion, they should be able to use both full and reduced forms in writing
and speaking.
Key พ: Infinitives and Gerunds
201
ELL Grammar Key 10:
Infinitives and Gerunds
*My doctor asked me trying avoiding to eat greasy foods. What? Most people
have to read that sentence several times before they have any idea of
what it means. The actual sentence is supposed to be My doctor asked me
to try to avoid, eating greasy foods. This sentence has four verb expressions
in it. In this sentence, how do we know when to use an infinitive (to try)
and when to use a gerund (eating)?
10.A. Typical ELL Errors: Noticing the Gap
Can you identify and explain these five common ELL errors with this
grammar point?
	ไ. * Write, Letters ire English, is ทot so difficultfor me no พ-, bite l used, to hoove a, lot of problews. 2.	*1asw so sorry for ecot to informyou, about what has happened, to IMS' in, the, past few- days, bite I have beerc extremely busy. 3.	* We were, tired,, so we, stopp-ed, to dr tee. After taking a, rest, we there drove alb the way horns,. 4.	* Thanksfor wrote asc email to rrce. I catet telbyou, hour happy I was to receive your news.	
	5. *1 waste thateyou, eat dinner with, wee tonight.	
10.E. Grammar Explanation
10.B.1. Form and Function of Infinitives and Gerunds
An infinitive consists of to plus the simple or base form of a verb. An
infinitive can function as a noun, adjective, or adverb. A gerund consists
of a VERB and -ing. A gerund is always used as a noun. It is important to
remember that infinitives and gerunds are verb forms, not verbs.
Infinitive = to + VERB	Gerund = VERB 4- -ing	1
1. Tobe or not to be—that is the	4. Getting a good job is my top
question.	priority.
2. The decision to quit my job	5. Are you interested in going to
was tough.	the store?
3. She wants to eat lunch with	6. She enjoys eating lunch with
our family.	our family.
202
Key 10: Infinitives and Gerunds
10.6.2.	Subject of the Sentence
When you want to use a verb as the subject of a sentence, use a gerund.
Yes, it is theoretically possible to use an infinitive as the subject, but this
happens only in very formal language. เท daily speaking, we almost
never use an infinitive as the subject. As a subject, a gerund or an infini-
tive is singular and lakes a singular verb.
Gerund as Subject	Infinitive as Subject	t	
1.	Speaking three languages is hard. 2.	Arriving on time is important. 3.	Running burns up a lot of calories.	4.	To speak three languages is hard. 5.	To arrive on time is important. 6.	*To run burns up a lot of calories.	
NOTE: These three examples represent natural, correct Eng- lish. These sentences could occur in either writing or speaking and in either formal or informal situ- ations. They sound better.	NOTE: Examples 4 and 5 sound much more formal than their gerund counterparts, Examples 1 and 2. No native speaker would ever say Example 6. Until they have a much higher English pro- ficiency level and can appreciate the potential nuance of using an infinitive as subject, ELLs should avoid infinitives as subjects. Fol- lower-level ELLs, I sometimes tell a "grammar lie" and say that infinitives are never the subject of a sentence.	
10.6.3.	Infinitive to Show Purpose or Reason
Infinitives can be a reduction of the phrase in order to, which shows a
purpose for doing something. Ask students to notice the comma after
this introductory phrase. This comma is a sure indication of an infinitive
of purpose.
PURPOSE
RESULT
To achieve their goals, the officials quickly hired a new manager,
infinitive (comma) subject	verb
Key 10: Infinitives anã Gerunds
203
10.B.4. Infinitives or Gerunds Following Certain Verbs
Consider these two example sentences:
She wants to eat lunch with our family.
She enjoys eating lunch with our family.
Why is to eat—and not eating—correct in the first example? Why is
eating—and not to eat—correct in the second example? Whether to use
an infinitive or a gerund here is determined by the first verb. In English,
we use an infinitive after want, need, promise, and other verbs. We use a
gerund after enjoy, avoid, consider, and other verbs. There is no obvious
rhyme or reason to account for which verbs must be followed by an
infinitive and which must be followed by a gerund.
For ELLs, there is no difficult concept to understand here. It is sim-
ply a matter of good old-fashioned memorizing which verbs are fol-
lowed by infinitives and which verbs by gerunds as seen in Group 4a
and 4b.
Group 4a. Verbs Followed by Infinitives
afford	demand	hope	need	promise
agree	deserve	intend	offer	refuse
ask	expect	know how	plan	want
decide	hesitate	learn	pretend	would like
Example:
I intended to study last night, but I decided to watch TV
instead.
'	Group 4b Verbs Followed by Gerund			Is.	J	
appreciate avoid can't help consider delay detest discuss	dislike dread enjoy finish get through go (shopping) insist on	keep on look forward to miss postpone practice put off quit	recommend risk suggest think about be tired of be used to	Ά gerund often follows go when it is a sport or a fun activity: go swimming, go bowl- ing, go shopping, go fishing, go running.
Example:
We may dread visiting the dentist's ofice, but we cannot
avoid going there.
204
Key 10: Infinitives and Gerunds
Some verbs can be followed by either an infinitive or a gerund with
no difference in meaning, as seen in Group 4c.
	Group 4c. Verbs followed 3^ Geinnds.or Infinitives;	I			
		Seine Meaning		-	fa· >·’. δί il·'?'·' j
	begin	continue	like	prefer
	can't stand	hate	love	start
Examples:
If you begin to cook now, dinner will be ready by 7:30.
If you begin cooking now, dinner will be ready by 7:30.
There are a few verbs that can be followed by either an infinitive or
a gerund, but the meaning of the sentence is different. This group
includes remember, stop, forget, and try, as seen in Croup 4d.
	Group 4d.	Different Meaning		
	remember	stop	forget	try
Examples:
remember
1.	Susan: Here are the tomatoes that you asked me to buy.
Sam: Thanks. I'm happy that you remembered to buy them.
(remember + infinitive means she remembered first and
then she acted.)
2.	Chuck: I found this old book with your name in it. Is it youps?
Chris: Well, 1 don't remember buying it, but it must be mine if it
has my name in it.
(remember + gerund means she acted first and then she
remembered.)
stop
1.	Allie: Why are you late?
Peter: My car was almost on empty, so I stopped to get some gas.
(stop + infinitive tells why. To is the same as in order to.)
2.	Robert: Does Stan still smoke?
Cindy: No, he doesn't. He stopped smoking last May.
(stop + gerund tells what he stopped.)
Key 10: Infinitives and Gerunds
205
Group 4e. Verbs Followed by Noun/Pronoun
Followed by Infinitive
advise	cause	forbid	invite	permit	teach	want
allow	convince	force	need	persuade	tell	warn
ask	expect	get	order	remind	urge	would like
The verbs in group 4e behave differently from those in 4a-4d. These
verbs usually require a noun or pronoun and then an infinitive. Notice
that many of the verbs in this group are words that mean "to ask or tell
someone to do something."
This group is important because some of these verbs are used very fre-
quently. Interference from ELLs' native language is often problematic here.
Many languages use a different pattern with these verbs, and a very com-
mon ELL error is *1 want that you call me instead of J want you to call me.
Examples:
wrong: 1 would like that you help me tonight.
correct: I would like you to help me tonight.
wrong: She asked that Kevin lends her some money.
correct: She asked Kevin to lend her some money.
wrong: The president told that the soldiers do their
best.
correct: The president told the soldiers to do their best.
wrong: The boss persuaded that we attend next week's
meeting.
correct: The boss persuaded us to attend next week's
meeting.
make: She made the children eat their vegetables.
let:	She let the children play outside.
have: She had the children do their homework first.
help: Can you help me carry these boxes to the basement?
NOTE: The verb help also allows an infinitive (with no change in
meaning). Can you help me to carry these boxes to the basement?
One of the most common ELL
errors (especially เท ELLs who
speak French.,,or Spanish) is put-
ting a t/iat-.ciause after verbs
that express ^command or a
strong desire such as want tell,
ask, need, and would like. *1
want that you call me should be /
want you to call me. *The boss
needs that we are here at 8 AM
should be The boss needs US to
be here at 8 AM. *The captain
told that the soldiers stand up
should be The captain told the
soldiers to stand up. Example sen-
tences with these key verbs
should be on the classroom walls.
To have someone do some-
thing means that someone else
does the work for you because
you paid the person, because you
have power (e.g., mother -
daughter), or because you asked
the person to do the work. ELLs
are confused by this structure
Group 4f includes make, let, have, and help. These verbs are different
in that they are usually followed by a noun or pronoun and then the
base form of the verb. These four verbs are extremely common in spo-
ken English, so they deserve extra attention in your lessons.
because it is yet another meaning
of have and is followed by some
rather complex grammar.
206
Key ใบ: Infinitives and Gerunds
10.B.5. Gerunds Following Prepositions
Prepositions are followed by nouns (or pronouns). If the object of a
preposition is an action (verb), then you must use a gerund, which is
the noun form of a verb. The use of preposition + gerund is a very com-
mon structure in English. (See Key 6.) Study these examples:
Group 5. Gerunds after Prepositions	- ·■
Thank you for doing this favor for me.
They always argue about spending too much money.
The president is not in favor of traveling to that area now.
The children kept on talking.
Common ELL Mistakes: what Your ELLs Should Know
1.	Do not use infinitives after verbs that take gerunds (and vice
versa).
wrong:	Many parents avoid to give sweets to their kids.
correct:	Many parents avoid giving sweets to their kids.
2.	The most common verb form for the subject of a sentence is a
gerund.
wrong:	Drive to Boston is more dangerous than fly there.
uncommon: Tq,drive to Boston is more dangerous than to fly
there.
correct:	Driving to Boston is more dangerous than flying
------------—theret
3.	Don't use a plural verb form with a gerund or infinitive as
subject. Don't be tricked by a plural object after the gerund.
The object of a gerund does not affect the verb.
wrong:	Eating green vegetables are good for your health.
correct:	Eating green vegetables is good for your health.
Key 10: Infinitives and Gerunds 207
10.C. Native Language Interference:
Compare English with Other Languages
Language	'Noles on Infinitives and -Gerunds
All
Languages
Arabic
Chinese
Japanese
Korean
Russian
1.	In English, some verbs are followed by infinitives
(want to read it, need to read it, refuse to read it),
and others are followed by gerunds (enjoy reading
it, finish reading it, postpone reading it). No other
language requires this grammatical distinction.
2.	With this grammar point, ELLs of all first language
backgrounds are at an equal disadvantage because
there is no possibility of positive transfer from their
native language to English. Common errors include
*1 want reading it or *1 enjoy to read it or even *1 like
read it.
3.	In English, modals are followed by simple forms of
the verb (can read it, will read it, must read it). Espe-
cially after studying gerunds and infinitives, ELLs are
likely to experience interference and produce utter-
ances such as *J can to read it or *1 can reading it.
These languages generally allow verbs to occur back to
back without any special marking. In some of these
languages, an English sentence with three verbs where
the second one is an infinitive and the third is a
gerund (I want to enjoy sitting on the beach) may be ren-
dered as series of unmarked verb forms *1 want enjoy
sit on the beach.
French
Spanish
1.	In these two languages, the most common verb------------
form for the second and third verbs in a sequence
is the infinitive so errors may include overuse of the
infinitive * I want to enjoy to sit on the beach and the
more universal series of unmarked verb forms *1
want enjoy sit on the beach.
2.	ELLs of these languages overuse tfiflt-clauses instead
of infinitives when the first verb expresses a com-
mand or strong desire. Common errors include *1
want that you help me or *She told that I arrive at
noon.
208
Key 10: Infinitives and Gerunds
...................................
‘ How common are infinitives ;
! and gerunds in spoken lan- !
! guage? Analyze a 1,000-word ;
; transcript of spoken language ‘
i for the number of infinitives and 1
; gerunds that are actually used. ;
■ Are there any patterns that you ;
! see emerging? (For extra 1
; research, do the same with an ‘
i excerpt of written language and >
! compare your findings.)	1
....................................
___________________________
10.D. Ideas for Teaching
The basic teaching objective here is to train ELLs to know when a verb is
followed by an infinitive and when it is followed by a gerund. To be
sure, there are other points, but this is the main question, so most of
your instruction will revolve around this single issue.
Early in their English study, EEEs use -ing verb forms in present pro-
gressive tense: I am eating; he is sleeping. This is not a gerund, but rather a
present participle. In this case, the -ing is used as part of the verb. A gerund
is an -ing form used as a noun: I like swimming; swimming is ill'll. The label
is not important (to me), but you need to be aware that your students may
think they know what a gerund is when you first present it, but they do
not. They are mistakenly assuming that this is previous knowledge.
ELLs have learned VERB + infinitive as their default setting: I want to
go, I need to go, I plan to go. This is so ingrained that it explains why when
ELLs are introduced to ทาodals such as can and will, they default to *1
can to go and *1 will to go. Thus, between VERB + infinitive and VERB +
gerund, the harder one will be the second one. ELLs already default to
the infinitive. In fact, the most common ELL beginning-level error is to
put only the base form of a verb: */ want go, */ enjoy go, and a common
intermediate error is to opt for the infinitive, which is correct in some
cases, / want to go, *1 enjoy to go.
When I teach a new word to beginners that I know is followed by
gerunds, I teach them that the new verb is followed immediately by
VERB + -ing. For example, when I teach the word enjoy to beginners, 1
explain the word and then I write on the board enjoy + VERB + -ing and
give a short example, I enjoy watching TV. I tell students to memorize
that formula. I make them write it in their notebooks.
At the intermediate level, ELLs are introduced to the concept that
some verbs are followed bv infirutives-and-othe-rs-bv-gerundsWfou-WÜ1-1-
need to teach the lists, which can be a rather monotonous task for the
students and for you. For the initial teaching at this level, I like to create
a "need to know" moment by starting with a pre-test. On the board, I
write six examples and ask the students to complete the sentence with
either do, to do, or doing. (I include do—not because it will be correct but
rather because I want students to see that we do not use their default of
a base form of a verb here.)
1.	I want___________
2.	Do you need	__________
3.	We enjoy	__________
4.	She promised	__________
5.	The criminal denied	__________
6.	They might	__________
Key 10: Infinitives and Gerunds
209
Most students at this level will get two to four correct. This tells
them that they do not know this material and need to pay attention to
the rest of your lesson. You have piqued their curiosity. This general
teaching technique of issuing a challenge can be used in teaching any
grammar point. (See Teaching Technique 21.)
At this point, 1 would review the group of verbs (in your ELL gram-
mar book) that take infinitives. Ask students how many of the verbs are
new to them. There will be only a few that are unfamiliar to the students
(because many high-frequency verbs are in this group and are therefore
known vocabulary items). Do the practice activities in the book.
Problems will rarely occur until you teach the second group of
verbs, those that take gerunds. Ask students about unfamiliar verbs.
There should be a pretty good number, including avoid, deny, dread, etc.
Do the practice activities in the book.
When you practice the two groups together, this is the first real
problem for many ELLs because they now have to make a choice
between an infinitive or a gerund. In other words, you have moved away
from the "safety" provided by simple controlled exercises. A good prac-
tice activity for this discrimination involves flash cards. In essence, it is a
drill.
You could also do a language drill by saying, I and a verb, and then
letting the students add doing or to do. The fourth example is more com-
plicated, so you may wish to use only the simpler first three with some
classes. (See Teaching Technique 4.)
T: I enjoy	C: I-enjoy doing
T: I want	C: I want to d©
T: I need	C: I need to do
T: I dread / need	C: I dread needing to do
At the advanced level, ELLs consolidate their knowledge of all the
aspects of this grammar point. At this level, ELLs should be required to
show sentence variety in their writing by including gerunds as subjects
as well as VERB + gerund constructions in their sentences. To reduce
your work load, have students underline these assigned constructions in
their papers. This requirement helps ELLs identify their target structures
and lightens your search for them as you read your students' papers.
210
Key 11: Phrasal Verbs
ELL Grammar Key II:
Phrasal Verbs
At some point around the eighth grade, native English speakers are
taught—incorrectly—that the word up in the sentence Luke came up with the
correct answer is an adverb. This is wrong. To be sure, up can be an adverb, as
in Luke pul his hands up. However, in the phrase come up with, meaning "to
provide," the correct way to analyze this sentence is to acknowledge that we
do not have three separate words come and up and with. Instead, we have
one phrase, come up with. This combination is called a phrasal verb. Native
speakers have no problem using come up with, but phrasal verbs are one of
a non-native speaker's biggest challenges. In fact, after more than three
decades of language study and teaching, 1 consider phrasal verb and pres-
ent perfect tense to be the two most difficult areas of English for ELLs.
Phrasal verbs are also called two-word verbs onthree-word verbs.
The more generic term phrasal verb may be less daunting to ELLs.
Consider the example, Luke put his hands up. Word order in English
is usually pretty rigid, so you cannot say book read yesterday I the instead
of 1 read the book yesterday. Here, however, you can say put your hands up
or put up your hands, but why is this flexibility in word order possible? If
you use the pronoun them for your hands, then by extension, you should
be able to say put them up or put up them, but only the first is possible.
Can you figure out why? (Note that these last two sentences also contain
phrasal verbs: figure out and find out.') The answer is in Key 11.
11.A. Typical ELL Errors: Noticing the Gap
Can you identify and explain these five common ELL errors with this
grammar point?
_____________________
1.	* when,you,with, the supaT; please,put bash in, the
cabinet nest to the, refrigerator.
2.	* when, they ran, out moneJ/, Jill anh Ann could, notplay
the, video ponce, any ucore.
3.	*Inyesterday’s rase,; Joseph,pot off to a, very bad, start; and,
bee, hah, to urorh extra, hard, to catch up the other runners.
4.	* If you, make a, mistake tn,fdhnp the application, out; just
cross out it and, write the correct information, above.
ร. *My Little sister told, my mom,; “Mom,; maheJosé decrease
the volume of the TV'.’’
Key 11: Phrasal Verbs
211
ll.B. Grammar Explanation
ll.B.l. The Form of Phrasal Verbs: VERB + Particle
A phrasal verb consists of a verb followed by a particle (or a preposition
or an adverb) such as after, away, back, over, in, into, out, on, off, up, or
down.
Example: He didn't turn off the light.
In this sentence, the word turn is not enough to express the meaning of
the sentence. It is necessary to have both turn and off. In addition, the
meaning of turn off is not equal to the meaning of turn plus the meaning
of off. Turn off is a phrasal verb. Other common examples of phrasal
verbs are call up, put on, call on, and look after.
ELLs avoid using phrasal verbs first because they do not know about
their existence and then because they appear to be more difficult. For
every phrasal verb, there is almost always a single-word equivalent in a
dictionary. These single-word equivalents are often of Latin origin and
tend to be used in modern English in more technical or formal situa-
tions while phrasal verbs are often of Anglo-Saxon origin (meaning they
are from the original English before Latin and French words were intro-
duced) and are very common in spoken English. For example, you
might ask someone, Could you put out that cigarette1 but in the days
when smoking was allowed on flights, the safety card said, In the event
that oxygen masks appear, please extinguish all smoking materials. If a child
is sick, the doctor will ask, Did you throw up ใ but the bottle of medicine
will say, Children: This medicine may cause young children to vomit.
Consider the two sentences She ran up the hill»and She ran up the bill:
There is no compelling
reason to use the term
particle—or any
grammar label for that
matter. Instead, simply
make reference to
phrasal verbs or verbs
and prepositions or use
no label if you wish.
No one knows your
students better than
you do, so you decide
which terminology to
use or not to use. (See
Teaching Technique 5.)
Sentence	’■	Meaningful Parts	, ,|
(1) She ran up the hill.	She + ran + up the hill. SUBJ VERB PREP. PHRASE
(2) She ran up the bill.	She + ran up + the bill. SUBJ VERB DIR. OBJ
Can you understand why only the second sentence has a phrasal verb?
In the first sentence, the sentence can be divided into three parts: She
(subject) + ran (verb) + up the hill (prepositional phrase telling where
she ran). The three parts of the second sentence are: She (subject) + ran
up (phrasal verb meaning "to increase"), and the bill (direct object).
212
Key 11: Phrasal Verbs
If you have ELLs who speak Spanish, french, Portuguese, or Italian—
which arc languages from Latin—these ELLs are more likely to use a
Latin-based word than a phrasal verb. Not using phrasal verbs makes an
ell's English sound strange. A native speaker might say, / need to look
into the price of a hotel room, but an ELL would most likely say, / need lo
investigate the price of a hotel room.
ไ'	... Phrasal Verbs and Single-Word-Equivalents	ÍI	
Phrasal Verb	รingle-Word Elfuivalent
(Anglo-Saxon, informal to neutral lone)	(Latin, more formal tone)
put out	extinguish
throw up	vomit
look into	investigate
put off	postpone
take off	remove
show up	appear
put in	install
think over	consider
find out	discover
11.B.2. The Difficulty of Phrasal Verbs
For ELLs, phrasal verbs cause special problems in both grammar and
vocabulary. To begin with, phrasal verbs are extremely common. They
are used in both speaking and writing, and because they are verbs and
verbs are so important, phrasal verbs often determine the meaning of an
entire sentence or utterance. Consider the sentence He should put	_______
the lamp. Notice how the meaning changes dramatically by adding in,
out, on, off, up, down, away, or back. If he puts the lamp on, we have light,
but if he puts out the lamp, there is no light. The phrasal verb controls
the meaning of the sentence.
ELLs are surprised by the mere existence of phrasal verbs because
very few other languages have phrasal verbs. ELLs need to understand
that sometimes multiple words are needed to express the idea of one
action. ELLs are probably accustomed to the idea that a noun can have
several components, such as the downtown bus station, but the notion that
a verb might have multiple parts is bizarre to say the least. In English, we
don't usually say, What time did you wake today? but rather What time did
you wake up today? We need a phrasal verb here, not just a single-word
verb. Native speakers would never use just wake here; instead, they
Key 11: Phrasal Verbs
213
would use wake up (or get up). We don't say, * Thดุ' ran of money or *They
ran out money but rather They ran out of money Here the phrasal verb run
out of requires three words.
Another confusing aspect is that phrasal verbs come in two types:
separable and non-separable. For separable phrasal verbs, the second
part (i.e., the particle) can "float" when the object is a noun: write down
a number OR write a number down. There is no difference in meaning or
accuracy of these two interchangeable forms. However, when we change
a number to the pronoun it, we do not have the same two options. We
can say write it down but not * write down it.
With the second type of phrasal verbs, which are called non-separa-
ble phrasal verbs, the phrasal verb can never be separated: look after the
baby but not *look the baby after, look after her but never *look her after.
Although phrasal verbs do present grammatical challenges, by far
the most common ELL errors with phrasal verbs are semantic (i.e.,
vocabulary) mistakes, which indicates that ELLs need to focus more on
the meaning of phrasal verbs. Phrasal verbs are usually idiomatic, which
means that the meanings of the individual words do not add up to the
meaning of the whole phrasal verbs. How could an ELL know that take
up means to begin a new activity, as in the sentence I took up tennis in col-
lege? The meanings of take and up in no way equal or even hint at this
meaning of take up. Further complicating the situation for ELLs is the
fact that phrasal verbs are often polysemous, that is, they have multiple
meanings. The phrasal verb take up has at least seven different meanings:
Polysemy of Take up	
Meanings	Examples
1. reduce in size; alter	Please take up these pants.
2. begin again	We'll take up where we left off.
3. consume	Buying a car took up all my savings.
4. develop an interest in something new	I took up tennis in college.
5. absorb, internalize	A sponge takes up water.
6. accept a challenge or offer	We took up his offer in 2008.
7. deal with, work with	Let's take up these issues one at a. time.
A much more thorough discussion of these and other problems that
phrasal verbs pose for ELLs can be found in Vocabulary Myths: Applying
Second. Language Research to Classroom Teaching (Folse, 2004, pp. 5-8,
101-6).
214
Key น'· Phrasal Verbs
11.B.3. Separable Phrasal Verbs
The phrasal verbs in this group can be separated when there is a noun
object. for example, you can say, call up Mike or call Mike up. If there is a
pronoun object, the phrasal verb must be separated. You have to say, call
him up, never *call up him.
Note that many of these expressions have multiple meanings. เท the
chart that follows, only the most common meanings are included for
the purposes of this grammar lesson. You should provide your 1'LLs with
relevant examples to help them remember the meanings. Be sure they
pay close attention to the separation patterns for noun objects and pro-
noun objects.
	Separable PhrasalVerbs			' fih .พ/- l 'พ:ะ·:··,'''JU·' ■พ-^
Phrasal Verb	No. 1 VERB + NOUN	No. 2 Separated by NOUN	VPDR J. PRONOUN	No. 4 Separated by PRONOUN
call back (return a call)	call back John	call John back	calKbcwfiJ-tiht	call him back
call off (cancel)	call off The game	call the game off		call it off
call up (telephone)	call up the teacher	call the teacher up		call her up
cross out (draw a line through)	cross but the mistake	cross the mistake out		cross it out.
JigurejD-LLt		figure mit	figure the		figure it OU!
(find the answer to a problem)	the answer	answer out		
fill in (write information)	fill in the blank	fill the blank in		fill it in
fill out (complete a paper)	fill out the form	fill the form out		fill it out
find out (get information)	find out the price	find the price Olli		find it out
Key 11: Phrasal Verbs
215
give away (give something to someone)	give away the prize	give the prize away		give it away
give back (return something to someone)	give back the reward	give the reward back		give it back
hand in (submit)	hand in my paper	hand, my paper in		hand it in
hand out (give one to everyone)	hand out the papers	hand the papers out	'^hanã ομΡ"	hand them out
leave out (omit)	leave out the sentence	leave the sentence out		leave it out
look up (look for information)	look up this word	look this word up		look it up
make up (invent a story)	make up a. story	make a story up		make one up
pick up (1. lift; 2. go get someone)	pick up my son	pick my son up	'ρΐ^^ρ^τ^η^	pick him up
put away (return to the correct place)	put away the clothes	put the clothes away		put them away
put back (return to the original place)	put back the boxes	put the boxes back	'^putbadr"	put them back
put off (postpone)	put off the test	put the test off		put it off
put on (wear)	put on your coat	put your coat on		put it on
put out (extinguish)	put out the fire	put the fire out		put it out
216
Key 11: Phrasal Verbs
lake off (remove)	lake off your shoes	lake your 1 shoes	tòke^off tberú	take them off
tear Lip (rip into small pieces)	tear up the bill	tear the bill up	"teruytpTr"	tear it up
throw away (discard, put in the trash)	throw away the bag	throw the bag away	throw awcjyhfl	throw it away
try on (check to see if clothing fits)	IT)’ on those shoes	tty those shoes on		try them on
turn clown (decrease)	turn down the radio	turn the radio down		turn it down
turn on (start)	turn on the lights	turn the lights on	titm^h^^n	turn them on
turn off (stop)	turn off the TV	turn the TV off		turn it off
turn up (increase)	turn up the volume	turn the volume up		turn it up
wake up (stop sleeping)	ruake up the baby	wake the baby up		wake him up
write down (make a note of something)	write down the name	unite the name down	wT^d^urTl.t	write it down
REMEMBER: The phrasal verbs in the separable group have three possi-
ble grammatical forms:
® phrasal verb + noun object (No. ].), I called up John.
• phrasal verb separated by noun object (No. 2), J called John up.
® phrasal verb separated by pronoun object (No. 4), 1 called him up.
A common ELL error is to assume that you can follow these verbs by
a pronoun object (No. 3). They produce sentences such as *1 called up
him and *The teacher put off it.
Key 11: Phrasal Verbs
217
11.8.4.	Non-Separabie Phrasal Verbs
In this group, the verb and the particle are always together, with the verb
first and then the noun (or pronoun) object afterward. Some students
find this group much easier than the separable ones because the word
order is the regular English word order of subject-verb-object. In other
words, nothing moves.
Νοη-separabk phrasal verbs have only two patterns: verb plus
noun object (No. 1) and verb plus pronoun object (No. 3). Some of the
verbs in this group have three words. Three-word phrasal verbs are
always non-separable. For example, The car ran out of gas is correct, but
*The car ran out gas of is wrong.
••.■ะ·'./·.	-	'■.'โ···<-	·.:-·.■··,·	Non-Separable Phrasal Verbs			
Phrasal Verb	No. 1 VERB + NOUN	No. 2 Separated by NOUN	No. 3 PRONOUN	No. 4 Separated by PRONOUN
call on (ask a ques- tion in class)	call on the student	hdTfhe^' studemOn^	call on him	cW^k^i^Ü^
catch up (with) (reach the same level or position as)	catch up with the others		catch up with them	
check into (I. register at a hotel; 2. investigate)	check into the hotel		check irft'o it	
come across (find by chance)	come across a wallet		come across it	
count on (depend on)	count on your help		count on it	'com0^OτΓ
get along (with) (be friends with)	get along with some- one	gepwith / somè&tfe^ (ütíng \	get along with her	
get in (enter)	get in a car		get in it	
get off (exit)	get off a bus		get off it	gStซี^^
get on (enter)	get on a plane	'get^pl^'	get on it	^^>^^
218
Key 1 ใ: Phrasal Verbs
gel out ol (exit)	gel out of a taxi	gel of (1 taxi out	gel out of it	get ofti-i out ■
(recover from an illness or a problem)	get over a cold	goLa cold-' oyer''	get over it	get Vt-alter·
gel thiough (complete)	get through the exam	gel the llmtígív^	gel through it	get it dimugh
(review or check carefully)	go over the test	go. [he tesC" oyer^\	go over it	gètΎ? ^©-’-·^
look after (take care of)	look after tire baby	d&olt tite^ bjibyafter^	look after him	loõklwjwafrer
look out (for) (be careful)	look out for that car	locdijorjhíü çar-out	look out for it.	look-fe^dpotil
put up with (tolerate, stand)	put up with that noise	putwith thatimeise yr	put up with it	pttt-w^j^ap
run into (meet by chance)	run into an old jfiend	ruQan	run into her	
run out (of) (not have any	run out of gas	runofgas^-	run out of it	rurr~of^jM^
more)				
watch out (for) (be careful)	watch out for that dog	ΪΡatçhfm>- thãT-cfog-out	watch out for it	
REMEMBER: The phrasal verbs in the non-separable group have only
two possible grammatical forms:
• phrasal verb + noun object (No. 1)
® phrasal verb + pronoun object (No. Z)
The teacher went over
the notes.
The teacher went over
them.
A common ELL error is to assume that you need to separate the
phrasal verb (based on what we saw in the previous group—the separa-
ble phrasal verbs). ELLs may produce sentences such as *The teacher
went the notes over (No. 2) and *The teacher went them over (No. 4).
Key 11: Phrasal Verbs
219
11.8.5.	Phrasal Verbs without Objects (Intransitive)
Some phrasal verbs are intransitive, which means that they never have
an object. These intransitive verbs consist of just a verb and a particle.
An example is pass away, meaning "to die." It is possible to say, Mrs. Riley
passed away, but it is not possible to say, Mrs. Riley passed away her or
* Mrs. Riley passed her away.
This chart demonstrates that no object comes after these intransitive
phrasal verbs, of course, an adverb of time (yesterday) or a prepositional
phrase (in her house) is possible with any kind of verb: She passed away in
her house yesterday. However, there is no noun or pronoun object that
serves as a direct object of the verb.
Intransitive Phrasal Verbs with Examples	I		
Phrasal Verb		VERB + No Object
break down	(stop functioning)	My car broke down.
break up	(end a relationship)	Susan and Jack broke up.
catch on	(begin to understand)	It took me a long time to catch on.
come ๐ท	(go faster)	Come on! We're going to be late.
eat out	(eat at a restaurant)	It's expensive to eat out every day.
getup	(leave bed)	What time do you usually get up7.
give up	(stop trying)	I was learning French, but I
		gave up.
go off	(make a noise)	My alarm went off at 6:30.
grow up	(become an adult)	I grew up in Canada.
hold on	(wait)	Hold on a minute.
hurry up	(go faster)	Hurry up or we'll be late.
keep on	(continue)	Mike kept on talking.
show up	(arrive, appear at a place)	Not many people showed up.
slow down	(go more slowly)	Please slow down.
take off	(leave the ground)	The plane didn't take off on time.
wake up	(stop sleeping)	I woke up when I heard the noise.
220
Key น: Phrasal Verbs
Common ELL Mistakes: What Your ELLs Should Know
1.	Do not avoid using phrasal verbs. The single-word alternatives
found in a dictionary often sound more technical or formal
than the equivalent phrasal verb.
Loo formal: Excuse me. I low can I ascertain which bus goes to
Jensen Stadium?
correct:	Excuse me. How can 1 find out which bus goes to
Jensen Stadium?
2.	Do not confuse the meanings of phrasal verbs.
wrong:	The coach put down the game because of the bad
weather.
correct:	The coach called off the game because of the bad
weather.
3.	Do not forget to use the whole phrasal verb, not just the verb.
wrong:	My husband picked me at the airport last night.
correct:	My husband picked me up at the airport last night.
4.	Do not forget to separate separable phrasal verbs when there is
a pronoun object.
wrong:	If you make ล mistake on the application, just cross
out it and write the correct information above.
correct:	If you make a mistake on the application, just cross
it out and write the correct information above.
ll.c. Native Language Interference:
Compare English with Other Languages
Language	
Arabic Chinese French Japanese Korean Russian Spanish	None of these languages has phrasal verbs, so the whole concept of phrasal verbs is new to most ELLs. Phrasal verbs are very difficult for all ELLs, and many ELLs avoid phrasal verbs completely. (Speakers of Ger- manic languages such as German, Swedish, Danish, Norwegian, and Icelandic may have fewer difficulties since these languages have phrasal verbs. However, verbs that are phrasal verbs in English may not be phrasal verbs in these languages.)
Key 11: Phrasal Verbs •ะ:ะ· 221
11.D. Ideas for Teaching
Some teachers wonder why phrasal verbs are in ELL grammar books. In
fact, some grammar series do not deal much with phrasal verbs because
phrasal verbs are more of a vocabulary learning task than a grammar
issue for ELLs.
The grammar component to phrasal verbs involves separability. In
my opinion, this is not a serious error, and I would spend much more
time practicing the phrasal verbs in sentences so that learners can get a
better sense of both meaning and the word order than focusing on sep-
arability options.
Phrasal verbs are used from the very beginning of instruction in the
English class. Five common examples that ELLs can understand when
they hear them are sit down, take out (a sheet of paper), fill in (the blank),
pass out (the papers), and hand in (your homework). If you ask an ELL who
has not been instructed in these five examples to verbalize them on his
or her own, the ELL would probably say sit, take, fill, pass, and hand (or
giwe). If you told the student that we usually put a second word there,
you might hear ail sorts of guesses such as sit up, take from, fill down, pass
to, and hand to. My point is that passive understanding does not equal
active production, so being able to comprehend a phrasal verb does not
mean that ELLs “know" it.
Passive understanding is a good first step, so one way to begin
teaching or focusing student attention on phrasal verbs is by presenting
a set of eight sentences on one topic that contain phrasal verbs. If your
topic is sports, you could begin with these four sentences:
FIND OUT
; Examine a 1,000-word excerpt ί
I of text written by a native ;
; speaker (e.g., from a newspaper ;
I or the Internet). Underline all !
I phrasal verbs. Which phrasal ;
' verb is the most common? Is !
I there a particle that is used more ,
; often? Predict which phrasal !
; verbs are problematic for ELLs ;
> and which ones are not. Explain ;
1 your predictions.	:
1.	The coach called off the game due to lightning.
2.	To join a gym, you have to fill out a membership form.
3.	Many people take up a sport when they are in high school.
4.	At 6 AM every morning, I wake up my son so we can go running
together.
Ask the students some questions about your sentences: what is the
overall topic? What does fill out mean? How many people have joined a
gym? What time do you usually wake up? At this point, I ask the class to
help me analyze the grammar of these sentences. I always tell students
to find the verb of a sentence first. The verb is usually the easiest part to
identify correctly, so everyone will be successful in this task, which in
turn encourages more interaction. In addition, you want to train your
students to identify and be able to avoid fragments, and identification of
fragments depends heavily on being able to find the verb—if there is
one (as there should be). Underline the main verbs in your sentences.
222
Key 11: Phrasal Verbs
In Sentence ใ, ELLs will identify call. Then put a box around the
word off. Ask students if they think off goes more with call (as a unit) or
with the game. After some discussion, most ELLs will say call, which is
correct. Say, "Yes, that's right. Call off ex presses one idea, but we write it
with two words. It means cancel—The coach canceled the game." Do Sen-
tences 2 and 3 with the class helping you in the same manner. Maintain
interaction. Then ask the class to do the rest of the sentences without
your input.
Make a separate list (one column) at the end of the sentences. When
you have finished, write the term phrasal verb at the top. You have now
introduced your students to phrasal verbs.
Phrasal Verb
1.	The coach called |off|the game due to the lightning. ctaU O'ljl
2.	To join a Mm, you fill|out| a membership form. ' out
3.	Many people take[นิ]วิ] a sport when they are in high
school.	take น(ว
4.	At 6 AM every morning, I wake [up] my son for our
morning run.	wake, up
At this point, you should do some simple practice exercises and
then follow up with a more detailed explanation of phrasal verbs,
including which verbs and which particles are commonly used. Students
need a list of common phrasal verbs.
Once you have explained what a phrasal verb looks like and what it
does—its form and its function—then it.ds.rtim.e_.to.. tackle.the issue of
separability. You can either explain this directly, or if you have enough
class time, you can ask students to make an attempt at deducing the rule
on their own. For the former, use your textbook explanation. For the lat-
ter, give students 15-20 examples of phrasal verbs used correctly or
incorrectly. These examples can be on a single worksheet, but if you
want to turn this into a speaking task, put each example on a strip of
paper. (You will need copies of the sentences for each pair or group of
students.) The examples are marked with a check for correct and an X
for incorrect.
Key 11: Phrasal Verbs •ะ::- 223
V 1. Mary called up her best friend around midnight.
X 2. Susan called up me last night.
•ร 3. He said the address, but I didn't write it down.
X 4. "Class, here are the test dates. Please write down them."
In essence, you are giving your students positive and negative
evidence of phrasal verb usage and you are asking them to try to figure
out what the rules are. In the process, students may be practicing Eng-
lish, too, so it is a win-win situation. They are speaking English, and
they are focusing on grammar.
224
Key ใ2: Medals
I ELL Grammar Key 12:
“12®! Modals
Modals are small but important words or phrases that allow the speaker
or writer to include nuances of meaning for verbs. Consider the subtle
but profound differences in meaning in these four statements: / might
go, I can go, / must go, and 1 should go. Consider why it is that a parent
can tell a child, H's getting late, so you'd belter finish your homework now,
but a child cannot in turn respond, Well, it's almost dinner Lime, so you'd
better gel in the kitchen and cook something good. (The answer is that had
better is used only by persons of power or authority to subordinates.)
The grammar of all modals is fairly straightforward, but not all
modals are acquired by ELLs quickly. The modal can is acquired cor-
rectly very early. The modal will is also learned early, but this modal is
overused. ELLs tend to use will incorrectly for all future sentences
(instead of be going to). Eor example, an ELL might ask, '■‘เพhat will you do
tomorrowใ and another ELL may reply, *1 will Slay home. Finally, some
modals that have equally simple grammar such as might are hardly ever
used by an ELL—correctly or incorrectly—even though these modals are
just as easy to learn, grammatically speaking, as the others.
12.A. Typical ELL Errors: Noticing the Gap
Can you identify and explain these five common ELL errors with this
grammar point?
	1. It’s MOK,. *hbuust VM&tJa/dcjOr LuKck· MW. *TheK,T must yo to the, bark,.	
	2.	*Paul was happy because, he, could, jussk his keys. 3.	*/4 students wrote OK, the, testpí-ap-ery “Oewr Teacher, yould, better pare, wee, an, A.” 4.	The,price tap OK, this radio says OM, dollar. * The,price, should, be, WTOMj. ร. * The, pouerMMTvt will to OKMWKXS, a, MW ecoMmic stimulus plan, tomorrow-.	
Key 12: Modals
225
12.B. Grammar Explanation
12.B.1. What Are Modals?
A modal verb is an auxiliary or helping verb that alters the meaning of
the sentence by adding shades of meaning, or mood, to the main verb
that it modifies. One way to explain modals to ELLs is to teach that
modals add "flavor" to verbs to change the meaning. The ten most com-
mon modals in order of frequency are would, will, can, could, may, must,
should, might, ought to, and had better. In the General Service List (West,
1953), would, will, and can are in the top 40 most common words in
English.
In addition to single-word modals such as will and can, there are
also modal phrases such as be going to for will (He is going to arrive at
noon; He will arrive at noon) and be able to for can (She is able to speak six
languages; She can speak six languages).
12.8.2.	Why Are Modals Difficult for ELLs?
Modals present both vocabulary and grammar problems for ELLs. In
terms of vocabulary, each of these modals is a completely different
word. For some ELLs, their native language will have an equivalent word
for the modal, but in other cases, it will not. For example, in Spanish,
there is no word for will or would. Instead, these meanings are commu-
nicated through the use of verb inflections, which are changes in the
endings of words (he needed, he needs).
A second vocabulary problem is that any modal can have multiple
meanings that overlap with another modal. For example, may means pos-
sibility (e.g., it may rain), but it also means permission (e.g., May I sit
here7.). Could also means possibility (it could rain), but it also means polite
request (Could you help me7) and past ability (I couldn't find my keys).
_____Grammatically speaking, modals present three problems. First, ELLs
try to conjugate modals: I can go; you can go; * *he cans go. For example,
ELLs may say, * My brother cans help you because my brother is third person
singular, and its verb needs -5 (my brother helps, my brother goes, my
brother takes). Second, a modal is followed directly by a verb (I can go,
she might believe, they should Stoy). In contrast, when a verb is followed by
another verb, the second verb is often in the infinitive form (I want to go,
she needs to believe, they plan to stay). Therefore, ELLs try to mimic this
pattern and produce errors such as *1 can to go, *she might to believe, and
* they should to stay. A third but less common error occurs when negating
and in questions when ELLs attempt to use the auxiliary do, as in *] don’t
should use Susan's cell phone or *Do you can help me7
226
Key 12: Modals
12.B.3. Two Ways that ELL Grammar Books
Usually Present Modals
Textbooks generally take one OÍ two approaches in presenting modals.
One approach is to teach the modals one by one. Thus, the textbook will
Leach can, then แท่น, etc. This approach is very clear for students and also
later serves as a good reference source since El,I.ร can find information
about any one modal very easily. The disadvantage to this approach is
that modals usually share meanings. I'or example, after students study
that might is for possibility, they will then see a few pages later that may
and can are also used for possibility. In other words, a modal rarely has
just one meaning, and rarely is one meaning expressed by only one
modal. We can see this approach in this chart:
Orga	nizing by Modal	ะ Modãls and Multiple Meanings
might	possibility	A one-way ticket might cost more than $400.
may	(1) possibility	A one-way ticket may cost more than $400.
	(2) permission	May I sit hereใ
can	(1) ability	She can speak several languages fluently.
	(2) permission	Can I sit here? (informal)
could	(1) polite request	Could you tell me where the bank is?
	(2) past ability	When I was a child, I could run much faster.
	(3) suggestion	You could fly to New York. It's not so expensive now.
	(4) conditional	If J had. a million dollars, I could travel anywhere.
	(5) possibility	Mark could be al work now, but I'm not sure.
Key 12: Modals
227
will	(1) future	According to the report, the rain will be heavy.
	(2) polite request	Will you explain this grammar point to me again ?
would	(1) offering, inviting	Would you like some tea ?
	(2) polite request	Would you read this letter and give me your opinion ใ
	(3) conditional	If you received a hundred, dollars from your father, what would, you do ?
should / ought to	(1) advising, suggesting	I like both shirts, but I think you should get the red one.
	(2) expectation	We ought to have 52 cards, but there are only 50.
must	(1) obligation, necessity	The rule book says that applicants must be at least 16 years old to apply for a license.
	(2) conclusion	The new library is huge. There must be thousands of books in it.
had better	Strong advice or warning	You'd better leave now, or you'll miss the bus.
Another approach is to group modals by mêànings. Thus, the text-
book will teach "modals that mean request," and "modals that mean
permission." I favor the first approach for lower-proficiency students
who are initially learning about modals and the second approach for
more advanced students who are trying to consolidate knowledge.
Lower-proficiency students are learning the modals as new words, for
example, might = possibility. They need time to absorb this type of infor-
mation. Higher-proficiency students, on the other hand, who are already
familiar with might, may, and could are able to appreciate a lesson that
starts out with ways to express possibility and then reviews and even ranks
might, may, and could in terms of degrees of possibility. We can see this
second approach on the chart on page 228.
228
Key 12: Modals
Organizing by Meaning: Modals and Multiple Meanings
Meanings	Modals	Examples
request	can	Can you tell ใTie where the bank is?
	could	Could you lell me where the bunk is ?
	would	Would you read this letter and give me your opinion ?
	may	May / have your full name?
	might	Might 1 offer you some lea?
permission	can	Can 1 sit here ? (informal)
	could	Could 1 sit here?
	would	Would you mind if 1 sit here?
	may	May I sit here ?
necessity	must, have to	The rule book says that applicants must be at least 16 years old to apply for a license.
possibility	may, might, could	A one-way ticket may cost more than $400. (50% chance)
	should, ought to	A one-way ticket should cost more than $400. (better chance)
	must	A one-way ticket must cost more than $400. (almost certain)
	will	A one-way ticket will cost more than
		$400. (definite)
advisability	should, ought to	I like both shirts, but 1 think you should get the red one.
	had better	You'd better leave now, or you'll miss the bus.
expectation	should, ought to	We should have 52 cards, but there are only 50.
conclusion	must	The new library is huge. There must be thousands of books in it.
Key 12: Modals
229
Common ELL Mistakes: What Your ELLs Should Know
1.	Do not use to after single-word modals.
wrong: Andrea should to study more.
correct:: Andrea should study more.
2.	Do not add any endings (-S, -ed, or -ing) to verbs after
modals.
wrong: Shawn will helps Jim with the work.
correct: Shawn will help Jim with the work.
3.	Do not use don't, doesn't, or didn't to make negative forms
of modals. Most modals form the negative by adding not after
the modal. (This is just like with be and other auxiliary verbs.)
wrong: Kathy doesn't can speak Japanese well.
correct: Kathy can't speak Japanese well.
4.	Do not use do, does, or did in a question with a modal. Most
modals form the question by inverting the subject and the
modal. (This is just like with be and other auxiliary verbs.)
wrong: Do you could help me with this homework?
correct: Could you help me with this homework?
5.	Do not use could for past ability if it is a single past action
in an affirmative sentence. In this case, we use was able to or
were able to. In a negative sentence, couldn't and wasn't or
weren't able to are okay. We only use could for the past of
can when the action was over a period of time.
wrong: Ann: Did you find your wallet?
Sue: Yes, I could find it.
correct: Sue: Yes, I was able to find it. It was under the
bed!
OR Yes, I found it. It was under the bed!
For a negative answer, both are possible:
Sue: No, I wasn't able to find it.
OR No, I couldn't find it.
230
Key 12: Models
12.C. Native Language interference:
Compare English with Other Languages
language	Notes onModals	j
Arabic Chinese French Japanese Korean Russian Spanish	1.	All languages are able to express the ideas associ- ated with modals such as possibility {may, might, could), ability {can, could), advisability {should), obligation {must), and intention (will). Some lan- guages have words for some of these concepts while other languages use a combination of separate words and some word endings. 2.	Modals present a very complex vocabulary problem for ELLs. Even with languages that have words that appear to have similar meanings for certain English modals, there is rarely a one-to-one correspondence between these words. For example, must in English has at least two separate meanings: conclusion and obligation. Other languages may require two (or more) different words or word endings to express these meanings.
> How common are modals? ;
! Many people mistakenly believe ‘1
; that modals are relatively rare ■
l and are used for only certain !
; kinds of writing. Look up any;
; animal inMn^ncydopedia^dm
! as an online source. How many I
' and which modals do you find J
I in the article? What are the I
; meanings of the modals that 1'
; you find? Keep an inventory. !
12.D. Ideas for Teaching
How you teach modals will depend on whether your students are begin-
ning, intermediate, or advanced learners.
A beginning lesson would focus on only one modal per lesson.
Modals taught early usually include can, will, and should. Each modal
would be taught separately from the others. For these, you would cover
typical ELL grammatical mistakes such as_adding^sJ-Mcan^-yoiwcan^—it
cans) or adding to f *jf can to go, *you will to do).
At the intermediate level, ELLs are familiar with some of the modals
and some of their meanings. Your syllabus might include some of the
more difficult modals, such as might, must, and could, as well as the finer
details about modals, such as: must has two meanings and the most
important one is conclusion, not necessity; could is not used for single
affirmative accomplishments; and could means more than the past of can
(e.g., it can mean probability).
At the advanced level, you should introduce the past modals: could
have gone, should have written, etc. Teaching the present modals is easy. In
some ways, it is like teaching new vocabulary, which sometimes has
multiple meanings, where you define the words, give examples, and pro-
vide students with practice. With the past modals, setting up contexts for
examples and then providing meaningful student practice is more diffi-
cult and more time-consuming.
Key 12: Modals
231
Most ELL textbooks offer straightforward information on teaching
modals. There is usually so much to cover that teachers have little time
to do anything else. However, I would spend time drilling the patterns
because modals are a very important part of English. Modals are impor-
tant to our ELLs because modals help "soften" a person's speech. Some-
times native speakers perceive the tone of our ELLs as rude or overly
aggressive, and this is often because our ELLs don't use modals. Instead
of saying the more usual You might talk to the other teacher as a sugges-
tion, an ELL might say, You need to talk to other teacher, which sounds
more like a demand and maybe even reprimand, which was not the
ELL's intention. (Remember that they do not realize that it sounds that
way to native speakers.)
Why should we do language drills? Our students make mistakes
such as, *1 am take the bus to school every day because they have internal-
ized I am from all the practice that they have had with this is in their
beginning-level classes. You should aim for the same goal with 1 can, 1
should, and 1 might. Students need to retrieve and use these as chunks
instead of having to think to themselves "Which modal means ability?
Can? Could? May?" Here are three examples of drills that increase in
difficulty:
For some unknown
reason, ELLs rarely use
the model might, but
natives use it a lot.
Instead, ELLs tend to
overuse maybe, with
an occasional perhaps.
As you read your ELLs'
essays or listen to their
conversations, notice
how rarely the modal
might is used.
. Drill 1: Subject Change.	
T: I should go.	C: I should go
T: she	C: she should go
T: Larry and Joe	C; Larry and Joe should go
	
T: I should go.	C: I should go
T: can	C: I can go
T: will	C: I will go
Drill 3: Substitution . '	'	- .:. (students make a change to previous sentence)	:	
T: I should go.	C: I should go
T: she	C: she should go
T: take	C: she should take
T: can	C; she can take
T: we	C: we can take
T: not	C: we cannot take
T: stay	C: we cannot stay
232
Key 13: Word Forms
ELL Grammar Key 13:
Word Forms
In English, there are dozens of word endings, or suffixes, that can
change one part of speech into another, as -ize changes an adjective into
a verb (legal -> legalize) and -mem transforms a verb into a noun
(enjoy -> enjoyment). For ELLs (and for native speaking children), word
endings are not so straightforward and thus require effort to be learned.
One reason for this difficulty is that there are dozens of such suffixes
that ELLs must learn. Nouns can end in -lion, verbs can end in -ize,
adverbs can end in -ly, and adjectives can end in -ful.
A much more daunting challenge for ELLs is that there is never
one way to change a given part of speech into another. Consider, for
instance, how we form adjectives. Yes, we can use -ful to change a
noun into an adjective (beauty -> beautiful), but we also have as many
as nine other endings to make adjectives from nouns, including
-OUS (danger-} dangerous), -ic (heroheroic), -an (Italy-} Italian),
-y (rain-brainy), -al (season-}seasonal), and -ive (expense-}expensive).
There is no way for ELLs to predict that danger becomes dangerous any
more than they can predict that we do not say * dangerful, * danger!, or
*dangerive. A good initial learning goal is that ELLs will be able to recog-
nize the part of speech of a word by using its suffix. A later goal is that
ELLs will be able to produce correct forms of a given word by adding the
correct suffix. Thus, at least initially, knowledge of word endings can only
be used one way: to decipher an already existing word by using its base
and any word parts (but not to know which suffix to add to a base word
to create a correcUEnglish word). Word form knowledge helps with decod-
ing words, but it has limited value in forming new words.
T37A. Typical ELL Errors: Noticing the Gap
Can you identify and explain these five common ELL errors with this
grammar point?
1.	* Members of ike, book, club OMtowrrtically rerebve,
preferentially prices.
2.	Liberia, kar L- substantial rubber of stature, resource.
3.	* Second, larpuape readers’ very Uucitek vocabulary
knourledye, kinder's tkeir ability to snake, fully ure, of
context clues a,s urell.
4.	‘ Politics debates, are,part oftke, democraticprocess.
5.	’ olytriple clocks WMTt be, very accuracy to be, useful.
Key 13: Word Forms
233
13.B. Grammar Explanation
13.B.1. The Importance of Word Endings
Certain word endings, or suffixes, can be used to create new grammatical
forms of a word. Thus, these new words have a meaning similar to the
original word, but the function, or part of speech, will change. For exam-
ple, the adjective final becomes a verb by adding -ize: finalize.
ADJECTIVE
By the final week of school, we were ready for a vacation.
VERB
Please call Global Travel so we can to finalize our vacation
plans.
Suffixes can be used to create four of the eight parts of speech, namely
verbs, adjectives, adverbs, and nouns.
Verb	Adjective	Adverb	Noun - .
finalize	final	finally	finalization
13.8.2.	Verb Endings
Word Endings for Verbs		
Ending	Meaning	Example
-ate	to cause, to become, to supply with	motivate, oxygenate
~en	to make something have a certain quality	darken, lighten
-ify	to cause or make into something	identify, solidify, unify
-ize	to become	generalize, finalize
It is important to check for spelling changes when adding word endings.
vowel dropped: clear + -ify
vowel added: different + -ate
clarify
differentiate
234
Key 13: Word Forms
13.B.3. Adjective Endings
Word Endings for Adjectives		
Ending	Meaning	Examples
-able, -ible	having a particular quality	comfortable, reversible
-al	of or relating to something	ไท US leal, occasional
-an, -ian	relating to someone or some- thing from a place; relating to someone who has certain knowledge or belief	A merican, vegetarian
-ant, -ent	having the quality of	defiant, persistent
-ary	belonging to	planetary
-ate	having, containing, or having to do with something	compassionate
-ative, -itive	having the quality of	talkative, primitive
-ed	past participle	confused.
-en	past participle	stolen, written
-en	made of	wooden
-ese	of a country	Chinese
-fill	full of	beautiful
-1C	of or relating to a particular tiling			periodic
-ing	present participle	confusing
-ish	having qualities of, or tend- ing to be	childish
-ive	having a particular quality	expensive
-less	without something	useless
-like	similar to	childlike
-ly	having qualities of	manly
-ory	relating to	obligatory
-OUS, -ious	having qualities of	dangerous, delicious
-proof	protected from	waterproof
-y	having the character of	curly, funny
Key 13: Word Forms
235
13.B.4. Adverb Endings
1 Word Endings for Adverbs'		
Ending	Meaning	Examples
-ly	in a particular way or at times	easily, occasionally
NOTE: Not all words that end in -ly are adverbs.
early	adjective	Gary is in his early twenties.
	adverb	Carlos has to wake up early.
daily	adjective	Our library subscribes to four daily newspapers.
	adverb	Kumiko exercises daily.
oily	adjective	Irma doesn't like oily foods.
lonely	adjective	Ronald was a very lonely child.
friendly	adjective	She is such a friendly person.
In addition, not all adverbs end in -ly: fast, well, soon, always, here.
13.8.5.	Noun Endings
	Word Endings for Noun	8 c	1
Ending	Meaning	Example
-al	the act of doing something	rehearsal, denial
-ence, -ance, -cy	action or process; quality	confidence, performance, lunacy
-ent, -ant	someone or something that does something		president, resident
-er, -or, -ar, -r	someone or something that does something	teacher, elevator, registrar, writer
-hood	having a quality or state	brotherhood, childhood.
-ity, -ty	having a quality	equality, specialty
-tion, -ion	act or result of doing something	attention, impression
-ism	a belief or set of ideas	capitalism
-ist	a person who performs a specific action; a person with certain beliefs	typist, capitalist
-ment	a result of doing something; a place of action	development, department
-ness	state or condition	happiness
-ure	an act or process	failure, pressure
-ship	a state or quality; an art or skill	friendship, sportsmanship
236
Ke}' 13: Word Forms
13.B.6. Lack of Word Endings to Indicate Part of Speech
The lack of consistency for the use of word endings in English to indi-
cate the part of speech of a word is a serious problem for ELLs. t or
instance, -OUS indicates an adjective, but not all adjectives end in -OUS.
While -lion indicates a noun, not all nouns end in -lion. Thus, we
should not be surprised when ELLs create words such as *naturous for
natural or * employalion for employment.
for ELLs, a more serious inconsistency in English is that a word can
often be more than one part of speech without any change in endings. A
word can be a noun or a verb (a photograph vs. I photograph), a noun or
an adjective (/ speak English vs. an English word), or all three—a noun, a
verb, and an adjective (it survey vs. to survey a group vs. a survey question).
In many languages, this is simply impossible because parts of speech are
more marked in those languages.
Unfortunately, there is no way to predict which ending—or even if
any ending—must be added to a base word to change its part of speech.
Consider how these words change for different parts of speech. Note
also the variations in meaning.
			
sadness	to sadden	a sad story	sadly
decision deciding	to decide	a decisive ending	decisively
a talk talking	to talk	a talk show a talkative person a talking dog	talkatively
-aruexpl anation	-to-explain—	an explanatory note—		-ê---	
a struggle	to struggle	a struggling actor	—
a nation	—	a national problem	nationally
a city	—	a city problem	citywide
wood woodenness	—	wooden	woodenly
love lovability	to love	a love story a loving cat a loved story loveable	lovingly lovably
Key 13: Word Forms
237
Consider the nouns city and nation. The adjective form for city is city;
the adjective form for nation is national. By default, we use the noun
form as an adjective when a separate adjective form does not exist. Thus,
we say a city and a city problem. We say a nation, but we cannot say *a
nation problem. Instead, we have to say a national problem because we
have an adjective form for this noun. ELLs have to learn (and remem-
ber) not only that we can use a noun as an adjective but also when a
given adjective form does not exist and therefore requires the use of the
noun form instead.
Given these difficulties for ELLs, I repeat my initial advice: Knowl-
edge of word endings can only be used one way—that is, to decipher an
already existing word by using its base and any word parts (but not to
put a base word with an ending to create a correct English word). Except
in controlled exercises where we tell ELLs to add a specific suffix to a cer-
tain word—for example, add -or to act—we cannot reasonably expect
ELLs to know to add -or to a verb to make a noun instead of adding -er
or -ist or -ian. All four of these suffixes indicate one who does an
action, but there is no way for an ELL to predict which ending is correct.
However, when ELLs encounter the word actor, they can reasonably con-
clude that it means "a person who acts."
Common ELL Mistakes: What Your ELLs Should Know
1.	Creating new words with word endings is very difficult.
Check a dictionary when you are trying to create a new word.
wrong: The spectators were very impressed with the runner's
quickation.
correct: The spectators were very impressed with the runner's
quickness)
2.	Not all words that end in -ly are adverbs, (examples: early,
daily, oily, lonely, friendly).
wrong: How much does a day newspaper cost?
comet: How much does a daily newspaper cost?
3.	Not all adverbs end in -ly. (examples: fast, well, soon, always,
here, hard.)
wrong: A bullet train can go lastly, but an airplane goes
more quickly.
correct: A bullet train can go fast, but an airplane goes more
quickly.
238
Key 13: Word Forms
13.C. Native Language Interference:
Compare English with Other Languages
Language	Notes on Word Forms
Arabic Chinese French	No two languages have the same set of prefixes and suffixes, so transferability will vary considerably based on the ell's native language. Of these seven languages,
Japanese Korean Russian Spanish	word forms in french and Spanish have the most in common with word forms in English.
Arabic	1.	Arabic uses a word root system that is based on a combination of three consonants, which is the basis for much of Arabic word formation. There are at least ten patterns to produce new words by either adding prefixes to this three-consonant root or infixing vowel sounds between the three conso- nants. For example, d-T-s is the root for "to study." Adding the prefix γ- produces yidnis, "He studies." Adding the suffix -1 produces past tense darast, "He studied." Adding the prefix ma- and altering internal vowel sounds gives US madrasa, "school" (place of study). 2.	Arabic-speaking ELLs appreciate explicit, detailed instruction and practice in the use of prefixes and suffixes for word formation in English. (Many *’ books give a rather cursory list of common prefixes and suffixes, but this superficial treatment is in no way sufficient for Arabic speakers. A.good-SO-urce- of- step-by-step instruction and practice is Intermediate Reading Practices, 3rd Ed. [Folse, 2004].)
Chinese Japanese Korean	1.	Chinese does not use affixes in the way English does, but Chinese makes extensive use of com- pounding to build words. Hong Kong means "fragrant harbor." Beijing means "north capital." Shanghai means "on [the] sea." The word ใน-นน.0, which consists of road and mouth, means "intersec- tion." The word xiong-mao, which consists of bear and cal, means "panda." 2.	Japanese and Korean make use of this kind of com- pounding, but they also use word endings.
Key 13: Word Forms
239
ไ3.D. Ideas for Teaching
From an ELL point of view, knowing a word part can be helpful in figur-
ing out the meaning of a word, but it is not so useful when lower-
proficiency ELLs are trying to create a word. Passive recognition is possi-
ble, but active production is difficult because ELLs have to know which
ending is not only grammatically appropriate but also the correct one
for that word. In other words, ELLs practically have to know the word
first to be able to create it, which is illogical.
Suppose we have the word create, and we know that it is a verb. We
want to produce the noun form for this verb, but we have several suffixes
to convert verbs into nouns, including -lion, -merit, or -ance. How do
we know that we should say creation but not *createment or *creatance?
Because of this ambiguity, I prefer to concentrate initially on recognition
skills. If you opt to do production practices, you need to provide a con-
trolled practice—that is, one in which all the words are formed the same
way. For example, don't give students a list of 20 verbs and tell them to
add -tion, -ment, or -ance as appropriate because there is no way for
them to know which is appropriate. Even young native speakers make
errors and say *mounta.iny instead of mountainous and *discolorment
instead of discoloration. In contrast, an acceptable exercise is to give stu-
dents ten verbs that you know combine with -tion and then ask students
to write these ten new nouns. This may seem extremely easy to you, but
that is because you already know these ten nouns. These ten nouns are
not new to you, but they are to the ELLs.
With any grammar point, you should always look for and teach any
aspects of the grammar that are similar to what is happening in your
ELLs' native languages—if there are similarities—and the ones that are
the most frequently used in English. The purpose of using cognates is
that ELLs will benefit more from structures that may already be familiar
to them in their native languages and that they will encounter more
often as they interact in English. Many ELLs in the United States speak
Spanish, and one of the most common suffixes in Spanish is -ción,
which is the same as our English -tion, which changes a verb to a noun.
Even if your ELLs are not Spanish (or French, Portuguese, or Italian)
speakers, starting with -tion first makes sense because it is one of the
most common suffixes, especially in academic writing.
Write three examples on the board one at a time. Get the students
involved in writing the second and third words. After you have written
celebrate and the suffix -tion on the board, hesitate. Then ask your stu-
dents, "Ok, what is my noun form? How about *the celebrateใ What
! FIND OUT I
; How good are ELLs .are knowing !
! the correct word forms of words I
I in English? Prepare a quiz for an ;
! ELL by providing a list of words I
! and then ■ asking the ELL to ;
; change the part of speech. For ;
I example: What is the adjective for ;
; the noun .color? Prepare ten ques- ;
I tions. Before you give your ques- I
; tions to five ELLs to complete, I
'< predict which three questions ;
I you -think will be the most diffi- I
; cult and which ..three questions ;
! will be the easiest? Try to use I
‘ words that) the ELLs will not;
I have seem already so that this !
; tas'k'really examines ELLs'. ability ;
> to predict the use of word end- !
, ings to form new words. I
240
Key 13: Word Forms
about * celebraiement?" Students will tell you the correct form, celebration,
and you should write it. To maintain teacher-class interaction, after
someone says celebration, ask, "How do you spell that?" and write the
word on the board as students spell the word.
act + -tion -> action
select + -tion -> selection
celebrate + -tion -> celebration
Consider these two controlled practice exercises. Students are not
asked to choose the correct suffix; instead, they are asked to combine a
specific word with a specific suffix to produce a new word. In essence,
errors are virtually impossible.
. . 1	.r	, v' - , ,	, '	1	«ใpcc .	/	i . 1.· .	
Noun	Adjective
1. color	2. coCorUtt
3. job	4.
5. end	6.
7. stress	8.
9. life	10.
Source: Intermediate Reading Practices: Building Reading and Vocabulary Skills, 3rd Ed.
(Folse, 2004), p. 57.
Verb	Noun
1. agree	2.
3. enjoy	4.
5. state	6.
7. move	8.
9. argue	10.
Source: Intermediate Reading Practices: Building Reading and Vocabulary Skills, 3rd Ed.
(Folse, 2004), p. 140.
Ke)' 13: Word Forms
241
After students have studied and practiced various word forms, teach-
ers can then increase the difficulty of practice exercises by asking stu-
dents to select the correct form among several potential forms (Joseph
signed lhe Iagreetion, agreement, agreeness] yesterday) or to produce the
correct form {AGREE: Joseph signed the___________________yesterday). Now
write three more verbs on the board and ask students to list the new
nouns on their paper. Give a time limit of 30 seconds. Then ask students
to tell you the answers, which you will write on the board (or let stu-
dents write their words on the board).
After students have studied several suffixes, give them a paragraph
or a mini-essay at the ELLs' reading level. Ask them to go through it to
underline words with word forms that they have studied. If you really
want students to focus on what you have taught, give specific instruc-
tions, such as Underline nine words as follows: three words with
-tion, two with -er meaning comparison, one with -er meaning a profession,
two with -est meaning very (superlative), and one with -ness meaning a noun.
Let students work alone (possibly as homework), and then ask
them to work in class in pairs or threes to check their answers. When
you review the answers, do not just announce the answers. Be interactive
with your ELLs. If someone underlined -ness as a noun, ask the student
what part of speech the word is without -ness. Ask which word is the
easiest to produce and which is the most difficult. Ask why. Don't just
give answers. Probe. Make sure they are noticing things about English
that will help them. Make your ELLs talk about the language.
242
Key 14: Passive Voice
ELL Grammar Key 14:
KEY 14M Passive Voice
In grammar, we talk about active voice and passive voice. In active
voice, the sentence structure is SUBJECT + VERB + DIRECT OBJECT,
where the subject is doing something and the direct object is the receiver
of the action: Miiry wrote six detailed emails. In passive voice, the sentence
structure is SUBJECT + a form of he + PAST PARTICIPLE, where the sub-
ject is the receiver of the action: Six detailed entails were written by Mary.
Native speakers have been told—incorrectly—to avoid the passive
voice. This was usually taught in school as something that would make
our writing weak. There is nothing wrong with passive voice, but it is a
problem when people overuse passive voice or even active voice. There
are specific times when the passive is appropriate, but it depends on
what the writer or speaker wants to accomplish with any given sentence
and how that sentence fits into the paragraph.
14.A. Typical ELL Errors: Noticing the Gap
Can you identify and explain these five common ELL errors with this
grammar point?
1.	* Thousands of people, went to California, tn ike. 1840s
because yold, discovered, there,.
2.	* where, were, you, when, the, arrldcni war happened,?
3.	*Λ/ίore, than, one hundred,people, killed, tn thairplane,
-------hr.--------------------------------------------------------
4.	* The,Japanese, Lanyuape can writefrom left to riykt or
from top' to bottom.
ร. * if you,find, a, wallet; it should, be returning to the owner
Immediately.
Key Ί4: Passive Voice
243
14.B. Grammar Explanation
14.B.1. What Does a Verb in the Passive Voice Look Like?
The passive voice is composed of the verb be and the past participle.
The verb be should be in the correct tense to indicate the time of the
action. In addition, it should also be singular or plural according to the
number of the subject.
<■ พุ·; ■ y	'<■ พ'ดั· ’พุ พุ^พุ^	PAST PARTICIPLE	.' 'Gไ1พุ ’บุ·	'* '1",· G ■■ พุ'.'บุ
The residence of the President of the United States	is called	the White House.
The current White House	was built	in 1818.
By 1815, the original White House	had been destroyed	in a fire.
14.8.2.	How Is Active Voice Different from Passive Voice?
Active Voice. A common sentence pattern in English is SUBJECT + \fERB
+ DIRECT OBJECT. In these sentences, the most important topic is the
person or thing that is doing the action (the "doer" of the action). In
these sentences, the subject is the agent of the action. This is called the
active voice. Can you identify the three parts (subject, verb, and direct
object) in these example sentences?
1.	The people of France gave the Statue of Liberty to the United
States.	â,
2.	Leonardo da Vinci painted the famous Mona Lisa.
3.	We will make a decision about our trip soon.
-----4.—'The people-reelected-George-Washington-Tor-a-secondurermUn*
1792.
In. these four sentences with active voice, the emphasis is on the
people of France, Leonardo da Vinci, we, and the people.
Passive Voice. Sentences in passive voice also begin with a subject and
have a verb, but the subject here is not the agent of the action. In passive
voice, the subject is the person or thing that "receives" the action of the
verb. The same four examples are repeated, but now in passive voice.
Can you see the differences?
5.	The Statue of Liberty was given to the United States by the
people of France.
6.	The famous Mona Lisa was painted by Leonardo da Vinci.
7.	A decision about our trip will be made soon.
8.	George Washington was reelected for a second term in 1792.
244
Key 14: Passive Voice
In Sentences 5 through 8 with passive voice, the emphasis is on the
Statue of Liberty, the famous Mona Lisa, a decision about our trip, and George
Washington.
Compare the differences between active voice and passive voice of
the verbs in these sentences:
Are we supposed to avoid
passive voice? Many
native speakers were incor-
rectly taught that passive
voice is bad in writing. Our
teachers were trying to help
"QTavõÍcl“wõrdy writing, so
telling US to limit our use of
passive voice made sense.
The task for ELLs is to learn
how to form passive voice
of verb tenses and when to
use it so that a student's
essay is more effective in
accurately and efficiently
conveying the writer'ร
intended message. The
bottom line is that there is
nothing wrong with using
passive voice. เท some cases,
it is actually preferred to
active voice. For example,
the first two sentences of
this message use passive
voice.
Verb Tense	Active Voice VERB	.	‘Passive Voice M? j ■^-· be + PAST PARTICIPLE 1
Present	I wash my car every Saturday.	My car is washed every Saturday.
Past	Shakespeare wrote that play.	That play was written by Shakespeare.
Present Progressive	They are making a special plan.	A special plan is being made.
be + going to	They're going to build a house here.	A house is going to be built here.
Present Perfect	People have offi- cially celebrated Mother's Day since 1914.	Mother's Day has offi- cially been celebrated since 1914.
Modals	The government should prohibit the sale of cigarettes.	The sale of cigarettes should be prohibited by the government.
14.8.3.	intransitive Verbs
Some verbs can never be used in the passive voice. These verbs are called
intransitive verbs. Intransitive verbs are never followed by a direct
object, so they cannot be changed to passive voice. Examples of verbs
that are never used in passive voice are happen, die, arrive, depart (and
many other verbs of motion). However, many ELLs incorrectly use these
intransitive verbs in constructions that look like passive voice such as
*The accident was happened, late last night or * Ten people were died in the
accident.
14.8.4.	When Is Passive Voice Used?
In general, we use passive voice when the agent of the action is not the
most important thing. In passive voice, the subject of the sentence is the
receiver of the action. The subject can be either a person or a thing.
If you want to name the agent in a passive voice sentence, you can
use a by + agent phrase. However, sometimes it sounds strange to name
the agent. You should not name the agent when it is not new informa-
tion or when the agent is not important. For example, in Sentence 8 on
Key 14: Passive Voice
245
page 243, we know that every president is elected by the people, so it is
unconventional to say, President Washington was reelected by the people for
a second term in 1792. The phrase by the people does not tell us any new
or important information and can be omitted.
Passive voice is common in both written and spoken language as
well as in formal, planned language and informal, ordinary conversa-
tions. It can occur in all of these situations.
14.8.5.	Passive Voice with get
The passive for the verb get consists of a form of the verb get followed by
a past participle. The get passive indicates a sudden change; the be pas-
sive indicates a result. Thus, We were lost describes our situation at a cer-
tain point, but We got lost indicates that we were traveling and suddenly
did not know our location. The past participle functions here as an
adjective that describes the subject.
The use of get is considered informal language and is therefore
much more common in spoken language than written language. Formal
writing generally avoids the use of get. Instead, use become as a synonym.
14.8.6.	Passive Forms Used as Adjectives (closed)
In some instances, it is possible to use a passive verb form as an adjec-
tive to describe a condition or state instead of an action. In this case, we
use a past participle after a form of the verb be.
	Sentence	Notes	*	
	The window is closed.	This sentence describes the condition of the window now.	
	All of the checks are gone.	This sentence describes the	
		condition of the checks now.	
14.8.7.	-ing vs. -ed Adjectives (Participial Adjectives)
(interesting vs. interested)
A past participle of a verb can function as an adjective.
Example: When I heard the news yesterday, I was
surprised.
A present participle of a verb can also function as an adjective.
Example: The news was surprising.
ELLs have a particularly difficult time figuring out when to use the
past participle and the present participle forms as adjectives. They con-
fuse pairs such as interested- -> interesting, confused -> confusing, and
surprised -> surprising.
246
Key 14: Passive Voice
EL1.S need to remember that the -ing form is for the person or thing
that makes (causes) the action and the -ed form (or any past participle
ending) is for the person or thing that receives the action.
-ing	
Present Participles Used as Adjectives	Past Participles Used as Adjectives
•	are active •	refer to the cause of the experience ® describe what the effect is •	often describe inanimate (non-living) nouns	•	are passive » refer to the person or thing that feels or has the experience •	describe how the person or thing is affected •	often describe animate (living) nouns
Consider these examples:
		
action	surprise	disappoint
the person or thing that causes the action	the news - The news was surprising.	Joe = Joe was disappointing.
the person or thing that receives	me ะะะ I was surprised.	us = We were disappointed	
tire action		
Common -ingf-ed (or Participial) Adjectives
annoying—annoyed amazing—amazed amusing—amused astonishing—astonished boring—bored confusing—confused convincing—convinced depressing—depressed disappointing—disappointed disgusting—disgusted embarrassing—embarrassed entertaining—entertained	exciting—excited exhausting—exhausted fascinating—fascinated frightening—frightened horrifying—horrified interesting—interested puzzling—puzzled satisfying—satisfied shocking—shocked startling—startled terrifying—terrified tiring—tired
Key ใ4: Passive Voice
247
14.B.8. Past Participle + Preposition Combinations
as Adjectives
With passive voice, the past participle can be followed by a by + agent
construction, as in They were married by an old minister. However, when
past participles are used as adjectives, they are followed by different
prepositions depending on the past participle. For example, we say I am
accustomed to something but J am interested in something. There is no
way to predict which preposition is used with which adjective, so ELLs
need to memorize the correct adjective + preposition combinations.
Three common uses of
past participles in
English include: (1)
perfect tenses (/ have
needed, she had
chosen); (2) passive
voice (/ was needed,
she had been chosen);
and (3) adjectives (a
much needed change,
a carefully chosen
gift).
be accustomed to	be divorced from	be married to
be acquainted with	be done with	be opposed to
be ashamed of	be dressed in	be related to
be bored with/by	be excited about	be satisfied with
be committed to	be exhausted from	be scared of
be composed of	be finished with	be surprised at/by
be confused about	be fed up with	be terrified of
be convinced of	be impressed by/with	be tired of
be dedicated to	be interested in	be tired from
be devoted to	be known for	be used to
be disappointed in/with	be made of/from	be worried about
	Common ELL Mistakes: What Your ELLs Should Know 1. Do not use active voice when you should use passive voice. wrong: The man bit the snake, (grammatically possible but not probable!!	
	correct: The man was bitten by the snake. 2.	Do not forget to use a form of be in the passive voice. wrong: This letter sent to the wrong address. correct: This letter was sent to the wrong address. 3.	Do not use the by + agent phrase if the information is not new or important. unusual: President Clinton was elected by the people in 1992. usual: President Clinton was elected in 1992. 4.	Do not mix up when to use -ing (present participle) and when to use -ed (past participle). They are completely different. wrong: I'm boring in that class, (possible but not likely) correct: I'm bored in that class.	
248 ---- Key 14: Passive Voice
5.	Do not forget to use an appropriate ending. Do not use just
Lite simple verb form as an adjective.
paper.
Lwrecf: The surprising results were on the front page of the
paper.
14.C. Native Language Interference:
Compare English with other Languages
language!	~ Notes on Passive Voice	D
Arabic	1.	Arabic has a passive form for all verb tenses, but passive voice is rare. Active voice dominates. 2.	Passive is formed by a slight change of a vowel sound in the middle of the verb. In Arabic, vowels
are written only in very formal writing such as in
the Koran, so active and passive forms look similar
though they sound different. (Perhaps the best
analogy in English is with the word read, which can
be pronounced two ways depending on the context,
but native speakers never confuse the two.) There is
a tendency for Arabic-speaking ELLs to rely on the
similarity of the two forms in Arabic and thereby
confuse active and passive in English: *The house
*built last year by my uncle.
3.	In Arabic, by + agent is usually absent. When it does
occur, it is expressed by the preposition b-, which
coincidentally mirrors by in English. (Unfortunately,
this similarity leads to overuse of by, as in *The
letter was written by ink.) In passive constructions in
Arabic, the agent is usually a thing, not a person.
4.	In general, Arabic-speaking ELLs tend to avoid
using passive voice in their writing or speaking
because passive voice is rare in Arabic.
Chinese	1.	Passive voice exists, but it is not formed with the verb to be and past participle as in English. 2.	The agent is marked by bei, which can facilitate the use of the by + agent structure.
Key ไ 4: Passive Voice
249
	French	French has three ways to express passive voice. 1.	French has a passive voice construction that is very similar to be + past participle in English. In French, however, the past participle must agree with the subject in number and gender. Therefore, French ELLs may write *The plants were watereds all night or * Every semester letters are sents to students' parents. 2.	French also uses reflexive verbs to express passive voice. A common example is in telling someone your name, as in Je m’appelle Keith, which translates literally as "I call myself Keith." A more natural translation would be "I am called Keith," which is passive voice, or simply, "My name is Keith." 3.	Another common way to express passivity is through the use of the pronoun on, which translates as "one." You may have seen a sign in a store win- dow that said on parle français id, which translates literally as "one speaks French here." A more natu- ral translation would be "French is spoken here," which is passive voice.
	Japanese	1.	Japanese has a special verb form for passive voice, which consists of one word that has an infix to signal passive voice. It does not involve to be or a past par- ticiple as in English, so Japanese ELLs often omit be and write *Naoko chosen the winner in the essay contest. 2.	The subject in a passive voice construction is usu- ally animate. 3.	The by + agent is expressed by ni, which usually means "in."				
		
	Korean	1.	Korean has a special verb form for passive voice, which consists of one word. It does not involve to be or a past participle as in English. Thus, Korean ELLs often omit be and write *Naoko chosen the win- ner in the essay contest. 2.	The by + agent is often rendered in English by the word Jfrom, producing an error such as *This book was written from Maria.
	Russian	1.	Russian has a special verb form for passive voice. Russian ELLs often omit be and write * Katya given the award for best essay. 2.	Passive voice of verbs in progressive and perfect tenses may be problematic because these are not indicated by separate tenses but rather modifica- tions to the verb.
250
Key 14: Passive Voice
Spanish
Spanish has two principle ways to express passive
voice.
1.	Spanish uses reflexive verbs to express passive voice.
A common example is in telling someone your
name, as in Vo me llama Keith, which translates liter-
ally as "I call myself Keith." A more natural transla-
tion would be "1 am called Keith," which is passive
voice, or simply, "My name is Keith." In addition,
you may have seen a sign in a store window that
said Aqui se habla espanol, which translates literally
as "[it] speaks Spanish to itself here." A more natu-
ral translation would be "Spanish is spoken here,"
which is passive voice.
2.	Spanish has a passive voice construction that is very
similar to the be + past participle in English, but
there are two differences that may influence Span-
ish-speaking Ebbs' English. In Spanish, there are
two verbs for to be, so Ebbs may be confused about
which one matches the use of passive voice in Eng-
lish. In addition, the past participle in this con-
struction must agree with the subject in number
and gender. Therefore, Spanish Ebbs may write *The
plants were watereds all night or * Every semester letters
are seats to students' parents.
3.	In English, the sentence The teacher gave the students
a test can produce two equally correct passive sen-
tences: The students were given a test by the teacher or
A test was given to the students by the teacher. In Span-
ish, however, only the second is possible because
the students were not really'"given "ไวy anyone. (The
subject of a passive voice sentence has to be the
direct object of the verb in active voice, not the indi-
rect object.) Spanish-speaking Ebbs may find the
first passive sentence somewhat difficult to compre-
hend and certainly to produce, causing learners to
avoid this structure in their English altogether.
14.โ). Ideas for Teaching
Passive voice is not for beginners. In fact, if a beginning-level Ebb asks
you in class about a verb that is in passive voice, deflect the question.
Just say that it is a difficult grammar area and that the student will learn
about this in the next course or level. If the student persists, you can
explain it briefly or better yet, explain it to the one student after class.
Key 14: Passive Voice
251
Tell the ELL that passive voice will be covered in much greater detail in a
higher-level course. Explaining passive voice in front of a whole class of
beginners can truly create more questions than solutions.
Beginning ELL materials are often written in. active voice, even if it
sounds weird, to avoid exposing ELLs to passive voice. This is especially
true when the past participle is irregular (grind-ground-ground), but it is
somewhat less likely with regular verbs (produce-produced-produced) or
"less irregular" verbs (Lake-took-taken) where the past participle looks sim-
ilar to the base form of the verb.
Passive voice is often taught in intermediate classes. The traditional
way to teach passive voice is to start with a clearly active voice verb
example, one where there is a clear actor, a clear action, and a clear
receiver of the action. The most traditional sentence is one like John built
the house. This active voice sentence changes in passive voice to The house
was built by John. I recommend doing several examples like this one on
the board. No doubt, your ELL grammar textbook will have several
examples of this transformation. See Teaching Technique 20.
A fun activity to practice passive voice is Auction, which is described
on pp. 137-40 in The Art of Teaching speaking: Research and Pedagogy for
the ESL/EFL Classroom (Folse, 2006). A simplified version requires you to
create a worksheet with 15 statements in passive voice. Make eight state-
ments correct and seven with passive voice errors of various kinds. Stu-
dents must identify the eight correct sentences. In Auction, students
work in groups to decide which sentences they are most confident
about, and then use money to buy as many correct sentences as possible
at the auction.
:	FIND OUT I
‘ Give ELLs a list of five participle !
; pairs such as interested and inter- ;
! esting or annoyed and annoying. !
; Ask ELLs to explain the differ-;
; ence in the pairs and then write !
! examples for both words. Can !
■ they write correct example sen- >
I tences that clearly differentiate I
; the meanings of the each pair of;
! adjectives?	I
Upper-intermediate and advanced students can be pushed to
increase their vocabulary by learning as many -ing and -ed participial
adjectives as possible. Although there are hundreds of -ing and -ed
adjectives, most ELLs rarely move beyondThe typical comfort zone of
interesting and surprised. You can encourage students to take a chance by
telling them that in their next piece of writing—whether it is a para-
graph, an essay, or ten single sentences—they must use two -ing adjec-
tives and one -ed adjective and circle them. By requiring students to
circle these three words (or similar), you put the burden on them to
help you grade their papers by making it easier for you to see whether
they have or have not completed the assignment accurately.
Alternatively, you could have students identify participial adjectives
in a selection from Time, Newsweek, or other publication. In these non-
ELL texts, ELLs are likely to find participial adjectives such as endangered.
(species), policing (forces), bewildered (customers), and surrounding
(areas) instead of the mundane, overused examples found in ELL text-
books (interesting, surprised, or boring).
252
Key 15: Conditionals and Wish
ELL Grammar Key 15:
Conditionals (if Clauses) and Wish
A commonly heard English sentence is, //'/ had a minion dollars, I'd (pay
off my house, take a trip around the world, immediately (piit my job). 1 had
never thought that this was a complicated sentence until an ELL asked
me one day, Why do you say had and not havei Ido you think this is a past
Lense sentence?
Native speakers frequently use conditional sentences or wish sen-
tences (1 wish I had a million dollars now), but we usually have no idea
why we use past tense for an obviously present time action. It is easy to
see how an ELL who hears, If you'd told me you needed help, I would've
helped you delivered at native-speaker speed has difficulty catching the
words and may not understand that this sentence really means "You did
not tell me that you had a problem and therefore 1 did not help you, but
I was ready to help you."
In natural spoken English, the actual verb forms used ('d told and
would've helped) are reduced and unstressed, so it is practically impossi-
ble for an ELL to hear the endings, let alone pick them up through natu-
ral exposure. This grammar point is one that ELL teachers should know
well and anticipate needing to explain to their students. Passive compre-
hension will not lead to active knowledge or ability to use this grammar
point. Instead, ELLs need explicit instruction in this rather difficult
grammar point.
15.A. Typical ELL Errors: Noticing the Gap
Can you identify and explain these five common ELL errors with this
grammar point?
1.	*lfl suddenly hare a, wllliort, dollars. ike,first thing that I
would do is to if ait usyjob today.
2.	* We, wish, we, COM,go to the, concert towcorrowy but we,
already have, sowethlng else, that we, hare to do.
3.	tf you, had, studied, this chapter พน)re, thoroughlyyou,
won’t be, so confuted, by this sentence,.
ร·. df we would, have bought them onlute, we could, have
gotten our concert tickets for half-price,
ร. I’พ, confused, al)out this grarumar. d wish, 1 hare under-
stood the rules for usaldrtg sentences with, wish.
Key 15: Conditionals and Wish
253
15.B. Grammar Explanation
15.B.1. What Is a Conditional Sentence?
A conditional sentence expresses the idea that the action in the main
clause (the result clause) can only happen if a certain condition (the
clause that begins with if) is fulfilled. The if clause states the condition,
and the main clause states the result.
Condition	Result	1
If I were you,	I wouldn't buy that car.
It is possible to reverse the order tence without changing its meaning.	of the clauses of a conditional sen-
Result	Condition
I wouldn 't buy that car	if 1 were you.
In actual communication, the implied and is not stated.	if clause is often understood or
1 1 ’	' Result	Unstated Condition
I wouldn't buy that car	(if I were you).
Note that we must use a comma after an introductory if clause.
/Condition, result.
Result condition.
If you study more, you will pass the test.
You will pass the test if you study more.
254
Ke y 15: Conditionals and Wish
15.8.2.	Four Types of Conditional Sentences
There are sour types of conditional sentences: zero, one, two, and three.
Zero conditional is not a true conditional, but it is included here
because it.uses the word if. .. .............	....	_______
Type of Conditional Sentence	Example	Notes on Usage
Zero	If it rains, 1 stay home. If it rained, I stayed home.	used for facts or situations that are always true; when or whenever can be used instead of if used for situations that were always true in the past; when or whenever can be used instead of if
First	If it rains, J will stay home.	used for an action that is likely to happen
Second	If it rained, I would stay home.	used for an action that is not true or that the speaker thinks is not very possible
Third	If it had rained, I would have stayed, home.	used for an action that did not happen
15.8.3. Zero Conditional	
Condition	
If + simple present tense If it rains,	simple present tense I stay home.
If + simple past tense If J had any questions about Arabic while I was living in Saudi Arabia,	simple past tense J called my good friend Ahmed ไท Washington, DC.
Zero conditionals express facts or situations that are always true in
the present or were always true in the past. In zero conditionals talking
about the present, we use the simple present tense form of the verb in
both the if clause (i.e., the condition) and the result. In zero condition-
als talking about the past, we use the simple past tense form of the verb
in both the if clause (i.e., the condition) and the result, as in if I had any
questions about Arabic while I was lining in Saudi Arabia, I called my good
friend Ahmed in Washington, DC.
Key 15: Conditionals and Wish
255
With zero conditionals, we can substitute when or whenever for if
and not change the meaning of the sentence.
Whenever it rains, I stay home.
When I had any questions about Arabic while I was living in Saudi Ara-
bia, 1 called my good friend Ahmed in Washington, DC.
15.8.4.	First Conditional
Condition (Future Time)	Result (Future Time)
Is + simple present tense, If it rains,	future tense. I will stay home.
If + present progressive tense, If it is raining,	
If + present perfect tense, If it. has rained,	
If + present perfect progressive tense, If it has been raining,	
First conditionals express an action that is likely to happen. In first con-
ditionals, we use a present form of the verb in the if clause, including
simple present tense (rains'), present progressive (is raining), present per-
fect (has rained), or present perfect tense (has been raining). We use a
future verb form in the result clause, including future (will stay), be going
to (am going to stay), or another modal (might stay).
15.8.5.	Second Conditional: Unreal (not true or not possible)
Condition ’ (Present or Future Time)	Result (Present or Future Time)
If + simple past tense If it rained	would + VERB.
If + past progressive tense If it were raining	I would stay home.
Second conditionals express something that is not true or not possi-
ble. In second conditionals, we use a past form of the verb in tile if clause,
including simple past tense (rained) or past progressive (were raining). We
use would in the result clause as well as could or might. Note that with the
if clause, we use were, not was, for all persons with the verb to be (if 1 were,
if you were, if he were, if she were, if it were, if we were, if they were).
If I were you,	I wouldn't buy that car.
If today were her birthday,	she would organize a party.
Although the verb form used
with second conditionals looks
like simple past tense, it is
actually subjunctive mood.
The subjective mood is espe-
cially common after if or wish:
If I were a doctor, I would work
in a small clinic. You can call
this verb form by its real name
of subjunctive mood or you
can tell ELLs that it is the sim-
ple past tense. How much ter-
minology you use or do not
use is your decision based on
your ELLs' language goals.
256
Key 15: Conditionals and Wish
15.8.6.	Third Conditional
’ Condition '(EastTime)
//' + past perfect tense
I f it had rained,
If + past perfect progressive tense
If it had. been raining
mould have + PAST PARTICIPLE.
1 would have stayed home.
Third conditionals express an action that did not happen. In third
conditionals, we use the past perfect tense or past perfect progressive
tense of the verb in the if clause. In the result clause, we use would have,
could have, or might have followed by the past participle.
15.8.7.	Mixed Conditional Sentences
The four patterns for forming conditional sentences are straightforward
when the condition and the result occur at the same time. In the real
world, however, we often talk about conditions from the past that affect
a result in the present or future, and we sometimes talk about condi-
tions of the present (facts) that would have affected a certain result in
the past time. These mixed sentences are quite common in real commu-
nication. In these mixed cases, the verb follows the rules for the time of
the condition and the time of the result.
	he would have bought that BMW yesterday, (present time)
If he had become a citizen,	he would vote in tomorrow's
(past time)	election, (future time)
If I weren't taking my car to the shop tomorrow, (future time)	I would have lent you my car. (past time)
If you were giving a big speech tomorrow, (future time)	you'd be busy planning it right now. (present time)
15.8.8.	Omission of if
With conditional clauses that contain were, had, or should, we can omit
the word if and then invert the subject and verb.
If he were here, 'i Were he here, /	he would lead the discussion skillfully.
If they had known about the fundraiser, Ύ Had they known about the fundraiser, f	they would have made a donation.
If you should find an electronic dictionary,ไ Should you find an electronic dictionary, J	please let me know. I've lost mine.
Key 15: Conditionals and Wish
257
15.8.9.	Contractions
Note that'd can be substituted for would or for had. In spoken English,
ELLs can hardly hear this sound, so they are not likely to acquire this
grammar feature unless the teacher helps them notice it through direct
instruction. In written English, ELLs have a difficult time figuring out
whether'd refers to would or had. What appears to be a simple contrac-
tion can be very difficult for ELLs.
If you'd told me, I could have helped you.
(you'd - you had)
If the course were easier, you'd be able to make a better
grade, (you'd = you would)
15.8.10.	Wish
The verb wish has a special grammar that is similar to verbs in the if
clause. Sentences with wish are similar in meaning to unreal conditions
in the present, future, or past. The situation is not true, does not exist, is
unlikely to happen, or did not happen.
Wish expresses the fact that you want the opposite of the real situa-
tion to be true. While the meaning of wish is easy for ELLs, the grammar
of wish is not. The difficult part about wish sentences is that the verb
tense is never the same as the time of the action. For example, to wish
about a past action, we use past perfect tense (instead of simple past). To
wish about a present situation, we use past tense (instead of present
tense). To wish about a future event, will changes to would. The verb after
the word wish is usually in a tense that is one time earlier than the actual
time of the action.	*’
Situation	Cl	larige	1 I Sentence .	
I didn't study last night.	past time -> tense	past perfect		I wish I had studied last night.
I don't study much.	present time	-> past tense		My dad wishes I studied more.
I won't study tonight.	will -> would			My dad wishes I would study tonight.
I can't go tomorrow.	can could			I wish I could go tomorrow.
258
Key 15: Conditionals and Wish
Common ELL Mistakes: What Your ELL Should Know
1.	Don't Lise past tense to talk about past conditions.
wrong: II I studied more last week, I would have passed
yesterday's test.
correct: If I had studied more last week, I would have passed
yesterday's test.
2.	Don't use present tense to talk about present conditions.
wrong: If I know Spanish, I would translate this letter for
you right now.
correct: If 1 knew Spanish, 1 would translate this letter for
you right now.
3.	When the verb to be is used in unreal conditions for actions
in the present (or future), use were instead of was for all
persons, singular and plural. (This error is also common
with native speakers in informal language.) See Hot Seat
Question 5.
wrong: if 1 was you, 1 would memorize this rule about
unreal conditions.
correct: If I were you, 1 would memorize this rule about
unreal conditions.
4.	Don't get confused by the contracted forms used with
conditionals.
If I'd had more time last month, I'd have finished reading
that novel.
(I had had)	(I would have finished)
5.	Remember that verbs in sentences with wish follow similar
patterns to those for if. Wishing in the present time requires
past tense, and wishing in the past time requires past perfect
tense.
wrong: Who is that girl? I wish 1 know her name.
correct: Who is that girl? 1 wish 1 knew her name.
Key 15: Conditionals and Wish
259
15.C. Native Language Interference:
Compare English with other Languages
Language Notes on Conditionals and Wish Sentences
Arabic	1.	Arabic has two words for if, reflecting classical/ formal and colloquial variations of the language. 2.	Past tense is used for hypothetical situations, so Ara- bic-speaking ELLs might say, * If 1 studied last night, I passed the test this morning instead of If I had studied last night, I would have passed the test this morning.
Chinese	1.	There is a word that means if. 2.	An if structure in Chinese requires two markers: if and then, as in If you study, then you (will) pass the exam. This requirement exists in Chinese and explains why Chinese ELLs often write incorrect sentences with two other incompatible markers: * Although I studied, hard, but I did not pass the exam.
French	1.	French has a word for if. 2.	French verb tenses in conditional sentences are similar to those in English. 3.	There is no separate word for would. Instead, end- ings indicate conditional verbs. French-speaking ELLs may produce -If I had studied, I passed the test or -If I had studied, I had passed the test. 4.	For future conditionals, the use of future tense is - required in the if clause: *IfI will make a good grade on the final, my parents will be so happy. 5.	The lack of progressive tenses in French may cause
	French-speaking ELLs to encounter problems pro- ducing structures such as If I were living here, I'd complain to the landlord. 6. French uses subjunctive mood in unreal clauses. Knowledge of this verb form may cause some inter- ference for French-speaking ELLs.
260
Key 15: Conditionals and Wish
Japanese Korean	ใ. These languages have a word for if. However, the word i/'is not obligatory because the verb endings signal a conditional sentence. 2.	In Japanese and Korean, the if clause ทานรt always come before the main verb. English allows inver- sion: If you study, you will pass or You will pass if you study. These Ehhs seldom write sentences with the if clause after the main verb. Though not an error, Japanese and Korean ELL writers may appear to lack sentence variety when in fact they are merely translating from their mother tongue. 3.	Japanese and Korean ELLs fail to differentiate real and unreal situations, writing sentences such as *Jf 1 had won the lottery, I will buy a new house or *1 will help you with your homework if 1 were good at math. 4.	These languages use a different verb ending when expressing provided that or if and only if instead of just if In other words, there is a verb form for con- ditional and another for strong conditional.
Russian	1.	Russian has a word for if. 2.	As in English, the word if can be omitted. In Eng- lish, this is possible but rare and requires inverted word order: Were I the president, 1 would raise taxes and Had you told me, I would, have helped you. In Russian, however, omitting if is common and does not make a sentence sound as formal as is the case in English. -3—fEhe-use- oLfuture-tense-i-s-possibie-m-the if clause: *If J will make a good grade on the final, my parents will be so happy.
Spanish	ใ.. Spanish has a word for if. 2.	Spanish verb tenses in conditional sentences are similar to those in English. 3.	There is no separate word for would. Instead, end- ings indicate conditional verbs. 4.	Spanish-speaking ELLs may be confused by the English verb form used in present contrary-to-fact sentences (if you spoke good French, you could trans- late this letter for me now) because the form spoke looks like English past lense. This verb form in Spanish, which is called subjunctive mood, is very different from its past tense counterpart.
Key 15: Conditionals and Wish
261
All Languages	All ELLs have trouble with the myriad of verb forms used in if clauses and main clauses in the various tenses. This grammar point appears complicated, but it is systematic and can be mastered after sufficient practice.
15.D. ideas for Teaching Conditionals
and Wish Sentences
As you have seen, conditional sentences can be divided into four differ-
ent types of conditionals. Depending on the class, you might teach all
four of these in one class meeting or you might separate them. In an
intensive program, perhaps giving an overview of all four and then
teaching each type one at a time makes the most sense.
In an EFL setting, students are not exposed to English much outside
of class, and more class time is spent providing opportunities for recy-
cling of previous material and for English practice. This allocation of
class time means that there is less class time for introducing a great deal
of material. For classes that meet only once a week, I would recommend
covering these one at a time and contrasting the new type with any pre-
viously learned types as you go along. Students will have no problem
with whichever type you present first, but as they see subsequent types,
their brains will work to sort out the contrast in forms and the contrast
in usages.
It is common in teaching grammar that the initial presentation and
practice of one item goes very well. The problem occurs when a second,
competing grammar option is raised. With if, when you present zero
conditional, you can expect very few problems. When you present con-
Tfitional one, you can also expect few problems. However, when you
present conditional two, get ready for the questions. Conditional two
requires ELLs (and teachers) to really think about what conditional sen-
tences are. In addition, the verb changes in conditional two are sharper
than they are with conditional zero or one.
The key to teaching conditionals is to make sure that all students
understand the word if. If 100 percent of your students do not under-
stand the word if, then you have no lesson. If is a hard word to explain
clearly, but good examples, a translation or two from a classmate, and
letting students use their dictionaries in class all add to making your
teaching task much easier.
To teach any of these conditionals, put the pattern on the board.
Stan with some easy examples. Choose meaningful topics, but for most
cultures, winning the lottery and changing your life are two concepts
that seem to transcend geographic and linguistic boundaries.
> Examine a 500-word excerpt -of a >
\ transcript of spoken English. I
; Identify all of the conditional ;
< structures. Flow many of the !
; structures have -the main clause ;
; (i.e., thjf result clause with .a!
I form of ไmil or would) but lack a ;
[ directly stated if clause, such as I;
! would never have done that. When I
! both clauses are stated, which ;
! clause comes first? Is there any ;
, pattern to this usage?	!
262 •ะ::· Key ใ5: Conditionals and Wish
The grammar of wish functions similar to that of the if clauses in
conditional sentences. 'The verb after wish or after if is usually one tense
earlier than the actual action of the verb. If your neighbor's cat died, you
state a wish by saying, 1 wish my neighbor's pel hadn't died. We use hadn't
died because of the verb in the original sentence was died, which is past
tense. The verb after wish or if is usually one time earlier, so simple past
tense changes to past perfect.
Being on the Hot Seat:
Grammar Questions from ELLs
•	Why does opening have one ท but beginning has two? Does the rule change
if we add -ed. instead of -ing: opened or openned?
•	How come we say want: to go,. need to go, and promise ' to :go but.enjoy going,
.dread going, and keep going?	-
•	Why is the word rain in present tense in the question, Did it rain yesterday?
when the word yesterday clearly means past tense—-and why doesn't rain
end in ~s if the subject is it?	\	: พ ~~
In education, we often hear about the "teachable moment," a time when a student is
most likely to benefit from instruction. For many language teachers, the ultimate
teachable moment occurs when a student raises his or her hand to ask a question—
such as those posed here—but what happens when the teacher has absolutely NO
idea of how to answer the question? What can teachers do when they suddenly find
themselves on the proverbial hot seat?
Students who raise their hands in class and present a question want to know the
answer at that moment, so that moment is THE teachable moment. What you are able
to do with that special moment is crucial to student learning, and how you handle
that question says something very important about your teaching ability, not only to
that particular student but also to the entire class of students.
264
4; Being on the Hot Seat
This chapter presents 20 grammar Hot Seat Questions involving ELL grammar
problems that ELLs frequently ask about. Each of these questions is followed by a
detailed answer with examples. Some responses are very straightforward and go right
to the grammar solution. Other answers actually demonstrate useful dialogue between
the teacher and the student(s) with the goal of not only providing the answer to the
grammar query but also training you as the teacher to learn to guide the ELL into dis-
covering the answer from several example sentences. Thus, the Hot Seat Questions
here serve both the student and the teacher.
At some point in our teaching careers, all of us are asked questions that we cannot
answer. Sometimes the answer has to do with data that we simply cannot recall at that
moment, but with ESL grammar, it might involve a question that we have never even
considered, let alone answered. While it is not necessary that the teacher know the
answer to every student question, teacher credibility is damaged by replying too often
with, "I don't know. I'll check on that and get back with you tomorrow." To be sure,
this reply does have its place in good teaching, but no teacher should need to play this
card too often.
So what are good teaching strategies for those moments when you are at the
board on the proverbial hot seat and a learner asks you a grammar question that is not
part of your prepared lesson and that you cannot answer at that particular time?
Grammar is by definition a pattern, and your job is to figure out—with the students in
tow—what the pattern is. It is recommended that you walk the students through a dis-
covery process regarding their question. Such guided learning is at the heart of excel-
lence in teaching, especially during a student-generated teachable moment.
When a student asks me a grammar question that I don't know the answer to—
and even one that I do know the answer to—I try to set up a scenario on the board that
will ultimately allow the students themselves to figure out the grammatical pattern
that will answer the questioA'. If you know the answer to the student's question, then
you simply need to develop the teaching techniques that will set up the discovery
process. If you do not know the answer but are a good teacher, oftentimeS-StudentS-are-
^siddbsofbed by the discovery process you are orchestrating on the board that they are
not even aware that you do not really know the answer.
Either way—whether you actually know the answer or are trying to figure it out
right there in front of your students—there are some specific teaching techniques that
you can use to facilitate student learning:
1.	If you do not know the answer, buy time. Yes, stall for time. Ask the student to
repeat the question. Ask other students to help with the question. Can they
explain the question better or with other examples? The other students can be
a valuable source of information in answering the original question.
2.	ELL grammar questions are often about the correctness of specific phrases or
sentences that they have heard or seen, such as, Is it correct English to say, "She
don't love me now?"
In this case, write the student's phrase on the board. Ask the student to
repeat the question again. Ask the student where he or she heard or saw this
language. This information is important because many times students are ask-
ing about vocabulary or grammar in a song or a TV show, which probably fea-
4: Being on the Hot Seat
265
tures informal language. With the she don't love me now example, my first reac-
tion would be to say no (because it is not correct grammar). However, if the
student says it is in a current song, then that tells me that the singer was trying
to sound "cool" or informal or perhaps trying to make something rhyme, so
that language is acceptable for that song—but it is still incorrect grammar
when I consider my students' real-world need to write a good paragraph, fill
out an application, or impress a job interviewer.
3.	If you know the grammatical answer that underpins the question, then you can
proceed to guide the student through other carefully selected examples. If the
rule does have exceptions, you don't want to accidentally bring up one of the
exceptions to a rule—at least initially. However, if you don't know the answer
to the grammar question, then keep eliciting more examples.
For example, if a student asks, "How do you pronounce the ending sound
of the word missed? What about sneezedใ What about neededใ" and you don't
know the answer and therefore don't know how to tailor your instruction,
YOU must be the language detective. You need to figure this out while looking
calm and still running the class.
What do all three of these words have in common? What exactly is the stu-
dent's question? If you can see that all three end in -ed, then ask the student—
and the whole class—to generate more examples. This is almost always a very
good technique because it involves everyone and because it is quite likely that
someone else in the class knows the answer and may be able to explain it in a
learner-to-leamer way that you cannot, so use this great resource presented by
fellow classmates.
4.	As examples are given, try to help students figure out the answer by grouping
the new examples on the board to represent the answer. The -ed suffix is pro-
nounced one of three ways (/d/, /t/, /Zd/), so when someone says coughed,
write it near missed because they both share the /t/ pronunciation.
If you don't know about the three pronunciations, then keep eliciting
Sãmple^frõrnhbíe^tüdent^WbeTryomrhãve^Hmexamples—pteces^ofTiata--^
then ask your class, "Okay, what is going on here? Can anyone see a pattern?"
In language, there is almost always a pattern; your student may have coinciden-
tally asked you about an exception, but this is rarely the case. If someone
knows tire pattern, then the student's question has been answered.
5.	If no one can figure out the answer, then offer more examples. However, as you
offer an example, say, "Okay, what about the verb persuade? What is the past
tense?" When someone says, persuaded, then ask, "Where should I write this
word—with missed, sneezed, or needed?"
■ After five or six more examples from you, if no one is able to figure out the
rule, then tell them. If you don't know the rule and you have exhausted all of
your detective potential, then you should say that you want your students to
keep working on this tonight and you want to see who can figure this out by
the next class. Say that you are confident that someone can do this. Depending
on your grading system, you may even offer extra points for the first student to
tell you the answer. By doing this, you have just bought yourself time if you
still need it, without losing face.
266
4: Being on the blot Seal
Our students in ESL settings are exposed to English all day. With the mas-
sive amount of English material on the Internet, even EEL students have access
to English input that พลร not possible just ten years ago. Whether from you,
the Internet, or another source, your students are hearing these grammatical
structures in natural speech or seeing them in print. Though your students may
in fact have understood the content of this language, this comprehensible
input is not sufficient for learning to take place. If it were, your students would
not be asking these grammar questions. In their quest to improve their English
proficiency, most adult learners are not satisfied with comprehensible input;
they also want to know why the language in the input is arranged the way it is.
Why is there an -ing ending? Why does needed have two syllables but called and
robbed don't? As you read the 20 questions and answers in this chapter, your
goal is to learn to recognize these patterns yourself so that you can help your
EEEs as they tackle English.
One final point worth noting is that a good teacher also knows when NOT
to answer a question. Sometimes an ELL asks a question that is a valid ques-
tion about a good language point (such as conditionals) but you as the teacher
know that that particular moment is not the right time to explain that answer
to the whole class. You know that explaining that grammar point right then
would be opening up the proverbial can of worms and would cause more con-
fusion than comprehension. The bottom line is that no one knows your stu-
dents better than you do, so use your judgment about what to explain at what
point and to what degree.
Hot Seat Question ไ: Adjective Word Order
Which is correct: a big house or a house big? Why?
Your Answer
In both examples, big is an adjective and house is a noun. In English, adjectives
come before nouns, so only the first example is correct: a big house. Following this
pattern of ADJECTIVE + NOUN, we can also say a green book, a Colombian girl, a
world, map, four tired students, and seven yellow pencils.
Extra Information for the Teacher
This question is probably from a beginning or low-intermediate ELL whose native
language allows adjectives to go after the noun, as in Spanish tin a persona importante
and UN estudianle inteligente. Put ล list of singular nouns on the board, and then ask
students to choose an appropriate adjective to go with each noun. Before writing the
adjective in front of each noun, ask students where to place the adjective. For exam-
ple, if your noun on the board is girl and ล student says tall for the adjective, ask the
Questions 1-2
267
class, "Which is correct: a tall girl or a girl tall!" Make your students practice saying
the combination of ARTICLE + ADJECTIVE + SINGULAR COUNT NOUN. To keep
vocabulary simple (and thereby facilitate attention on the grammatical pattern with-
out vocabulary distractions), teachers should use things that are visible in the class-
room. Even better, the teacher should let the student give the examples, and no new
vocabulary will be introduced.
Hot Seat Question 2: Inverted Word Order with Negative Expressions
Never has the weather been so cold! I understand all the words in this sentence and
the meaning, but the grammar looks strange to me. Why does the word has come
before the subject the weather? Actually, this sentence looks more like a question
than a statement: Has the weather been so cold ? Why don't you say * Never the
weather has been so cold!
Your Answer
You're right that this sentence looks more like a question than a statement
because in a question, we would certainly ask, Has the weather ever been this
cold ใ Sometimes when you find a sentence where the grammar looks strange to
you, it is a good idea to see if there is a pattern. Can you generate some more sen-
tences that look like this one to check if there is indeed a general pattern?
Look at this sentence again. What is strange or unique about this sentence?
How many times have you seen a sentence begin with never? (I know, almost
never!) The word never is usually in the middle of a sentence, not at the begin-
ning. We would say, The weather has never been so cold.
If we make other sentences with never in the usual middle position and then
move never to the beginning, look what happens:
A.	It never rains here in January.	-> Never does it rain here in January.
B.	My bank is never open on Sunday.	-> Never is my bank open on Sunday.
If you look at the part underlined, what do you see? Yes, the underlined portion by
itself is set up as a question.
Now we have a potential rule (or pattern) that when you begin a sentence with
never, you have to use the same word order as in a yes-no question. However, we need
to see if there are other words that do this, too, or does this pattern only happen with
never ใ
What makes the word never special or unique in meaning? It is a negative word
that shows frequency. Let's try out our new pattern with similar words: seldom, rarely,
268
4: Being on the Hot Seal
not once, or not even one time. Let's also try ล sentence with a positive adverb of fre-
quency, sometimes, to test out our hypothesis:
c. We seldom pay by credit card.	-> Seldom do me pay by credit curd.
I). Movie tickets are rarely over $10.	-> Rarely are movie tickets over $10.
E. Movie tickets are sometimes over $10. -> * Sometimes are movie tickets over $10.
Because E did not work out, we can conclude that this pattern of inverted
word order, which looks like the grammar of a question, is connected to sentences
that begin with a negative adverb of frequency (or similar word).
A writer or speaker begins a sentence with a negative word to emphasize the
negative meaning of that sentence. In this case, English grammar requires you to
invert the subject and verb and use appropriate auxiliary verbs such as do, does,
and did.
Extra information for the Teacher
This question probably came from a high-intermediate or advanced student.
Hot ,Seat Question s: Spelling words with Double Consonants
Key
. Key Λ
'3r
When you add -ing or -ed to a word, how do you know how to spell the word? I
mean, how do you know when to double the final consonant? Which is correct:
happening or happenning? opened or openned? prefered or preferred? focusing or
focussing?
Your Answer
The spelling of the original word is important. If a one-syllable word ends in
consonant-vowel-consonant (C-V-C), then we double the last consonant before
adding not only -ed. and -ing but other endings that start with a vowel such as -er
(for comparison and for a doer), -est (for superlative), and -en (to make a verb
from an adjective, e.g., red -> redden).
If a word ending in C-V-C has two syllables, we double the last consonant
only if the (pronunciation) stress is on the second syllable.
Questions 3-4
269
kjnf T.niiinu	Ending in C-V-C		
INUl Diiuiiig	ฯ inC-V-C	1 Syllable	2 Syllables, 1st Stressed	2 Syllables, 2nd Stressed
		^1 2	1 letter	1 ■ -» 2 letters
act -> acted react -9· reacted clean -> cleaned take -> taking read -> reading look -> looking sing -> singing push -> pushed	wrap -> wrapped plan -> planned stop -> stopped clap -> clapped get -> getting run -> running cut -> cutting beg -» begging	enter -> entered listen -> listened travel traveled happen happened open	-> opening offer	-> offering open	-> opened happen -> happening	commit -> committed prefer	->	preferred occur	->	occurred refer	->	referred begin	->	beginning admit	->	admitting infer	->	inferring compel -> compelling
Extra Information for the Teacher
We never double any words that end in these letters: พ (saw -> sawing), X (fix -> fixing),
or y (say -> saying). Verbs that end in the letter c (without k) usually add -k:
panic -> panicked.
An engaging way to teach this is using a discovery approach. Put the -ing forms of
ten to fifteen of these verbs on the board. Ask students to work in small groups and
figure out the spelling patterns here. These spelling patterns can be taught to high-
beginners and up. Intermediate and even advanced ELLs appreciate reviewing these
spelling patterns. (See Teaching Technique 9.)
Seat Question 4: used to
________WherLjdo^Qu_usejtsedJa?^JLJhinkJitísJEbmpas-Ltense,_.so_jwhatísJhe_.difference___________
between simple past tense and used to? Does I went to that school mean the same as
I used to go to that school ใ If they mean the same thing, is one form preferred? Is
one slang?
Your Answer
We use used to to talk about past actions that were true at one time but are now no
longer true. In addition, the speaker is indirectly saying that the action will proba-
bly not happen again. Consider these examples:
A.	When I was in kindergarten, I remember that we used to take naps every
day.
B.	When Kelly lived in Michigan, she used to hate winters because of all the
snow.
c. I used to play tennis almost every day, but now my job doesn't let me.
D.	Before computers, kids used to play outside more.
E.	My grandmother didn't use to wear a hearing aid, but now she does.
270
4: Being on the Hot Seat
Simple past tense is often for an event that happened once at a specific time in
the past. Used to lets the speaker or writer give ล subtle "flavor" about the action
that simple past does not.
Notice the correct negative form in Example E is didn't use to. (Eor more infor-
mation on past tense usages of used to and would, see pages 127-28.)
Extra Information for the Teacher
This kind of question is probably from an intermediate or higher-proficiency ELL.
In addition, ELLs may confuse used to and be used to. The expression be used to has
the same meaning as be accustomed to. This expression can be used in any tense, so we
have are used to and was used to. A noun usually follows this expression, Í am used to litis
job. If the name of an action follows, it must be a gerund, 1 am used to waking up early.
Sot,Seat Questioner. Present Unreal Conditional Sentences
Key J	If 1 had. a million dollars right now, J would buy a new house. This sentence is talking
'151	about the present. That's what right now means. I don't understand how you can use
\ had here because had is past tense, and this sentence is talking about the present.
J
Your Answer
Verbs after if use a special grammar aspect called subjunctive mood when the
action after if is unreal or imaginary. (You don't have a million dollars right now,
do you? That makes the situation unreal or imaginary.) By coincidence, the sub-
junctive mood in English looks just like the simple past tense. NOTE: If you think
that using a term such as subjunctive will confuse your students, then just label this
form past. I have never found using the label subjunctive very helpful, so I usually
avoid it as excessive grammar labeling. Rowever,m,p.p.erj.n.termed.iateun-advanced-
ELLs may appreciate knowing this term.
Subjunctive Mood
Need	Use	Be	Know	Have
if 1 needed	if 1 used	if] were	if I knew	if 1 had
if you needed	if you used	if you were	if you knew	if you had
if he needed	if he used	if he were	if he knew	if he had
if she needed	if she used	if she were	if she knew	if she had
if it needed	i f it used	if it were	if it knew	if it had
if we needed	if we used	if we were	if we knew	if we had
if they needed	if they used	if they were	if they knew	if they had
Questions 5-6
271
In an if sentence to talk about the present, we use what looks like past tense
for that if verb, but it really is subjunctive. The other verb, called the conditional
verb, will usually have the form: would + VERB. Consider these examples:
Present Unreal Situation	Conditional Sentence about Present Time
A. I want to buy a house. 1 don't have a million dollars.	D. If 1 had a million dollars, I would buy a house.
B. 1 want to call Sue. I don't know her number.	E. If I knew Sue's number, I would call her.
c. I want to change many things. I am not the president.	E If I were the president, I would change many things.
Extra Information for the Teacher
This question probably came from an upper-intermediate or advanced ELL. Note thaty
the subjunctive of be is were for all pronouns, including I, he, she, and it, which use was
in simple past tense. You may hear some native speakers say, If I was you, but this is con-'
sidered informal spoken language. However, the standard written form is If I were you.
Hot Seat Question 6: had had
I saw a sentence with the word had two times in a row: Before Lucas bought his clas-
sic 1973 Ford Mustang, he had had many other cars. However, not one of them was as
nice as his Ford Mustang. Is this really possible? What does had had mean?
Your Answer
Yes, had had is possible. Let's look at your sentence and figure out what the pattern
-------(rule)-might-be:........................................................
A.	Before Lucas bought. . . ,
B.	Before I came here,
c. When we got married,
D. By the time she graduated,
he had had. . . .
I had studied English for many years,
we had. known each other for a long time.
she had. been in college six years.
Look at the verbs that are in the same slot, or place, where we see had had in
your original sentence. Do you see a pattern? Yes, all the other verbs consist of had
+ PAST PARTICIPLE. This tense is called past perfect. In B, the main verb is study,
and the past participle is studied. In c, the main verb is know, and the past partici-
ple is known. In D, the main verb is be, and the past participle is been.
In your example A, the main verb is have, and the past participle is had. Your
verb might look a little strange, but had had is correct. The first had is the auxiliary,
or helping verb, that we always find in past perfect, and the second had is the past
participle of the main verb have. Therefore, had had is 100 percent correct here.
272
4: Being on the Hot Sent
Extra Information for the Teacher
This question probably came from an upper-intermediate or advanced ELL
ชlot Seat Question 7: Adverbs of Frequency Word Order
1 play usually tennis on Saturday morning with my doubles partner. Is this sentence
okay? Why or why not? My roommate is a native speaker, and she understands me
when I say this, but my teacher says that this sentence is not right.
Your Answer
The grammar in your sentence is not 100 percent correct, but if you have good
pronunciation, most native speakers will have no problem understanding your
sentence. The grammatical error involves the placement of the "word usually. You
have probably already studied a group of words called adverbs of frequency
(always, usually, often, sometimes, rarely, never). I'm going to rewrite your sentence
with the correct word order and give you several other examples. Let's see if you
can figure out what the pattern is.
A.	I	usually	play		tennis on Saturday morning .... 1
B.	My uncle		is	always	late for everything.
	Soldiers	never	needed		chemical protection suits before.
D·	Children	usually	love		to drink juice for a snack.	1
E.	Stores		were	rarely	open on weekends when I.... j
F.	My two cats		are	usually	extra friendly when they want.... 1
.G.	Schools here		are	never	open during Christmas holidays. 1
H.	Most cars	usually	get		more than 30 mpg these days.
What do you think the rule is so far? Yes, we use adverbs of frequency before
all verbs except am, is, are, was, were. Adverbs of frequency come after these five
forms of be. Let's look at six other examples now:
1. Drivers	should	always	wear	a seatbelt.	1
J. My dad	has	never	had	a car accident.	ะ
K. 1	have	often	wondered	what it would be like to ....	:
L. If you	don't	ever	try	something new, how can you .... 1
M. Beetles	can	sometimes	bite	so badly that your skin will .... 1
N. Mark	has	always	taught	in this small school.	'
Questions 7-8 ■ะ···- 273
Now you can see the second part of the rule: When a verb has an auxiliary, or
helping verb, the adverb of frequency goes after the first part of the verb.
You can simplify this rule as follows: When a verb (except am, is, are, was,
were) is a single word, the adverb of frequency goes before it. When a verb has
more than one word (an auxiliary plus main verb), the adverb of frequency goes
after the first word.
Extra information for the Teacher
Adverbs of frequency are covered in many beginning- classes. Placement of these
adverbs in a sentence is a common question for even beginning ELLs. A single pro-
nunciation error or a single grammar error hardly ever impedes communication
between an ELL and a native speaker. Communication usually breaks down com-
pletely, however, when an ELL makes both a pronunciation error and a grammatical
error simultaneously. Consider the ELL, Felipe, who says, *My cousin is our least. Did
he mean to say teeth? (Some languages don't have the th sound in the word teeth.) Dicl
he mean teacher? Actually, this student meant to say, My cousin is an artist. Some lam
guages do not use an indefinite article with professions after the verb to be, so this ELL
dropped the word an completely. At the same time, he mispronounced the word artist
by stressing the second syllable ar»tfst instead of the first syllable ár«tist and by chang-
ing the second vowel from schwa /a/ to long e. Even if he had had the same pronunci-
ation errors but had included the word an, I believe that a native speaker could have
understood him. While a misplaced adverb of frequency is not so serious, this error
can block communication completely if one or two words in the same utterance are
mispronounced. Correct word order, or syntax, can help compensate for less than per-
fect pronunciation.
Hot Seat Question 8: will in if Clauses
I learned that I can't use will in an if clause, so I can't say, *IfI will study harder, my :
grades will improve. I'm supposed to use present tense and say, If I study harder, ' 15
my grades will improve. The other day I heard a native speaker say, If you will lend me J
$100, I will pay you back in a few days. Is this sentence okay? Why? Or why not? : -
Your Answer
You are right that we don't usually use any future tense in an if clause even if the
action is clearly going to take place in the future, as in your example. It is clear that
both the studying and the better grades are in the future.
The new sentence that you heard is indeed correct. It is possible to use future
in an if clause when the meaning is "if you agree to do this." Thus, when the
speaker said, If you will lend, me $100, I will pay you back, he or she is saying that if
the listener agrees to lend the money, then he or she will pay her back. The mean-
ing is similar to "if you promise to lend me $100."
274
4: Being on lhe Hol Seat
1-1 ere are some more possible examples:
A.	If you will clean the kitchen, I will clean the bathroom.
B.	If the hotel manager will reduce the price, we can stay there.
11 ere are some examples where it is NOT possible:
c. * If it will rain tomorrow, we will stay home. (The rain can't make a promise.)
D. * If your plane will be late, 1 will pick you up at the airport. (The plane
can't agree.)
Extra Information for the Teacher
A clause is any subject-verb relationship. 1 will call you has one clause. The sentence If
I study harder, my grades will improve consists of two clauses; my grades will improve is the
main clause and If I study harder is an if clause. This question probably came from an
upper-intermediate or advanced ELL.
Hot Seat Question ร;Conimctions __
For the words you are not, I can say you're not, and I can also say you aren't. Is there
any difference in these two? Are they both OK?
Your Answer
There is no difference in meaning between these two contractions. AVith the nega-
tive forms of is, are, have, has, had, will, and would, there are always two contrac-
tions possible: she isn't, she'f'not; they aren't, they're not; we haven't, we've not; it
hasn't, it's not; you hadn't, you'd not; I won't, I'll not; and she wouldn't, she'd, not.
Using either one is fine.
Extra Information for the Teacher
Questions about contractions can come from all proficiency levels. Beginners need
help with the concept of contracting since not all languages have written contractions.
Higher-proficiency ELLs need help with confusing contractions such as it's for it is or
it has or they'd for they would, or they had.
Another question that many ELLs ask about contractions is whether or not it is
considered acceptable to use contractions. Contractions are normal in speech, and
informal writing such as emails and text messages; in fact, we even make contractions
in speech with nouns, not just pronouns: Kevin's not here, those *cals're not mine, that
bus'll lake you downtown. (These last two examples occur in spoken English only.) How-
ever, these "contractions" represent informal, relaxed spoken language. Writing is
quite different from speaking in that it is usually more formal. Contractions should be
avoided in academic writing.
Questions 9-10
275
Hot Seat Question 10: Verb Forms in Past Tense Questions
Did you ever work thereใ When you ask a question about the past, why do you use
the present form of a verb?
Your Answer
This is a good question that many students ask. Your sentence looks confusing,
but actually it is not. The word work looks like present tense, but it is not. It is
really the base or simple form of the verb. In English, we do not use -s or -ed for
main verbs in questions or negative statements. Study these two examples:
Question	wrong: correct:	*Where does she works? Where does she work?
Negative	wrong:	*The manager of the bank does not works on Saturdays.
	correct:	The manager of the bank does not work on Saturdays.
For past tense, we can use only one past tense marker (indicator) for each verb.
If you already have -ed, you can't have did, and if you have did, you can't have -ed.
What are the past tense markers in these sentences? Look at the markers and
the number in each sentence.
Affirmative Sentences	Past Tense Marker	No.	
A. Frank worked for BMW for eleven years.	-ed (regular verb)	1	
B. Our aunt lived in Dallas for her whole life.	-d (regular verb)	1	
c. My co-workers went to a small café for lunch.	went (irregular verb)	1	
D. Earlier today, James did something important.	did (irregular verb)	1	
When we make questions for these sentences, we still have only one past tense
marker, as seen in these four questions in past tense:
Questions	Past Tense Marker	No.
E. Did Frank work for BMW for eleven years?	did (auxiliary verb)	1
F. Did our aunt live in Dallas for her whole life?	did (auxiliary verb)	1
G. Did my co-workers go to a small café for lunch?	did. (auxiliary verb)	1
H. Earlier today, did James do something important?	did (auxiliary verb)	1
276
4: Being on lhe Blot Seat
The pattern that we use for a past tense question is did + SUBJECT + VERB. I think
your confusion is that the base verb looks just like the simple present tense. However,
in simple present tense, we add -s for he/she/it. To ask a question about Example E, we
cannot ask, *Did Frank works /or BMW? If we could use works with an -s, then yes, we
would be using present tense, but for all subjects, we use did + SUBJECT + VERB.
You may think that it looks strange to use the base or simple form of the verb
here, but if we also put the main verb in past tense, we have a serious problem because
then we have two past tense markers instead of just one. The rule in English is that you
can have only one past tense marker for each verb.
Study Examples Í-L carefully. These sentences represent typical ELL errors. Can
you understand why all four questions are incorrect?
พ)'^		
1. *Did Frank worked for BMW for eleven years?	did (auxiliary verb) + -ed	2
J. * Did our aunt lived in Dallas for her whole life?	did (auxiliary verb) + -ed	2
K. * Did my co-workers went to a small café for lunch?	did (auxiliary verb) + went	2
L. * Earlier today, did James did some- thing important?	did (auxiliary verb) + did	2
Extra Information for the Teacher
This is a common question from beginning ELLs. The same grammar [pattern) is also
true for negatives, as seen in the same four sentences:
M. Frank did not work for BMW for eleven years.	did (auxiliary verb)	1
N. Our aunt did not live in Dallas for her whole life.	did (auxiliary verb)	1
o. My co-workers did not go to a small café for lunch.	did (auxiliary verb)	1
p. Earlier today, James did not do something important.	did (auxiliary verb)	I
Questions 11-12
277
Hot Seat Question 11: since versus for
"1 have lived here_____two years." Should 1 use since or for to fill in the blank?
Your Answer
The answer is for: I have lived here for two years. We use for with quantity of time,
and we use since with the name of a time. For tells the duration of something, and
since indicates when something began. (See p. 170 for more information on the
use of since and for.)
for	since	
for two years for a decade for six hours	since 1999 since the last century since the war began	
for at least half an hour	since last summer	
for my entire life	since July 1st	
For can be used with many verb tenses: •	I have lived here for two years. •	I lived there for two years. •	I will live there for two years.	Since is usually used with perfect tenses: •	I have lived here since 1999. •	I have been living here since 1999. β I had lived there since I was born.	
Extra Information for the Teacher
The distinction between since and for is usually mentioned in high-beginner or lower-
intermediate books.
Hot Seat Question 12: Noun Clauses as Embedded Questions
..	........
__________________________________
_______
Can you tell me where does Karen live? My roommate told me that this sentence is
wrong because I'm supposed to ask, Can you tell me where Karen lives1 I thought
that I needed to use do/does/did with questions.
...
Yoiir Answer
Your roommate is correct. Your sentence has two clauses. The independent clause
is Can you tell me (something) โ This sentence would usually have a simple noun
as the direct object: Can you tell me Karen's addressใ In your example, the direct
object is actually a noun clause that asks for information. The normal word order
in a noun clause is QUESTION WORD + SUBJ + VERB. However, the word order
is NOT like that in a question, so we do not use doI does 1/did as auxiliary verbs here.
Typical ELL Error	Correct Sentence
*The report didn't say where did he go.	The report didn't say where he went.
* I don't know what time is it.	I don't know what time it is.
278
4: Being on the Hot Seal
Whether the sentence is a statement or a question does not matter:
Statement: You know where lonathan works.
Question: Do you know where lonathan works?
Extra Information for the Teacher
Noun clauses as embedded questions are usually addressed at the upper-intermediate
level. Most ELLs have never noticed this grammatical pattern, and first language inter-
ference can be a problem here, too.
Hot Seat Question 13: another, other, and others
1 have a hard time with the word other. Other means "one more," so can 1 say, I
need other book now? Other looks singular, but my teacher said you can use it with
plural nouns like other books. What about others11 thought others is the plural form
of other. Others looks plural, so why can't 1 say others booksใ when do I use other
and when do 1 use others?
Your Answer
To answer this question, we need to look at not just two words but rather three
words: another, other, and others.
Yes, you are correct in that the meaning of another, other, and others is "addi-
tional." All three words have the same basic meaning, but they do not have the
same grammar.
If you want to talk about one thing, you must use another. Your sentence I
need other book is not correct. Book is a singular count noun, and there is a rule in
English that a singular count noun must have the articles a, an, or the in front of
it. You can also put another singular marker word like this or that. You can also use
possessive adjectives such as my or her, but you cannot have the word other all by
itself.
If you want to check your sentence, take out the word other and what do you
have: I need book. I think you can see that this is not good English, right? You have
to say I need a book. Now, if you take this new sentence I need, a book and put in the
word other, you get I need other book, which we know is not right because we need
the article a. However, if we add a, look what we get: I need a other book. Do you
see the problem? Yes, other begins with a vowel, so we need an, not a, so now we
have I need an other book. This used to be correct, but over time, English has come
to write an + other in one word: another. Your correct sentence should be: 1 need
another book.
Your second question is about other and others. Others is always a plural pro-
noun, and remember that you cannot use two plural words together. This means
that you cannot say I need others books but rather 1 need other books. The word others
cannot be an adjective because adjectives in English are never plural. The word
others is only a pronoun. If you give your classmate some books and ask that per-
son, Okay, how are those books? Are those enough or do you need some others? then
Questions 12-14
279
your classmate might answer, I don't think these are enough, so please give me some
others if you can.
another, other, others
Singular	Plural
A.	Please give me another. B.	Please give me another book.	E. Please give me some others. E Please give me some other books.
c. NO: * Please give me other. D. NO: * Please give me other book. Reason: You need an article or similar word.	G. NO: * Please give me some others books. Reason: You can't use two plurals together.
Extra Information for the Teacher	y
All ELLs at all levels have persistent problems with the forms of other. The patterns of
usage for the other and the others are similar to those presented here for other and others.
As stated, adjectives in English are never plural. However, demonstrative adjectives
have both singular forms {this, that) and plural forms {these, those).
Hot Seat Question 14: good versus well
I feel good or 1 feel well. Which one should I say when everyone asks me, How are
you doing?
Your Answer
Both are grammatically correct. When talking about your health, you can use
both. Some people consider I feel well to sound a little more formal than I feel good,
but both are correct.
When talking about your demeanor or your spirits, you should use only I feel
good. If you just found out that you made 100 on your grammar test, you would
answer I feel good. If you are playing a tennis match today and someone wants to
know about your mental or emotional condition before this important match,
you would also answer I feel good, which means I feel good about my chances of play-
ing well today and maybe even winning today.
Extra Information for the Teacher
This question was probably asked by an intermediate ELL. When asked How are you
doing1 the typical response is Fine. This quick question and answer is a polite exchange
that acknowledges the other person. It opens the door to further communication if
either person appears to want to pursue it. It is not usually a question about the per-
son's health. If something is wrong, the person is free to comment on this, but in gen-
eral, speakers do not expect an explanation of what ails the person.
280
4: Being on the Hot Seat
Hot Seat Question 15: gonna (Informal and formal Language)
Is gonna OK? If so, when can I use ii?
Your Answer
Here is the short answer: in writing, no; in speaking, sometimes. In writing, there
are certain contractions that are permitted. You can write I've for 1 have or she'd for
she had or she would, but contractions are not common in academic writing. If you
are writing an essay for a class or filling out an application for a job, then no, you
should definitely not use any contractions at all. However, in emails, letters, notes,
and fiction, it is acceptable to write contractions.
Gonna is a reduction for going to that naturally occurs in spoken English. The
more relaxed and informal the setting or the better you know the person that you
are speaking to, the more likely a native speaker is to use a reduced form such as
gonna. However, gonna is never acceptable in formal writing. If you have seen
gonna written somewhere, you probably saw it in some song lyrics. Song lyrics are
written language, but the language in a song is trying to sound like spoken lan-
guage, so the songwriter tries to write on paper the way the words should sound
when you sing (or say) them. To make the words match the beat of the song, the
songwriter often writes in "speech language."
In English, we use going to for two different reasons, but going to can be
reduced to gonna in only one of these two cases. Read these ten sentences with
going to and decide which ones you think gonna is possible for.
1.	I am going to love you forever.
2.	Careful! The baby isgoing to fall off the chair.
3.	Tomorrow I am going to the bank.
4.	Nobody really knew when the rain was going to stop.
5.	When I get home tonight, I am going to watch that movie on TV.
6.	Many people are going to Florida for spring break.
7.	The president and his wife are going to travel to China.
8.	I hope the exam is not going to be hard.
9.	If you are going to the store, can you buy some butter for me?
10.	Kelly was going to go to Orlando, but her plans changed.
After looking through these examples, you should have said that gonna is possible
for all of these except Numbers 3, 6, and 9. We can say gonna only when a verb follows
going to and never when a place follows. When native speakers hear gonna, they know
that a verb will come next.
Extra Information for the Teacher
This question is commonly asked by ELLs at all proficiency levels. They hear gonna all
the time, and they want to know about it. Many ELLs, however, do not realize that be
Questions 15-16 -ะ:ะ- 281
going to can be followed by two different grammar patterns, namely an action or a
place, and when trying to sound more advanced, they say, * "I'm gonna the bank" or
* "we're gonna New York tomorrow." In addition, many ELLs initially make the mis-
take of saying gonna followed by to, so instead of saying, "I'm gonna eat dinner now,"
they say, *'Tm gonna to eat dinner now."
Only a high-intermediate or advanced proficiency ELL should really put forth
much effort in trying to use gonna. Beginning and lower-intermediate ELLs would ben-
efit more if they spent their study time learning new vocabulary or practicing fluency.
Hot Seat Question 16: Present Perfect Tense
Why do people ask me, Have you ever eaten sushi? with present perfect tense (have	Key J	Key J	.Key
eaten) when they are asking about the past? Why do you use a tense named present	" 31
to talk about the past? If you mean present time, then the person has to answer no	J	J	'
about the sushi because I can see that he's not eating sushi now, and if he is eating	J	I	'
sushi now, I think it would be stupid to ask someone if they are eating sushi.'Do	J	J	J
you see my point?
Your Answer
Yes, I see your point. Your question is a very good one. We call this verb tense
present perfect, but that is because present perfect is used to describe situations
that connect the past and the present. Most languages do not have one verb tense
that is used like present perfect in English. The reality is that present perfect is
probably the single most difficult verb tense in English because this one verb tense
can be used for at least three different times. In fact, it can be used for the past and
for the present, which is what makes it so,difficult for ELLs to grasp.
Verb tenses have one or two uses, and those uses are usually very closely con-
nected to the time of the action. Simple past tense, for example, is for the past,
----and simpleffutureWensemsWoY^thwfiitureDPresênL^effêiT^iWdfffêfentWConsider
these three common usages:
Present Perfect	
Meaning	Example
1. an action that began in the past but still continues now (continuing past)	I have lived here since 2003.
2. an action that took place in the past but the time is not mentioned (indefinite past)	I have lived in three foreign countries.
3. an action that took place in the past (the time is not mentioned) that is relevant to the current situation (past-present connection)	Bob: I'm selling my house and moving to an apartment. It's expensive to maintain a house. Tim: Well, I have lived in an apart- ment, and 1 think you're right. Houses are expensive to keep up.
282
4: Being on the Hot Seat
Extra Information for the Teacher
This question probably came from an intermediate ELL. Present perfect is one of the
most difficult things in English grammar. Most languages do not have a tense that
works like present perfect in English. For example, Spanish has a tense that looks like
present perfect, but it can be used with a definite past time marker that is not possible
in English: Ha llovido fiierte anoche - * ft has rained hard last night. French, too, has a
tense that looks like our present perfect, but there is no simple past tense in French, so
this tense doubles up as our simple past and present perfect: Il ท phi = 11 has rained or
it rained. Since present perfect has different usages in English, many languages use dif-
ferent verb tenses or different expressions for each of these different usages, resulting
in very little overlap of real usage for what would appear to be similar verb tenses. In
the most common English usage of present perfect, which is a past action that contin-
ues, as in 1 have worked here for five years, many languages—unlike English—use some
type of present tense.
The bottom line: Any ELL who can use these three kinds of present perfect with
ease is probably reaching advanced proficiency in English. (See pp. 104-5 and 119-24
for more information about present perfect.) When 1 have to do a quick interview to
check a new ELL's general proficiency, 1 try to ask questions that would normally elicit
answers in the present perfect tense.
Hot Seat Question 17: Possessive Forms
Which is correct: boys' or boy's?
Your Answer
Both are correct, depending on the situation where it is used, but the meaning is
very different. The first one, boys', means that something belongs to several boys.
The second one, boy's, means that something belongs to one boy. Part of the con-
fusion of these two items comes from the fact that both are pronounced exactly
the same way.
An easy trick to figure this out is to omit the apostrophe and anything to the
right. The remaining word should tell you who the owner is. Look at these
examples:
Shortcut for the Possessive in English		
Possessive Word	Omit the Apostrophe and Anything to the Right	JReal Owner
the student's books	— 'ร	the student
the students' books	—	the students
the Smiths' books	—	the Smiths
Questions 16-18
283
If two children have a kitten, the correct possessive is the children's kitten. Let's
suppose you are confused about the rule for possessive and don't know if the cor-
rect form is children's or childrens'. Look what happens if we test this here:
two children's	— 'ร	'ร two children NOTE: Yes, children is a word in English.
two childrens'	—	X two childrens NOTE: No, childrens is not a word in English.
Possessive in English is a little difficult, but with practice, you can get it right.
You add 'ร to a word to make its possessive form. If the word already ends in -s,
add just the apostrophe. If it is a proper noun—a person's name—it is possible to
add either just apostrophe or 'ร: Bess' or Bess's; however, the word is pronounced
exactly the same—two syllables /bes az/. If you want to check to see if your form
is written correctly, remember to use the technique that we just considered.
Extra Information for the Teacher
ELLs of all proficiency levels need to use possessive forms, so this type of question
could be from any proficiency level. Be prepared to tailor your answer, giving only the
basics to beginners but more details to higher-proficiency levels.
Hot Seat Question! 8: Comparison of Adjectives
Plow do I know when to add -er for comparison and when to use the word moreใ
What's the secret trick?
Your Answer
We use the comparative forms (-er or more) to compare two things. There is no
secret trick, but there is a relatively easy rule. There are a few exceptions, but in
general, add -er for one-syllable adjectives (tall -> taller) and for two-syllable
284
4: Being กท the Hol Seal
adjectives that end เท -y. (lazy -> lazier). All others use more before: expensive ->
more expensive. The same rule applies for adding the before the adjective and -est
after or using the words the most before the adjective.
One Syllable	Two Syllable, End in -γ	Others
tall—	lazy—	modern—
taller—	lazier—	more modern—
the tallest	the laziest	the most modern
new—	heavy—	serious—
newer—	heavier—	more serious—
the newest	the heaviest	the most serious
wide—	busy—	expensive—
wider—	busier—	more expensive—
the widest	the busiest	the most expensive—
fast—	cozy—	rapid—
faster—	cozier—	more rapid—
the fastest	the coziest	the most rapid
Some common irregular forms are good -> better -> the best and bad ->
worse -> the worst. In addition, some adjectives in everyday usage may vary: com-
mon, quiet, simple. Therefore, you will hear simpler and more simple, the quietest and
the most quiet.
Extra Information for the Teacher
This question was probably asked'by an intermediate ELL. For whether or not to dou-
ble the final consonant: hot -> hotter (not hater) and cold colder (not coldder), see
________	Hot Seat Question 3. ______________________________________________
Hot Seat Question 19: do versus make
What is the difference between do and make? Can I use one for the other?
Your Answer
You use do or make depending on the other words that they are used with. For
example, we do the dishes, but we make the bed. Why? There is no special reason;
these are idiomatic usages.
Questions 18-19
285
In general, we use do with different kinds of work. We say do a job, do work,
and do homework. In general, we use make to indicate creating or producing some-
thing new.
The problem is that English has many special expressions with do or make.
These expressions are idiomatic and must therefore be memorized. There is no
other solution. Here are some common expressions using do and make:
Special Expressions with Do		Special Expressions with Make	
How are you doing? What do you do? How do you do? do work do the laundry do homework do something over do a favor do a job	do business do badly do well do housework do the ironing do the dishes do an exercise do exercise do an assignment	make the bed make dinner make money make a living make a mistake make a promise make a difference make an agreement make a decision make a suggestion make an excuse	make food make coffee make a plan make arrangements make a call make noise y make an effort ' make a speech ■ make sense make progress make up your mind
Extra Information for the Teacher
The words do and make perplex all proficiency levels of ELLs. For beginners, use com-
mon examples such as do homework and make a sandwich. More proficient ELLs can
tackle do business and make sense. Longer lists of examples of do and make can be
found in almost any grammar book for ELLs or even on the Internet, but long lists can
_bemverwhelmingAoJ?,LLs. When you go over a list with ELLs, a good technique is to
ask students to go through the list to see how many of the items they already know.
This helps them see that the list is not all new information, and this reduces learner
anxiety.
Another useful teaching technique is to teach ELLs that a good strategy is for them
to look at the list of items and select the ten items that they think they will need to use
in their English. In this list, for example, a person who is studying business or who
will use English for business purposes might need expressions such as make a plan, do
business, make progress, and make an agreement.
Many ELLs confuse do and make because many languages have only one word that
means do or make. For example, Spanish has only hacer, and French has only fam.
286
4: Being on the Hot Seal
HotSeat	Word Order
Which of these two sentences is correct? 1 like very much tennis or / like tennis very
much. Is there any difference in meaning between these two sentences?
Your Answer
Only the second sentence is correct: I like tennis very much. In this sentence, very
much is an adverb phrase. It tells how much you like tennis.
Sentences in English follow a subject-verb-object (S-V-O) order. It is not com-
mon to put an adverb between the verb and the object. In this sentence, the sub-
ject is I, the verb is like, and the object is tennis. It is not possible to put an adverb
between the verb like and the object tennis.
The adverb well is also difficult for some students. Which do you think is cor-
rect? She sang well the song or she sang the song well.
In some languages, both of these word orders are possible, but in English,
only the second sentence is possible. The word well is an adverb, and we cannot
place an adverb between the verb sang and the object the song. Therefore, the cor-
rect sentence is She sang the song well.
Extra Information for the Teacher
A word order question is usually a high-beginner to low-intermediate issue. Word
order errors usually reflect direct translations from the ELLs' native languages. Some
languages allow much more freedom with word order than English does. For the most
part, English sticks to a word order of S-V-O. If there is an adverb, it usually comes
after the object.
In French, adverbs can come between the verb and the object, so a French-
speaking ELL might write *1 like well the coffee. In Spanish, verbs can come before sub-
jects at times, so a Spanish-speaking ELL may write ISuddenly^enteredAn-the-room-w
stranger. In Japanese, sentences with adverbs of degree follow a S-O-ADV-V word order
so a beginning Japanese ELL might write * American people Japanese language very flu-
ently don't speak.
Specific Techniques
for Teaching ELL Grammar
Armed with adequate knowledge about ELL grammar as well as a mindset toward teach-
ing grammar, you are ready to prepare your lesson and teach your class. However, there
is always a gap between what any book says about teaching and what actually happens
in the classroom. This gap is not surprising given that in a typical class of 20 ELLs, there
are 21 human beings (including the teacher) who bring to the learning table 21 different
sets of life experiences, world and subject knowledge, and teaching and learning ability.
With this interactive chemistry, it is almost impossible to plan a lesson and carry
it out to the letter. Unexpected things not only can but will happen. For instance,
imagine that you have planned your first grammar activity on count nouns. For your
lesson, students need their books and their homework, but some students may not
have their books, and some may not have completed their homework. You have also
planned a second short Internet activity, but when you attempt to access the website in
class, it is not working for some reason.
These problems involve human beings and technology, but grammar problems
can also happen. Imagine that you have planned a lesson on the past tense of regular
verbs and come to class fully prepared with great visuals, examples, and worksheets to
practice the form of this tense in affirmative (wanted), negative (did not want), and
interrogative (did you want?) forms. However, in the middle of your great teaching
presentation, a student asks you about the pronunciation of the -ed in wanted, missed,
and robbed. "I write -ed for these three words, so why is the pronunciation different?"
Unmistakably, this Hot Seat Question is a teachable moment, but you have no idea
about this pronunciation difference. It was not part of your plan to teach this today.
In all of these cases, you will learn to improvise-—as all experienced teachers have.
There is no book that can prepare you 100 percent for the real world of teaching
287
288 ·:ะ::· 5: Specific Techniques
grammar. Over the years, many things have happened in my classes that 1 could not
have predicted, but each of these had the potential to become a learning event for
both the students and me. for teachers who want to improve their grammar classes,
there are two things that I can wholeheartedly recommend: a solid base of grammar
knowledge and an extensive repertoire of techniques for teaching grammar.
My first suggestion deals with ELL grammar knowledge. You need to learn as
much about ELL grammar as possible. The information in Chapter 3 and the blot Seat
Questions in Chapter 4 will help you tremendously. Teachers often ask me how 1
learned so much about ELL grammar. The answer is experience. It has taken me many
years to reach a point where I not only know most of the students' grammar ques-
tions, but 1 can also pretty much predict what the questions will be when an ELL
opens his or her mouth to pose the question.
My second suggestion has to do with teaching techniques. As teachers, we have
our own individual repertoires of teaching tidbits, techniques, games, and activities
that we have developed over time. To increase our repertoires, teachers can read activ-
ity books and attend teacher conferences and presentations where practical activities
are shared. In this final chapter, 1 offer 25 different techniques for presenting, explain-
ing, practicing, and assessing grammar that I have learned over the years as a language
student and a language teacher.
Teaching Technique 1
You don't need a grammar book to start your lesson.
Many teachers, especially novice teachers, begin lessons with, "Please open your books
to page . . . . " The textbook is a tqpl, not your lesson plan. It is not necessary to begin
every lesson with the book. There are other more interesting and more engaging ways
to start your grammar lesson.
----W-hy-not-open-the-lesson-with-a-sentence-and-ask-studentsrto-anaiyzem-grammctr
point? In other words, start the lesson with a question, not with an answer (or expla-
nation). One effective approach is to set up a comparison between two grammar
options. With articles, it could be a/an versus the, as in this example, which is followed
by three teaching options:
Thomas Jefferson was an important person in น.ร. history. He was the third president.
Option 1: Write these sentences on the board with the words under-
lined and ask "Why do we use an here but the here?" Seek
ล group explanation.
Option 2: Write the sentences on the board but leave two blanks.
Ask students to put an and the in the blanks. Explain that
their choices are an and an, an and the, the and an, or the
and the. Seek a group explanation.
Option 3: Write an and the on the board. Then ask if anyone can
come up with a sentence that has both an and the in it.
Next Step: Ask the class to come up with more examples. เท content
classes, ask students to find examples of the grammar point in their
Techniques 1-2
289
textbooks. In each case, have ELLs talk about why the writer used an
or the in a particular place in a sentence.
This same teaching technique contrasting two (or more) options can work with
most ELL grammar points. Two other examples include many/much and verb tenses:
many/much: Sue has many great ideas for the project, but she
doesn't have much time to do them.
verb tenses: My cat is losing her hair. Every June she loses a lot of it.
Teaching Technique 2
In example sentences, use content that is relevant
and meaningful to your students.
Your students may pay more attention if the content of your teaching examples is
interesting and meaningful to them. If you are teaching adults who want to get a job,'
then your examples might talk about working in an office or applying for a job. If you
teach in a university-prep program, your sentences should use topics relevant to being
a college student. If your students are more interested in pop culture, use examples
that are related to that topic. Teachers should always remember their students' primary
reasons for studying English.
In Japan, I once taught English conversation to a group of very talented junior ten-
nis players. At first, I tried to use the traditional kinds of materials for my classes with
them, but they tuned me out. These tennis players were not interested in sentences
about jobs, school, or international politics. They were, however, extremely interested
in tennis. I figured out that they were interesteirn learning more information about
their favorite tennis players, so I went out of my way to use sentences about tennis and
tennis players when I was trying to emphasize a particular grammar point.
Here are three examples of how students' interests and ultimate goals in learning
English can influence the content of class material, including example sentences:
Students' Interest or Goal	Example Sentences for is/are
Tennis	1.	Rafael Nadal is a Wimbledon champion. 2.	The Williams sisters are from the United States. 3.	Maria Sharapova is a great player. 4.	Roger Federer is in England now.
Getting a job	1.	The night shift is from 11 PM to 7 AM. 2.	The applications are available online. 3.	The salary is about $15 an hour. 4.	The benefits are good at that company.
In a classroom	1.	Our grammar class is from 7 to 7:45 PM. 2.	The teacher for this class is Mrs. Jenkins. 3.	The students in our class are from six countries. 4.	Four students in our class are from Korea.
290
5: Specific Techniques
Teaching Technique 3
Find a real task that is suitable for low-proficiency adult ELLs.
If you are teaching adults, it is essential to remember that adults are not children. They
do not want to be treated as children, and we need tasks that are not childish, For
teachers of low-proficiency ELLs, it can be challenging to find tasks that actually prac-
tice the ELL grammar point at hand and are appropriate for adult learners.
An example of such a quandary is how to practice a and an. of course the teacher
can do drills where the teacher says a noun and students repeat the noun with a or an
(e.g., "cat." "A cat." "book." "A book."), but even low-proficiency students need to go
beyond this type of drill. Students need to come up with the word on their own, but it
should be for a real communicative purpose.
One activity is to ask students to write the letters of the alphabet along the side of
their paper, with one letter for every line. Give students no more than ten minutes to
write anything that they can see at that time (in class) that begins with that letter.
Answers can have only a noun or an adjective that starts with that letter followed by
any noun that they see (that can begin with any letter). Thus, for the letter c, they can
say "a cat" or "a cute baby"—provided that both of these are visible at the time. True
beginners should work only with nouns, but slightly more proficient students can be
challenged by working with not only nouns but also adjective + noun combinations.
Students then take turns saying their answers. When they say their answers, such
as I see a book, everyone else should be listening for the use of a or an since that is the
ELL grammar point being practiced. See Key 7.
Teaching Technique 4
Use a rapid language drill for practice, assessment, or both.
As a teacher, you know that there is a step (or series of steps) between seeing the form
of a new grammar point and being able to actively produce this structure at the right
time. One of the early missing steps is just being able to say (or write) the structure.
ELLs need a chance to practice using this structure in a safe environment—with the
teacher—and teachers can get some feedback as to whether ELLs understand the gram-
mar of the new structure.
A very efficient practice technique is to use a language drill, especially with pairs
or small groups of language points that ELLs confuse. For example, many ELLs confuse
the use of since and for, so some rapid, guided practice can be very helpful. In this drill,
the teacher will say a time word or phrase such as yesterday or six weeks, and students
(either individually and/or chorally) should say the whole phrase using either since or
for. (Teachers should monitor choral response as carefully as possible because individ-
ual student problems may be less obvious.)
Techniques 3-4
291
A drill is a good technique here because (1) the distinction in English is relatively
clear, (2) this grammar point does not require elaborate or multi-sentence examples,
and (3) ELLs need to encounter this structure many times.
In this drill, the teacher should explain that he (or she) will say a time word or
phrase. Students should then say either since or for followed by the teacher's utterance.
In other words, saying just for or only since is not acceptable. The whole idea of a drill
is to become accustomed to the combination of for with a duration and since with a
name of a time. Requiring this target chunk of language in a rapid-fire manner that
simulates ELLs' need to produce these utterances quickly in the real world is what dif-
ferentiates a good drill from a traditional paper assessment.
After each correct student response, the teacher should repeat the correct response.
The teacher's goal is to maintain a brisk pace that keeps students motivated but is still
within their reach.
Teacher: yesterday
Class: since yesterday	J
Teacher: since yesterday	.
Teacher: six weeks
Class: for six weeks
Teacher: for six weeks
Alternatively, the teacher may call on (or gesture to) individual students or divide
a larger class into smaller groups. If no response is given, which frequently happens
early in the drill, pause and then after a few extra seconds, ask another student. Then
go back to the original student. Say the correct answer. Then repeat the prompt and
coax students to say the correct phrase this time.
Teacher: Monday . . . Susan
Susan:___(silence)----------------------------------------------------------------
Teacher: Martha
Martha: since Monday
Class: Susan
Susan: since Monday
Teacher: Good . . . three days . . . Jose
Jose:	for three days
Doing a drill well requires a great deal of skill. For example, a drill on a topic such
as for versus since should probably last between 30 and 60 seconds. To accomplish
this, the teacher needs to be able to produce a series of time phrases such as yesterday
and six weeks, one after the other. If the teacher hesitates too much, the activity loses its
momentum and can very quickly become monotonous.
A drill only works if students are engaged. "Drills are boring" was a common com-
plaint about the audio-lingual method (ALM) used in language learning a few decades
ago, but the problem with ALM was not necessarily the drill but rather that ALM used
292 -ะ:ะ5: Specific Techniques
only one technique for the entire class period. Regardless of the teaching method, 1
can't imagine any class being interesting when it consists of one activity that is carried
out day after day. Drills should be used judiciously, and they should be used fre-
quently but in small spurts.
For practice, try to think of a language point studied in this book and come up
with a simple drill. Remember that depending on the grammar point, you may need
to come up with as many as 20 items in a drill that lasts 30 to 60 seconds. Doing a
"live" drill well in class requires skill on the teacher's part, and it is definitely a skill
that can be practiced and perfected. Some teachers prefer to plan their drills by mak-
ing a list of 15-20 drill items on a small notecard. Here is an example of such a crib
sheet:
1.	yesterday	6. last year
2.	six weeks	7. September
3.	Monday	8. last September
4.	three days	9.1999
5.	a long time	10. a minute
Teaching Technique 5
Limit grammar terminology as much as possible.
I remember visiting a class once where a teacher insisted on making students identify
the particles in phrasal verbs (see Key 11). He had them write the word particle by the
particles. I could not see any useful purpose in having the students use the term parti-
cle. I wonder how those students liked having to use this grammar label.
Imagine that you have given up one year of your life to enroll in a Bulgarian
intensive language program in Sofia, Bulgaria. You have left your family in your
country, and you are surrounded by signs in a foreign alphabet that you cannot deci-
pher. You need a great deal of vocabulary to be able to order food in a restaurant or
open a bank account. You need language that can help you function in your foreign
language setting.
In your Bulgarian class, however, your teacher makes you learn words such as sub-
ject, predicate, and particle in Bulgarian. How will these words serve your real-world
language needs?
ไ'๖ be certain, we do need some ทาeta-language to discuss grammar. We need
words such as noun and verb fairly early on in the process, but how much more do
your students need? No one knows your students better than you do, so you are the
best person to answer this question. I would like to recommend, however, erring on
the side of using less grammar terminology whenever possible, and for ELLs in
primarily conversation courses, almost no grammar terminology.
Techniques 4-6
293
Teaching Technique 6
Help students sort out and then consolidate
new grammar information.
Students need help consolidating new grammar information. Many times students are
not confused until there are two language options competing for the same slot in their
brain. For instance, students can use simple present very well until they run into pres-
ent progressive. Now there are two "present" forms that are competing for the same
grammatical slot. ELLs begin mixing up I do and I am doing. Many ELLs begin to pro-
duce hybrid forms such as *1 am do.
Students need your help through practice to sort out which is which. Consider
these two tasks:
Task 1. Verb Tense Discrimination: Simple Present, Simple Past, Present
Progressive, Future. Underline the correct form of the verb.
1.	The boy (is going to play, is playing, played, plays) tennis last week.
2.	Mark and Joe (are going to study, are studying, studied, study) vocabulary next week.
3.	We (are going to be, are being, were, are) on the plane before you were.
Task 2. Verb Tense Discrimination: Simple Present, Simple Past, Present	
Progressive,	Future. Write the correct form of the verb on the line.
verb: study	
1. She			grammar now.
2. They			vocabulary last night.
3. He always			spelling.
4. I			grammar tomorrow.
verb: do	
5. You			the homework last night.
6. I			the exercises every day.
7. We			Lesson 5 right now.
ร. She			the questions tomorrow.
Both of these exercises require students to discriminate among several seemingly
logical answer options for the target grammar point, namely verb tenses. In Task 1,
ELLs must choose the correct answer among four options. In Task 2, ELLs must come
up with the correct verb tense on their own. Task 1 requires passive recognition, but
Task 2 requires active production. Both types of exercises are useful in helping ELLs
refine their ability to use grammar correctly. As a teacher, you should recognize that
Task 2 requires more English proficiency than Task 1 does.
294
5: Specific Techniques
Teaching Technique 7
For any grammar point, consider potential
first language interference.
Hirst language interference causes many but not all ELL grammatical errors. Language
errors can come from three sources:
1.	Hirst language (LI) interference. Spanish speakers say */ have hungry because
Spanish uses have in lieu of be in certain expressions that use be + adjective in
English.
2.	Universal problems. All ELLs say *The accident was happen/ed even though they
do not say was happened in their own language, and almost all ELLs initially
negate with no as in *1 no like tea or *1 am no like tea even though they may not
negate that way in their Lis.
3.	Target language (L2) interference—yes, interference from English itself. Very
early in their English studies, ELLs learn What time is it7, and Where does Mark
live7 so well that they also produce *1 don't know what lime is it and * Could you
tell me where does Mark live7
No one expects ELL teachers to know all their ELLs' first languages, but the more
foreign languages you know and the more that you know about your students' lan-
guages in particular, the better you will be able to understand and predict your stu-
dents' English errors. This in turn allows you to evaluate student learning and plan
your teaching more effectively because you can differentiate between an error that rep-
resents LI interference and one that shows a lack of learning or mastery.
In an ESL setting, your classroom will be multilingual. Based on information pro-
vided by the National Clearinghouse for English Language Acquisition and Language
Tnstruetion-P-rograms-(2O02-),-Florida-D&panment-o£-Education-42QO.7),^ancLCalifornia
Department of Education (2008), the foreign languages spoken by many ELLs in the
United States are (in descending order): Spanish, Vietnamese, Hmong, Chinese, Korean,
Haitian French Creole, Arabic, Russian, Tagalog, Portuguese, and Japanese. In contrast, in
an EFL setting, all of your students will most likely speak the same native language. In
either setting, knowledge of your students' LI in relation to English impacts your ability
to teach ELL grammar.
How can you learn what you need to know about your students' LI to spot inter-
ference? One obvious way is to enroll in a foreign language class. Not only will you
learn about the foreign language, you will also experience what it is like to be a lan-
guage student—to be in your students' shoes—and you will have an opportunity to
evaluate how you perceive different teaching techniques used by your language
teacher. This can be quite enlightening.
Since enrolling in a class is not a viable option for everyone, ล second method to
gain the LI knowledge that you need is to pay close attention to the notes about the
potential interference for various Lis that can be found at the end of every ELL gram-
Techniques 7-9
295
mar point covered in Chapter 3. For novice ELL teachers, there is much to learn, but
the more you deal with ELLs, the more you will begin to recognize the specific types of
grammatical errors that speakers of Spanish, Chinese, Arabic, or another foreign lan-
guages make.
Teaching Technique 8
Simple exercises may not be so simple.
Don't assume that an exercise is "simple" or does not activate learners' minds because
it appears shallow. For instance, simple error identification in the form of two answer
options with only one being correct requires students to select the correct form and at
the same time begin to distance themselves from the error in the other option. This
task is very good if the errors are actual errors that your ELLs might make. The type of
error may be influenced by ELLs' first languages and their English proficiency levels.
The following task, which requires very little teacher preparation time, is a short?
example of a simple but successful comparative and superlative forms exercise:
Directions: Put a check mark (a/) to indicate which of these two forms is possible.			
	A. successfuller 	B. more successful		A. the most bad 	B. the worst		A. the slowliest 	B. the most slowly		A. more serious 	B. seriouser
Teaching Technique 9
Use the board to help ELLs visualize a pattern.
When students can see the grammar pattern, they are more likely to remember the pat-
tern. To illustrate this, let's look at the problematic grammar issue of when to double
the final consonant before adding -ing or -ed.
The rule is that you double the last consonant if it is a one-syllable word ending
in C-V-C (consonant-vowel-consonant). Thus, we double the Í in hit to hitting but not
in act to *actting.
As this rule is illustrated on the board, a good teacher would try to make sure that
the examples are aligned so that at the end you can clearly see three columns and then
write C-V-C above.
For example, notice how the material on the board progresses as you add exam-
ples, which you are eliciting from the students rather than your own mental word
bank. Teach actively: Always keep your students involved in whatever you are doing at
the board.
296
5: Specific Techniques
Without actually telling anyone the rule first, ask the students to say verbs and
then write them correctly with either one or doubled consonants:
When your board has eight to ten examples, there is probably enough information to
help "prove" the generalization.
At this point,-ask students if--anyone-can-figmeOutwhen you double the consonant
and when you do not. Respond positively to all answers. Say something like, "No,
that's not exactly right" to wrong guesses, whether someone says the actual rule or
not, draw vertical lines to help students figure out the rule.
	
• .:	CJU t|t ing	e a tj ing	\
;	g r abb i ท g	ท e e d i ท g ;	!
J	■บ·: 2	putting	, r e á c h h ท g
b r a gig i n g	1 o ๐ k| i ท g
Point out that the base form of the verbs on the left end in C-V-C while those on the
right do not. Ask students to come up with three more verbs for both columns.
Techniques 9-11
297
Teaching Technique 10
Use songs to practice ELL grammar.
Just about everyone loves music. Using songs from time to time in class can be not
only fun but very educational. Songs tend to repeat certain phrases or lines, so in
essence, a song is really a language drill set to music. Be sure to give your students a
copy of the lyrics (but be careful to not violate copyright law) so that they can both
hear and see the grammar point. Instead of telling students the grammar point that
you are emphasizing, ask the students to see if they recognize any grammar points that
you have studied. It is imperative that you choose songs that have lyrics that your stu-
dents can understand fairly well and that are worth learning. One of the worst experi-
ences for an ELL is to work hard to learn some new vocabulary only to find out that it
is rarely used outside of the classroom.
Here are four examples of songs connected with particular grammar points:	J
Song and Artist	Grammar Point
"El Condor Pasa" (Simon and Garfunkel)	verbs and modals in if sentences
"Tom's Diner" (Suzanne Vega)	present progressive tense
"In the Ghetto" (Elvis Presley)	simple present tense, 3rd person -s
"We've Only Just Begun" (Carpenters)	present perfect tense; infinitives and gerunds
Teaching Technique 11
Choose grammar materials for false beginners carefully.
Many of the students that I taught in Japan who placed into our Level 1 classes had
studied English for many years. To be certain, they knew some English words, and
some had even memorized complicated grammar points such as if clauses, yet these
students could not say very much in English. Such ELLs are referred to as false begin-
ners because they are not really beginners even though their lack of oral fluency might
make a teacher mistakenly misjudge their actual level. In a way, false beginners are try-
ing to retrieve previously studied material, so you can teach them material beyond
what you would with true beginners.
Let's imagine a lesson about is with true beginners and false beginners. We know
that is can be followed by many different structures, including a noun (is a doctor), an
298
5: Specific Techniques
adjective (is good), a present participle (is eating), a past participle (is eaten), a preposi-
tional phrase (is in the room).
With true beginners, we should focus on only one of these categories first; in other
words, we should not include noun examples and prepositional phrase examples
because these are two different grammatical patterns.
With false beginners, however, the situation might be different if you believe that
your ELLs can handle this material, for many false beginners, it may be a matter more
of re-awakening their previous knowledge or shoring up their courage to use then-
prior English knowledge. In this case, you can be less concerned about mixing up sub-
points of the primary grammar point.
Compare these two sets of examples for true beginners and false beginners. Note
that the topic of tennis is the same for both groups.
TOPIC: Famous Tennis Players
True Beginners
1.	Rafael Nadal is from Spain.
2.	Serena Williams is from the น.ร.
3.	Maria Sharapova is from Russia.
4.	Roger Federer is from Switzerland.
Comments:
1.	One pattern: SUBJ + is + from +
country
2.	A novice teacher might have mistak-
enly used nationalities instead of
country names, but nationalities are
irregular in English and form a sepa-
rate vocabulary lesson. Many people
can relate to learningjKemamejofa-.
country and may in fact already
know it, but nationalities are much
more difficult. Consider how the
four countries in our examples
change irregularly to Spanish, Ameri-
can, Russian, and Swiss, which would
add a new grammar point if includ-
ed in the example sentences.
3.	Great content for these students, all
of whom are serious tennis players.
False Beginners
1.	Rafael Nadal is from Spain.
2.	Serena Williams is 27 years old.
3.	Maria Sharapova is a great player.
4.	Roger Federer is in England now.
Comments:
1.	These examples would not be
good for true beginners because
they are four different patterns that
express origin, age, occupation, and
location.
2.	False beginners can be pushed a lit-
tle, and such prodding is good as
---^long-as-mater-ial-is-still-withinttheÍT“
grasp. While different aspects of be
are mixed together here (origin, age,
occupation, and location), note that
only present tense of be is on the
board. We have no past tense, no
conditionals, and no modals.
Techniques 11-13 ■ะ::- 299
Teaching Technique 12
Use pantomime when it matches the grammar point.
Teaching present progressive tense is relatively easy. The only problem is that some
verbs are rarely used in this tense, but our ELLs attempt to make sentences such as *1
am being sick this week.
How can we help our ELLs remember whether a verb can or cannot be in the pres-
ent progressive tense? The following verbs do not show action in English and are
therefore rarely used in progressive form: own, possess, like, love, need, want, seem, feel,
be, prefer, remember, forget, believe. What is able to be the "action" can vary from lan-
guage to language, so I do not recommend belaboring this concept much.
One way to deal with this is to play charades. It is very difficult to illustrate want
or prefer in gestures. Explain to students that verbs that they cannot physically demon-
strate well are probably not used in progressive tenses in English.	1รุ'
Teaching Technique 13
Multiple choice questions are useful in teaching,
not just testing, grammar.
In language learning, we often hear about comprehensible input, meaning that learners
need large amounts of understandable speaking and reading samples so that they can
assimilate grammar patterns and develop their English proficiency. All of this input from
you that our learners are hearing is real English usage, which can be referred to as
positive evidence. In other words, the utterances that our ELLs hear is possible English
(hence, positive). Equally valuable and, some might argue, even more valuable is
negative evidence. That is, our learners also need to know what is not possible.
Native speakers have had years and years of positive input. The combination of a
large amount of input, surely thousands of millions of words in both print and
speech, with at least 15 to 20 years of cognitive development time, allows native
speakers to learn our first language with relatively little negative evidence. For exam-
ple, you know that the words in this paragraph are in a correct order (or you would
not be able to understand these sentences!), but no one ever told you to say have had
instead of had have or thousands of millions instead of millions of thousands.
In stark contrast, most non-native learners have relatively little input (especially in
an EFL setting or even in an ESL setting where the students are not readily exposed to
English so much at home or outside of school). In addition, many ESL learners have a
very short time frame in which to reach a certain level of English proficiency.
For ELLs who have such tight time constraints along with very limited English
input, negative evidence is critical. Very young ELLs may not benefit from negative
feedback, but adult learners who are accustomed to being in a classroom setting have
300	5: Specific Techniques
the requisite study and classroom skills to ask questions about language points and
benefit from feedback about tvhat is and what is not possible in English.
One practice technique for doing this is multiple choice questions. Multiple
choice questions force learners to discriminate among various answer options and fig-
ure out which ones are not possible and why. Teachers should capitalize on the built-
in language discrimination in multiple choice questions, as in these examples:
1.	At the store, he bought some.______
(A) can of beans (B) loaf of bread (C) carrot (D) rice
2.	I'm a tennis fanatic!_I'm tired, 1 usually have enough
energy to play.
(A) Only if (B) Even if	(C) Since (D) Now that
The bottom line: You should be able to create a multiple choice question for any
language point. In fact, a good teaching technique is to write three or four multiple
choice questions on the board and then ask students to work on their answers individ-
ually and then in pairs or small groups. In addition to being a good source of negative
input and speaking practice, students will develop better test-taking as well as editing
skills.
..........................................
Teaching Technique 14
In leaching editing, state the number and type of errors
that students are to locate.
...............................................................................................
Editing is an important composition skill for ELLs to practice and master because it
helps them to function in English independently of the teacher or textbook. Some
______________
-------------ed-i-ti-ng-t-a-s-ks-as-k-steden-ts-to—^JocatemmdmepaiTttke^errott^iTttãTslãõrrpiêceTãfTvfitingf
but the ELLs are not told which errors to look for. We should focus on teaching, not
testing. We should be teaching our students to be careful with specific kinds of errors—
and not testing for just any and all possible errors in English. For better teaching out-
comes, 1 recommend using exercises that tell students specifically what kinds of errors
to look for. When teachers do not specify this information, students tend to identify
more errors than actually exist in the exercise. Since our goal is to improve ELLs' abil-
ity to repair specific errors, such as subject-verb agreement or verb tense, tell your stu-
dents exactly what they are looking for. By doing so, you are teaching, not testing.
Techniques 13-15
301
Find the Errors
Directions: Locate and correct the seven errors in: modals (2), missing subject (1),
noun plurals (1), verb form (1), pronouns (1), and negatives (1).
If you fall down or got hit in the mouth, one of your tooth might come out.
Knowing what to do in this emergency may can allow you to save your tooth.
First, you shall try to put the tooth back in its socket, or original hole, and hold it
there firmly. You should no wash the tooth, as this can actually harm it. If you are
unable to put the tooth back in its socket, then put in the cheek area and hold it
there. If this is not possible, should put the tooth in a glass of milk until you can
get to the hospital. Of course it is important to meet with your doctor or dentist
as soon as possible.
Source: Intermediate Reading Practices: Building Reading and Vocabular)' Skills, 3rrI Ed. (Folse, 2004).
Teaching Technique 15
Help ELLs manage the daunting chunks
of grammar information.
Some grammar points are about a general system, such as present progressive tense or
modals. In contrast, other grammar points require students to learn information
about a long list of items. Examples include irregular past tense forms, verbs that are
followed by gerunds, and common non-count nouns.
One of our jobs as teachers is to help our learners manage what appear to be
large, daunting learning tasks such as lists. A good teacher never gives students a list
and says, "Now go memorize this list" without any kind of advice. A good teacher
helps_stu.dents figure-out-strategies-that-will-help withnnemoàatiom
One good strategy is to train students to look for patterns within the list. For
example, all ELLs must deal with irregular past tense forms, which are among some of
the most frequently used words in English—took, put, or said. To be certain, an alpha-
betical list of irregular past tense and past participle forms may initially appear daunt-
ing, but some students may benefit from a task that requires learners to group the
items by pronunciation or spelling patterns, such as A-A-A for cut, cut, cut. is A-B-B for
teach, taught, taught or A-B-C for go, went, gone. Many times we grammar teachers rush
past the form of a grammar point in order to get to the actual practice. However, gram-
mar points can be difficult because of their form, because of their usage, or for both
reasons.
Ask students to refer to a given list of irregular past tense and past participle forms.
Remind students that they may use some verbs twice. Beyond additional work with
learning these forms, ELLs may come to realize that the list of, say, 100 items is really
not 100 individual items but instead ten groups of items that are similar. In other
words, within the seemingly haphazard list of completely irregular forms, there are
some patterns that will make the learning load lighter.
302
5: Specific Techniques
Each student should have a pattern sheet. Students should go through their refer-
ence list of verbs to find other verbs that match these patterns for forming the present,
past, and past participle of these irregular verbs.
Present	Past	Past Participle
long i	long 0 druxe,	drove-	-en driver,
All 3 forms are the same.
cast	cost	cost
present	past eat	ate.	present + -en eater,
long e	long 0	-en
speak,	spolce,	spõkêK,
short i befiift,	short a	short น befiaJT	beqiMb
present become	past	same as present berarxe-	berowce,
present drive,	past	present + -ท drove·	driver,
Techniques 15-17
303
Teaching Technique 16
Help ELLs see all the pieces of a grammar puzzle.
Students are accustomed to seeing information, not just hearing it. A good teacher will
have some kind of visual that helps ELLs follow the lesson better. The example here is
an overhead transparency that helps students consolidate the present and past tense
forms of some common verbs. I normally do two or three examples as a class and
then let students work individually or in pairs to fill in the other forms. An effective
teaching plan is to give this to students as a homework sheet a few days later.
Present Statement	Present Negative	Past Statement	Past Negative	Present Question	Past Question '
he goes	he doesn't go	he went	he didn't go	Does he go	Did he go~
they catch				Do they catch	
		we had			
			she didn't get		
	I don't wake				
Teaching Technique 17
Break up longer or difficult grammar lessons.
For some strange reason, many teachers feel compelled to follow their grammar book
(or other ELL book) rigidly. Just because a lesson in the book is very long, it does not
mean that you must teach that entire lesson in one class period to your students. The
authors of the textbook may not have had the foresight to split up the material into
more manageable chunks, but you can do this. The authors do not know your stu-
dents' capabilities, but you do.
Consider irregular past tense verbs, for example. In terms of forms to learn, there
are about 150 irregular verbs with perhaps 60 to 70 of these being of high frequency.
In addition, there are grammatical patterns to learn here, such as the negative is did
plus the base form, not the irregular form (I did not go versus *1 did not went.).
Why not divide this grammar point into two (or three) lessons with some time in
between? There is a good rationale for teaching a few irregular verbs first and then
teaching all of those plus the others later. Teach high-frequency irregular verbs first.
Students are then likely to run into them in their reading or listening and therefore
have some time to consolidate meaning. At the very least, students may notice these
words more and pay attention to their use.
304 -- 5: Specific Techniques
Teaching Technique 18
Gimmicks help all learners.
The rule for doubling letters of one-syllable words before adding -ing or -ed has been
demonstrated in Teaching Technique 9, but what do you do for two-syllable words?
The rule is that for verbs of two syllables that end in C-V-C, you double the last conso-
nant before adding -ing or -ed if the stress is on the second syllable (commit ->
committed) but not if the stress is on the first syllable (open -> opened).
One effective gimmick to practice this point is to have students first circle which
syllable is stressed. This number is important because the number they have circled
(1 or 2) indicates which syllable is stressed and also indicates how many letters to put
before adding the -ing or -ed. When you write this on the board, you will see the
proverbial light bulbs go off in your learners' heads.
1 com	CD (mit)		committed	(2 t's because we circled the 2)
Cl)	2			
(o)	pen		opened	(1 ท because we circled the 1)
1	@			
pre	(fer)		preferred	(2 r's because we circled the 2)
Teaching Technique 19
Use examples that match the target grammar point.
Your example sentences when teaching any grammar point are the key to successful
teaching and learning. As you introduce to be (and any grammar point) to your stu-
dents, you will be writing and saying many example sentences, what should you keep
in mind as you come up with the example sentences?
Your example sentences should not go much beyond the current grammar
point. For example, when you are teaching present tense of be (am, is, are), you
should not use sentences that contain more complex grammar points such as past
tense of be (was, were), other verbs, other tenses, conditionals, or adjective clauses.
Your overall goal is to keep the pattern as simple as possible when you are present-
ing new grammar.
Techniques 18-19
305
Consider these good and bad examples when you are'first introducing ELLs to am,
is, are:
Good Example	Bad Example	Notes
Kevin is thirsty.	Kevin is thirsty. Fie was thirsty yesterday, too.	1.	Don't introduce was with is. 2.	Students don't know too.
Laura is tired.	Laura is tired. She was at the office all day today.	3.	Don't introduce was with is. 4.	Students don't know all day. (all day vs. ever)/ day)
John is happy.	If John is happy, he will go with us to the beach.	5.	Conditional sentences are difficult to comprehend. 6.	Students don't know will, US, beach.
The books are green.	The books that are on the table are green.	7. Adjective clause (that are on the table) is hard/confusing. "
Let's move to a later class meeting when the lesson is now focusing on using a
form of be in sentences that state a person's occupation. The target English pattern is:
subject + am/is/are + article + occupation. This pattern produces sentences such as I am
a student and She is a doctor. However, a teacher who wants to provide some clear
examples of this pattern might inadvertently throw in additional grammar points,
resulting in confused ELLs.
Consider these examples from three different teachers:
	Initial Presentation Examples of am/is/are			
	Class A: · One Grammar Point	Class B: Two Grammar Points	Class C: Three Grammar Points		
	1.	I am a student. 2.	You are a teacher. 3.	He is a lawyer. 4.	She is a doctor. 5.	It is a tiger.	1.	I am a student. 2.	You are a teacher. 3.	He is an architect. 4.	She is an architect. 5.	It is a tiger.	1.	I am a good student. 2.	You are a nice teacher. 3.	He is a great architect. 4.	She is an excellent lawyer. 5.	It is a unique elephant.	
In these examples, students in Class A see five good examples because the only
part that is changing—the only part that grabs learners' attention—is the variation of
am, is, and are. Therefore, it is logical that this variation, which is the purpose of the
lesson, is the focus of the learners' attention.
In Class B, however, the teacher has unwittingly introduced the question of when
to use a. and an. In B, students will have no problems with 1, 2, and 5, but when ELLs
see 3 and 4, they will want to know why you use an instead of a here. The teacher has
now introduced an additional grammar point: a/an. For some groups, this additional
grammar point may be all right; for other groups, it may be a problem. In either case,
the teacher should be aware of the actual grammar points being illustrated.
306
5: Specific Techniques
In Class c, students may have problems with all five examples because many ELLs
want to pul adjectives after nouns (due to LI interference). Some ELLs will want to
know why we say a good student, not *u student good. Therefore, in c, the teacher
.......
should not include adjectives in any of the initial examples, furthermore, the teacher
in c has also included the a/an grammar point. ELLs will want to know why we say an
before excellent but not before unique in the next sentence. This is precisely the kind of
question that ELLs will ask—because the teacher has not chosen examples carefully. If
you think the reason for the use of an in #3 is that excellent begins with a vowel, then
why don't we say an in #5 as well? The difference is that unique begins with a vowel let-
ter but not a vowel sound.
Teaching Technique 20
Teach mnemonic devices to help ELLs remember grammar.
When you change a verb from active voice to passive voice, a helpful hint is to count
the number of verb parts in the active sentence and then add one. The number of verb
parts in the passive sentence is usually one more than the number of verb parts in the
active sentence because we add a form of the verb be to the passive sentence.
Pay attention to the number of verb parts in these active and passive sentences.
Active	'	4	'Passive	-	1
1 People write Arabic from right to left.	2 Arabic is written from right to left.
2 The vice president will lead the meeting.	3 The meeting will be led by the vice.	
	president.
4 Local artists are going to do the paintings.	5 The paintings are going to be done by local artists.
As your ELLs are exposed to more verb tenses, it is essential to guide your students
to compare verb forms from one tense to the next. When dealing with passive voice,
for example, too many books and teachers use only examples from simple past tense.
Include different tenses as well as modals and be.
Techniques ใ 9-21
307
	Active Voice		Passive Voice
simple present tense	People do X.		น doHA.
present progressive tense	People are doing X.	x_	
simple past tense	People did X.	x_			
modal	People might do X.	x_			
have to	People have to do X.	X	
be going to	People are going to do X.	x_	—
past progressive tense	People were doing X.	x_				
present perfect tense	People have done X.	x_	—
Teaching Technique 21
Motivate your ELLs with a challenge.
I learned this trick from my high school French teacher, Mrs. de Montluzin, who told
us one day in French class, "The sound of /r/ in French is very difficult, and I don't
know if any of you will be able to pronounce this sound yet. I'm going to pronounce
some words, and you see if you can say them after me." For some reason, being told
that I might not be able to learn something actually motivated me. This challenge
made me even more determined to try to pronounce the French /r/.
Issuing this kind of challenge takes no teacher preparation time or special effort,
but its effect on your class can be dramatic. I find it especially effective when I am
going to present a grammar point that is somewhat difficult. If students are able to
learn the grammar point well right away, they feel especially good. At the same time,
students who have difficulties do not feel so bad because I acknowledged that this
grammar point was a little difficult before starting the lesson. Thus, you can see that
this challenge benefits not only the best but all students in a class.
308 ·:ะะ· 5: Specific Techniques
.....................................
Teaching Technique 22
Reduce teacher workload: Let students write
practice quizzes for each other.
.....................................................................................
We teachers are overworked. We recognize the value of frequent small assessments of
our ELLs' progress—for both our and their benefit—but we cannot manage all of the
paperwork that frequent quizzes entail.
The solution: Let students quiz each other. Have students write simple quizzes for
each other. This works best with grammar rules that are relatively straightforward
and/or require memorization of many items. It is not recommended for activities that
require actual usage since non-native speakers, many of whom have limited profi-
ciency, will be grading the usage of other similarly limited proficiency ELLs. Student-
written quizzes work particularly well, however, with any grammar point that comes
in a list, including irregular past tense and past participles (pp. 336-40), verbs fol-
lowed by gerunds or infinitives (pp. 201-7), and separable versus non-separable
phrasal verbs (pp. 214-18).
By making one simple quiz of 20 items, students have at least four different
encounters with the grammar material: (1) when students create an original quiz,
(2) when students exchange papers and take a classmate's quiz, (3) when students
return quizzes to the original writer who then checks the answers, and finally (4)
when students have an opportunity to look over their corrected quizzes. This activity is
probably unfamiliar to most ELLs, so you need to make a sample quiz so that all stu-
dents can follow the same formatting in your model.
This great activity requires minimum work on the teacher's part, but it provides
maximum student practice with the grammar material. The bottom line: no teacher
grading required!
Quiz Writer:_____________________
Quiz Taker:Date:_____________________	_________
Present	Past	Past Participle
1.	be	_______ _______
2.	make	_______ _______
3.	break	_______	_______
(Continue until 20 items are in place.)
Techniques 22-24
309
Teaching Technique 23	
1	Find grammar points in non-ELL m;	Iterials.	!
It is very empowering for ELLs to be able to recognize recently studied grammar points
in non-ELL materials. Our ELLs can tell the difference between materials that have
been modified for their limited English proficiency and original, non-modified mate-
rials. Choose material that is not too far beyond your ELLs' reading ability.
A simple grammar point is that all singular count nouns must have an article (a,
an, the) or some other determiner before them. Ask your students to find every noun
in a paragraph from the textbook or newspaper or other source. Students should
underline the singular noun, and then circle the determiner that comes before it,
remembering that sometimes there may be one or two words in between: a cat versus
a very young cat.
Teaching Technique 24
Use guided grammar writing activities to help ELLs see the
connection between grammar and writing.
One way to move beyond the traditional fill-in-the-blank activities in so many gram-
mar books and practice limited composition at the same time is with what I call
Guided Grammar Writing. For this activity, choose a paragraph that you would like
your students to focus on. For example, if you are studying descriptive writing, choose
a paragraph that has many descriptive adjectives or that has words that evoke strong
feelings of emotion. Conversely, you could choose a short narrative for narrative writ-
ing or a paragraph from the letter to the editor column in a newspaper for argumenta-
"tivenvritmgr--------------------------------------------------------------------------
Keeping in mind your grammar points related to your writing objective, identify
five to eight areas of interest in the paragraph. These might include verbs, descriptive
adjectives, clauses, or longer sentences.
What you are going to do is remove certain features from the paragraph and then
provide directions to put these pieces back in. Be sure that when you remove these
items, the resulting language is still grammatically correct and logical. In this exercise,
ELLs are not correcting errors. They are editing to make improvements.
310
5: Specific Techniques
Guided Grammar Writing Name: 	_________________
Read the paragraph below. Rewrite it by.making the six changes listed. -
Careful: You may have to make other changes, including adding prepositions
and changing verb forms.
1.	Change many in Line 1 to a wide variety.
2.	เท Line 4, use a pronoun for these magazines.
3.	เท Line 7, add a word that means "most important" to describe focus.
4.	Combine the sentence A few are older with the sentence just before it.
5.	Add lately to the sentence that begins This magazine has . . .
6.	Change the last question to one that begins with Should. In this ques-
tion, present the two possibilities. (For example, Should we leave now or
go later?)
At our school office, we subscribe to many magazines. We make these
magazines available to our students, much as magazines are available in the
waiting rooms of doctors' offices. These magazines are not used in classes, and
students are free to read them or ignore them. These magazines are for extra
English practice. Some of these magazines are about science. Others are about
business, and others are general interest. The fact is that we have a wide vari-
ety of types of magazines for our students. The focus of one of these maga-
zines is on pop culture. Ivdeals with celebrities and topics that appeal to
college-age students. (Most of our students are college-age students. None is
younger. A few are older.) This magazine has been coming with semi-nude
jn.odels_on-the-covemGeFtain-parts-of-the-body-are_always''stiategically“cõv:
ered, but there is no doubt that the models are unclothed. My question is:
What should we do?
Source: First Discussion Starters: speaking Fluency Activities for Lower-Level ESL/EFL Students (Folse &
Ivone, 2002).
Now let's look at a copy of the original paragraph, which is our answer key for this
guided grammar activity. For changes that have only one option, such as substituting
one word for another, there is only one correct answer. However, for this to be a good
activity, you want to go beyond mere copying and substituting. You want changes that
allow for more leeway and creativity on the ELL's part. For example, Change 5 asks stu-
dents to add the word lately, but this word can go in several different places, not just
one. The teacher's goal is to design an activity that requires students to apply the gram-
mar rule in a real world situation.
Techniques 24-2
311
At our school office, we subscribe to a wide variety of magazines. We
make these magazines available to our students, much as magazines are avail-
able in the waiting rooms of doctors' offices. These magazines are not used in
classes, and students are free to read them or ignore them. They are for extra
English practice. Some of these magazines are about science. Others are about
business, and others are general interest. The fact is that we have a wide vari-
ety of types of magazines for our students. The main focus of one of these
magazines is on pop culture. It deals with celebrities and topics that appeal to
college-age students. (Most of our students are college-age students. None is
younger, but a few are older.) Lately this magazine has been coming with
semi-nude models on the cover. Certain parts of the body are always strategi-
cally covered, but there is no doubt that the models are unclothed. My ques-
tion is: Should we remove this magazine from circulation in our program?
This activity can be displayed on an overhead transparency or similar available
technology. A real advantage for teachers is that this writing activity does not generate
stacks of papers that you have to grade. Many writing activities contain original writing
that you do need to look at; however, this activity should be shared in pairs or small
groups first and then can be checked easily as a whole class.
I find that this activity works best when it is intentionally kept short, as more is
not necessarily better here.
Teaching Technique 25
Develop your own system for correcting grammar errors.
Teachers often ask when and how they should correct grammar errors. The answer is,
"It depends."
In speaking, I would not correct any errors directly. If you interrupt the students
when they are talking, they might lose their train of thought or suddenly become
quiet, which is not what you want. You want your ELLs to speak in English as much as
possible. In addition, when you correct someone who is speaking, the speaker may
not realize that you are making a correction. If the speaker does realize that you have
made a correction, he or she may not actually use your correction in a reformulation.
In other words, at best your correction will not be noticed by the ELL; at worst, your
correction will stop communication.
In writing, the answer depends on the purpose of the writing. If this is a student
journal, you should not make corrections. Some students, however, may request that
you correct their writing. In this case, I recommend that you choose one, two, or three
main errors and point only those out.
312
5: Specific Techniques
In a paragraph or essay, you should mark the errors. This brings up the question of
how errors should be marked. 1 have not seen any conclusive research finding that
strongly indicates that any one method of marking a written paper produces better
learning than any other method. Research, has looked at numerous marking options :
including not marking errors, marking only certain errors, circling the error but not
indicating the nature of the mistake, and using error codes such as ■ร-V/for subject-verb
agreement errors or(ART.)for article errors. I recommend marking your EELs' papers in
a way that you are comfortable with and that you have explained completely to your
ELLs. kind out what works best with your EEEs.
Remember that error correction should be helpful and lead to better learning, not
become a huge burden on you or the students. Try to view error correction as a neces-
sary and important part of student learning, not just testing.
APPENDIX 1
Common Grammar Errors
Made by Native Speakers
Errors that Occur in Writing and Speaking	Errors that Occur Predominantly in Writing
1. unnecessary prepositions (e.g., Where do you live at?*) 2.	I, me 3.	myself (reflexive pronouns) 4.	past participles and past tense (e.g., gone, went) 5.	lie, lay 6.	whoever, whomever (or who-whom) 7.	he/she/it don't* 8.	if I would have known* 9.	double negatives 10.	bad, badly	■»' 11.	them, those	12.	have, of 13.	it's, its, its'* 14.	your, you're 15.	'ร 16.	who's, whose 17.	to, too, two 18.	affect, effect 19.	lose, loose 20.	they're, there, their
This appendix consists of twenty errors made by native English speakers. The
selection of these errors is based on my years of teaching experience and interviews
with college composition instructors. In addition, I collected examples of errors in
native speaker writing in the form of letters, emails, and essays for three years as I pre-
pared to write this book. The twenty errors are divided into two groups, namely those
made in both writing and speaking and those made primarily in writing. Errors 1-11
are errors made in both writing and speaking. Errors 12-20 occur in writing.
In the first group of errors, native speakers often misuse one word for another, so
they might say (or write) V feel badly instead of I feel bad, or they might say (or write)
*We went should, have there instead of We should have gone there. A native speaker who
consistently says, *We should, have went is likely to write that same error as well.
313
314
Appendix ใ : Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers
The second group of errors occurs in writing. With these errors, the correct form
and the incorrect form have the same or very similar pronunciations, for example,
Error 12 involves the mistaken use of the word 0/ for the auxiliary have in past modal
constructions such as ^innsl of gone instead of must have gone. In'natural spoken Eng-
lish, the auxiliary have is not stressed and is reduced to the sound of schwa /ธ/, which
makes is sound just like the preposition of, which is also not stressed in natural spo-
ken English and is reduced to the sound of schwa.
Native and non-native English speakers need to proofread their written work care-
fully to edit for these errors but especially for this second group of errors. Students
cannot rely on the spellchecker on their computers with these errors. Eor example, the
combination *musl of gone is not possible, but all three words are in fact correct Eng-
lish words, so this combination may not be marked in any way.
Errors that Occur in Writing and Speaking
	Error 1: tUniwcessary PrepoMticms	J	
•	in writing •	in speaking		* Where do you live at?
Many of US were told that we should never end a sentence with a preposition.
Unfortunately, this "rule" is not true. There are in fact many times when it is
absolutely necessary to do so.
—	Possible with (	1 ' Tinal Preposition	Not Possible 1	- > without Final Preposition
	1. What are you looking at?	♦what are you looking? ?At what are you looking?
	_2.--d^hat-are-you-wa-iting for?	♦What are you waiting? ?For what 2re you waiting?
	3. Lying is one thing she won't put up with.	♦Lying is one thing she won't put up. ?Lying is one thing up with which she won't put.
	4. 1 know which song he's listening to.	*1 know which song he's listening. 1 know to which song he's listening. (possible but much more formal than the left column)
NOTE: ♦ before ล sentence indicates an ungrammatical sentence. ? before a sentence indicates an awk-
ward sentence, “before a sentence indicates an ELL error.
Appendix 1: Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers •ะ::· 315
If some sentences have to end in a preposition to maintain their intended mean-
ing, why did our teachers tell US, "Never end a sentence with a preposition"? Their
intention was to stop people from ending sentences with unnecessary prepositions.
The most common example of this involves the question word where-and the preposi-
tions at or to, as in * Where do you live at7. More examples follow.
Incorrect	Correct
* Where do you live at?	Where do you live?
Where are you going to?	Where are you going?
♦That is where she works at.	That is where she works.
♦Brown bears inhabit places where it's difficult for humans to live in.	Brown bears inhabit places where it's difficult for humans to live.
♦It's essential to get the message out to parents that they have to know who their loved ones associate with and where they are at.	It's essential to get the message out to parents that they have to know who J their loved ones associate with and where they are.
I or me? When do we use I, and when do we use me? I is a subject pronoun, and
me is an object pronoun. The word I almost always functions as the subject of a sen-
tence (I am here). It occurs less commonly after the verb to be and sounds very formal
(The mystery donor is I).
-----The-word-ms-is-usually-an-objeet-after-a-verbMt-can-be-a-direct-object-s-Ms^lldgss-
selected me as the winner) or indirect object (The judges gave me the prize). It can also
function as the object of a preposition (The judges listened to me when I sang).
Confusion of I and me occurs for several reasons. First, people generally think that
I sounds more correct (or somehow better) than me, so they tend to overuse I as a
hyper correction. This idea is totally without merit; the use of I or me depends on the
function of the word within a given sentence. Second, people mistakenly believe that
you should always use J somewhere before a verb and me somewhere after a verb, which
means that I is used near the beginning of a sentence and me toward the end. This mis-
conception has a good basis in that subjects usually come before the verb, and I func-
316
Appendix ใ: Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers
tions as a subject. However, a problem occurs with prepositional phrases because they
may occur either before or after the verb. Thus, people think that they should open
their sentence with Between you and Í because this phrase is occurring before the verb.
When there are multiple objects, people often make a mistake with / and me. The
sentence :tTh.e teacher gave the award to Justin, Kim, and 1 because we sang so well is incor-
rect because you should use an object form since the three people here are functioning
as objects of the preposition to. This usage error is actually quite common. It is
extremely easy, however, to figure out whether to use I or me in this case. Omit all of
the other names so that you have only one slot left and then fill it with J or me.
Although many native speakers might commit the grammatical faux pas in this exam-
ple, almost no native speaker would ever say *The teacher gave the award to ใ. In this
case, it is now obvious to any native speaker that to me sounds much better than to 1.
Incorrect	ว ^CorWECÍ
1	‘ f (JJ - ‘'1	1,	-'Μ.	.ำ·- 1.'ร·'’':-.'-yX- ■•■1, 7;.J,- ~t. .โ·:d’. ’tr -'5.	y.· L Α.'~.'.·*ί~7.,~'*':'T'bv-'—-i.f'-r*'-.e L -รุ'■ร-	Ύ-■'· k	yr*!1'7'',7 v > '■ รุ'·โvL·., ,".·' '',‘‘1'' รุ*,·,'·.^ iti:รุ-รุรุ.7
** Between you and 1, this situation is going to have a very unhappy ending.	Between you and me, this situation is going to have a very unhappy ending.
*Laura has been frank from day one and explained to Donna, Carlos, and I what she is going through.	Laura has been frank from day one and explained to Donna, Carlos, and me what she is going through.
*Your place was terrific, but I want to say that your warm hospitality and great facilities are what we enjoyed the most and what made the trip so special to Mary and I.	Your place was terrific, but I want to say that your warm hospitality and great facilities are what we enjoyed the most and what made the trip so special to Mary and me.
^Listen, if the manager wants to give more responsibility to you and I, well, I think that's a wonderful thing.	Listen, if the manager wants to give more responsibility to you and me, well, 1 think that's a wonderful thing.
am currently working on my master's degree in teaching. My ultimate goal is for my wife and I to teach overseas together.	I am currently working on my master'ร degree in teaching. My ultimate goal is for my wife and me to teach overseas together.
Appendix 1: Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers
317
Error 3: Myself (Reflexive Pronouns)	
• in writing ° in speaking	*My wife and ] look forward to working more with the Matthew Community Program. Founded a decade ago by Theodore Jabil and myself, this organization serves children and families in the Brooklyn area.
Currently, we are seeing a surge in the overuse of reflexive pronouns, especially
myself and yourself. Reflexive pronouns can be used only when the subject of the sen-
tence also refers to the same person. Thus, I can say I sometimes talk to myself, but I can
never say I sometimes talk to yourself.
Be careful with the NOUN + such as + PERSON structure, as in People such as me
need to wear glasses at all times. A common error is to use a reflexive pronoun here, but
you cannot say People such as myself. . . because people and myself do not refer to the
same person. (Yes, you are part of people, but not all people are you.) We need me
here (not I) because as is a preposition, so we need an object form. A reflexive pro-
noun can be used only when it refers to the same person that is being mentioned.
Incorrect	Correct	1
My wife and I look forward to working more with the Matthew Community Program. ^Founded a decade ago by Theodore Jabil and myself, this organi- zation serves children and families in the Brooklyn area.	My wife and I look forward to working more with the Matthew Community Program. Founded a decade ago by Theodore Jabil and me, this organiza- tion serves children and families in the Brooklyn area.
Please read the attached sheet of instructions. Hf any of you has any questions, please contact Harty or myself at once.	Please read the attached sheet of instructions. If any of you has any questions, please contact Harry or me at once.
^People such as myself tend to believe that there is no true political solution to the problem in Yugoslavia, but this concept is untenable to others.	People such as me tend to believe that there is no true political solution to the problem in Yugoslavia, but this concept is untenable to others.
*That's one of the many differences between you and myself. You are a night owl, but I just can't function like that.	That's one of the many differences between you and me. You are a night owl, but I just can't function like that.
Here is a list of the schedule changes that need to be implemented. ^Please advise Anne and myself when these changes have been made to the master schedule.	Here is a list of the schedule changes that need to be implemented. Please advise Anne and me when these changes have been made to the master schedule.
318 ·:>· Appendix ใ: Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers
Error 4: Using Past Participles for Past .Tense (e.g.,#one, went)
•	เท writing ri had went to different tax services, but TaxPlus was the best
•	in speaking ever.
Verbs in English have four principal parts: base, past, past participle, and present
participle. For the vast majority of verbs, the past participle is formed the same as the
past tense by adding ~ed. For irregular verbs, the past participle has many endings,
including ~en and -ne, but some verbs (especially short one-syllable verbs) have the
same form in present, past, and past participle. (A longer list of these forms can be
found in Appendix 2.) The present participle of a verb is formed by adding “ing.
Examples follow.
Present	Past	Past Participle 1 > Present Participle	
work	worked	worked	working
live	lived	lived	living
choose	chose	chosen	choosing
go	went	gone	going
put	put	put	putting
The phrase be broken
means that something
is not functioning, but
the phrase be broke
means have no money.
Thus, He was a broken
man and He was a
broke man are both
grammatically possible
—but- do-not-mean-the—
same thing at all. เท
the first example, he
has lost his spirit or will
to do something; in
the second, he has no
money.
An unfortunately common (and serious) error is misuse of the past participle.
Some speakers use the wrong form in the past participle slot, as in *1 have sang this
tune many times, while others use the past participle form for the past tense, as in *1
seen the tornado. While these sentences may be considered acceptable in certain
dialects of American English, both are wrong in Standard American English.	____________
+1 had went to different tax services, but TaxPlus was the best ever.	1 had gone to different tax services, but TaxPlus was the best ever.
*We seen the tornado when it hit our neighbor's house.	We saw the tornado when it hit our neighbor's house.
*1 have sang this tune many times.	1 have sung this tune many times.
^Unfortunately, that computer is broke, so you'll have to use another one.	Unfortunately, that computer is broken, so you'll have to use another one.
*As soon as the girls seen the accident, they called the police. Chaos ensued.	As soon as the girls saw the accident, they called the police, chaos ensued.
Appendix 1: Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers : 319
Error 5 ะ lie, lay	
• in writing « in speaking	*The DC-10 jet cracked into two pieces and came to rest with the front section laying on its side
The confusion here involves the verbs lie and lay. This confusion is actually under-
standable because the words do look alike (e.g., both are short words that begin with
the letter I) and because the past tense of lie is lay. Furthermore, lie can be an irregular
verb meaning "to recline" as well as a regular verb meaning "to tell a falsehood."
Native speakers have no problem with the use of lie as a regular verb as in He lied
about his whereabouts, so let's concentrate on the two irregular usages, which are in fact
the source of the error here. When lie means "recline," it is an intransitive verb, which
means that it cannot have a direct object. Thus, you cannot say, *Lie the tree on its side
but rather Lay the tree on its side. Lay is a transitive verb, which means that it must have
a direct object in all cases. You cannot say, H'm going to lay out by the pool because there
is no direct object after lay. Correct usage here would be I'm going to lie out by the pool."
	Meaning	Present	Past	Past Participle	Present Participle	
	not tell the truth (regular intrasitive verb)	lie 1 never lie.	lied You lied to me.	lied Have you ever lied to me1	lying Are you lying about this ใ	
	recline (irregular intrasitive verb)	lie Please lie down.	lay The wolf lay down and died.	A'	lain Why have you lain on the sofa so long?	lying Was the cat lying on this sheetใ	
	put, deposit (regular	lay Please lay	laid They laid the	laid This hen has	laying The dealer was	
	transitive verb)	the boxes there.	tree on its side.	laid two eggs this week.	laying the cards on the table.	
Incorrect	Correct	1
*The DC-10 jet cracked in two pieces and came to rest with the front section laying on its side.	The DC-10 jet cracked in two pieces and came to rest with the front section lying on its side.
Why don't you lay down for a while?	Why don't you lie down for a while?
	
*Are you going to lay there all day? Are you going to lie there all day? Most teenagers in our neighborhood are lazy. *They just lay out by the pool	day after day, wondering what life is about.
Most teenagers in our neighborhood are lazy. They just lie out by the pool	day after day, wondering what life is about.
320
Appendix 1: Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers
Error 6: whoever, whomever (or: who, whom)
• in writing	*Team captains are receiving this article because they might want
® in speaking	to pass it on to whomever would benefit from it the most.
The forms who and whoever are subjects, and the forms whom and whomever are
objects. The most common mistake here is using the subject pronouns in an object
slot. This error occurs because people mistakenly assume that who and whoever are
always used toward the beginning of a sentence (since subjects usually occur near the
beginning of a sentence) and that whom and whomever toward the end of a sentence
(since objects usually occur after the verb and, therefore, toward the end of a sen-
tence). In the sample error, would benefit is the verb for its clause. Every verb needs a
subject, so would benefit needs a subject. Thus, we have to use whoever in this case. It
does not matter that the clause whoever would benefit comes after a preposition since
whoever is not the object of this preposition; instead, the whole clause is the object of
the preposition.
When in doubt as to which form to use, circle the verbs. Make sure that each verb
has a subject. If every verb already has a subject, the slot is likely an object and you
should use whom or whomever.
The bottom line: A verb needs a subject, and the -m forms cannot be used in the
subject slot.
	1 "	**
*Team captains are receiving this article because they might want to pass it on to whomever would benefit from it the most.	Team captains are receiving this article because they might want to pass it on to whoever would benefit from it the most.
-^Whomever has the most points by the last week of the course will receive a prize.	Whoever has the most points by the last week of the course will receive a prize.
^Editorial writers often endorse a cer- tain candidate because they hope to convince their readers to vote for the candidates whom the writers think will do the best job.	Editorial writers often endorse a certain candidate because they hope to con- vince their readers to vote for the can- didates who the writers think will do the best job.
*1 thought you might like to scan this article and pass it on to whomever would benefit from it the most.	I thought you might like to scan this article and pass it on to whoever would benefit from it the most.
*My main goal is allowing the students to take pride in whom they are. I think it's an important goal for all teachers.	My main goal is allowing the students to take pride in who they are. 1 think it's an important goal for all teachers.
Appendix 1: Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers
321
Error 7:1le/she/it don't*
•	in writing
•	in speaking
What the boss don't know won't matter in the end.
Present tense verbs for the third person singular (he, she, it) need an -s ending for
both affirmative and negative utterances. The most common error occurs in the nega-
tive when speakers say or write ijt don't matter or *this problem don’t have anything to do
with your situation. Using double negatives is considered a serious error in standard
English and so might well mark you to many people as an uneducated person of lower
socioeconomic status. Using double negatives is common in some regional varieties of
English.
At times, you will hear educated speakers use this construction, but they know
that they are using incorrect language and are doing this to attract attention, to sound
very informal, or to joke. Everyone agrees, however, that this is non-standard English.
Many of our native-speaking students make this particular error. To fit in with their
peers, they need to continue using the non-standard form, but to sound professional
and educated and get a good job, they need to know the difference between what is
standard English and what is not standard English. In particular, they need to be able
to turn one form off and the other on at the appropriate time.
This chart shows the correct conjugation of the verb need in both affirmative and
negative in simple present tense. Note the use of -5 for third person singular.
Verb: Need	Affirmative	Negative
Singular	I need	*'	I don't need
	you need	you don't need
	he needs	he doesn't need
	she needs	she doesn't need
	it needs	it doesn't need
Plural	we need	we don't need
	you need	you don't need
	they need	they don't need
322
Appendix ใ: Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers
Incorrect	Correct	J
*พhat the boss don't know won't matter in the end.	What the boss doesn't know won't matter in the end. ...........	. - . -..7-..
*She don't even treat you like 1 do.	She doesn't even treat you like 1 do.
Ht don't seem fair that you lost the con- test.	it doesn't seem fair that you lost the contest.
*LeToya Luckett sang a song called "She Don't."	NOTE: We cannot change the title of someone else's song, but the correct title should be "She Doesn't." (Songs often have grammatical errors that reflect the current language usage of the song's intended audience or for poetic purposes.)
*The first single taken from the Human Nature 2005 album was called "He Don't Love You." The lyrics include "He don't love you, no, but he don't want anyone else to have you. He don't want to let go."	NOTE: Again, we can't change the title of an existing work, but the correct title should be "He Doesn't Love You," and the correct lyrics should say "He doesn't love you, no, but he doesn't want anyone else to have you. He doesn't want to let go."
Appendix 1: Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers ■ะ-ะ- 323
Error 8: If I would have known*
• in writing
« in speaking
*If I would have known about the free movie tickets, I would
have gone to see the movie with you.
A sentence that begins with if has two parts or clauses: the if clause (which states the
condition) and the main clause (which states the result or effect of the condition). The
correct verb form in the if clause to describe a past action is if + SUBJECT + had + PAST
PARTICIPLE (e.g., if 1 had known}. The construction would + have + PAST PARTICIPLE is
used only in the main clause, which is also called the result or effect clause.
The use of would have in the if clause is very common in American English—even
among educated speakers, but it is not correct. All languages evolve, and this grammar
point appears to be moving toward acceptance into standard English. However, only
time will tell if the descriptive use of this grammar item will eventually become
accepted into standard English by the prescriptive grammarians.	I
Incorrect	Correct
*If I would have known about the free movie tickets, I would have gone to see the movie with you.	If I had known about the free movie tickets, I would have gone to see the movie with you.
*On the band's 1986 album called Chicago 18, the group Chicago sang the song "If She Would Have Been Faith- ful." A song from this album reached #17 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart.	NOTE: We cannot change the title of someone else's song, but the correct title should be "If She Had Been Faith- ful." (Songs often have grammatical errors that reflect the current language usage of the song's intended audience for poetic purposes.)
*If he would have taken his medicine, he wouldn't have had that heart attack.	If he had taken his medicine, he wouldn't have had that heart attack.
Hf John would have been here, he would have solved the problem with- out a doubt.	If John had been here, he would have solved the problem without a doubt.
*If it wouldn't have been raining, the kids could have played in the backyard.	If it hadn't been raining, the kids could have played in the backyard.
324
Appendix ใ: Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers
Error 9: Double Negatives
•	in writing	iWe think the airline made a mistake. We couldn't find none of
•	in speaking	our luggage when we arrived.
A double negative is the use of two negatives in the same clause. A double nega-
tive is considered non-standard English. Examples of negative words include not,
none, never, no, hardly, rarely, scarcely, barely, nothing, nobody, no one, neither, and seldom.
It is possible to have two negatives in a sentence if they are in different clauses: (Most
people do nol have a passport) (because they have never traveled abroad).
The bottom line: Use only one negative word per clause.
Incorrect <	UMUMUNWMMUMWMUGWMMRMMAWWWW \ z vl,	* เ /r J
♦We think the airline made a mistake. We couldn't find none of our luggage when we arrived.	We think the airline made a mistake. We couldn't find any of our luggage when we arrived. (OR more formal: We think the airline made a mistake. We could find none of our luggage when we arrived.)
♦The school board's new plan will not hardly affect the students at this ele- mentary school.	The school board's new plan will hardly affect the students at this ele- mentary school.
♦Those people don't know nothing about what happened in the '80s.	Those people don't know anything about what happened in the '80s.
No, he's gone. *He doesn't live here no more.	No, he's gone. He doesn't live here any more.
♦They bare’ly clid’not arrive at the air- port in time to catch their return flight.	They barely arrived at the airport in time to catch their return flight.
WNSK8MZ»SZWM»W«MW8SSDMW«M8MWS^W«

» in writing
« in speaking
♦Aunt Mildred is okay but probably won't get around much
again. The operation was complicated. I feel so badly for her.
What is the grammatical difference between bad and badly ? The answer is easy: bad
is an adjective and badly is an adverb. Thus, we say, His timing was bad. today and He
played badly today. Feel can be a transitive verb that means "to touch something," but it
is also an intransitive linking verb that means to "perceive a certain condition of the
body or mind." People almost always use the second meaning because they want to
tell about their health. However, after the verb to be and linking verbs such as feel, look,
seem, and appear, we use adjectives. (See p. 48 for a review of this material.) Using this
Appendix 1: Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers
325
rule, we say, He was bad, He felt bad, He looked bad, He seemed bad," and He appeared
bad.
The most common mistake that native speakers make is to use the phrase feel badly1.
which is incorrect (unless your job happens to be to fee] things, in which case you might
feel tilings well or feel tilings badly). In the slot just after a verb, we would usually use an
adverb of manner ending in -ly, but feel here is an intransitive linking verb and needs an
adjective form. Thus, the combination feel badly is a hypercorrection.
Incorrect	■Correct
Aunt Mildred is okay but probably won't get around much again. The operation was complicated. *1 feel so badly for her.	Aunt Mildred is okay but probably won't get around much again. The operation was complicated. I feel so bad for her.
+The thin blonde model on the cover of a magazine makes all women feel badly about their own bodies despite the size, shape, height, or age of the magazine's readership.	The thin blonde model on the cover of a magazine makes all women feel bad about their own bodies despite the size, shape, height, or age of the magazine's readership.
According to the author, when people feel stressed, angry, or ashamed, we give off negative energy. *This is why viewing negative events causes US to feel badly. Similarly, witnessing acts of kindness causes US to feel good.	According to the author, when people feel stressed, angry, or ashamed, we give off negative energy. This is why viewing negative events causes US to feel bad. Similarly, witnessing acts of kindness causes US to feel good.
*1 could tell that Mr. Prompton felt badly, and I left thinking how difficult it can be to pick up the pieces and go	 on, especially when you are already try- ing hard and feel uncertain about what your next step should be.	I could tell that Mr. Prompton felt bad, and I left thinking how difficult it can be to pick up the pieces and go on,	 especially when you are already trying hard and feel uncertain about what your next step should be.
We should have been free and given the same opportunities others had. *We always felt badly because our people were not treated fairly.	We should have been free and given the same opportunities others had. We always felt bad because our people were not treated fairly.
326
Appendix ใ: Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers
Error 11; them, those
* ill writing	We can't let them people vote, if we let them vote, they're not
» in speaking	going to make the right decision.
What is the grammatical difference between them and those? The confusion here
occurs because them is a pronoun (Who lire those boys’ I don't know them), and those is
an adjective (/ know those boys) or a pronoun (Those are the boys that I know). Because
them is a pronoun, it can never modify (i.e., describe) a noun. It is never correct to say
them people or them reasons.
Incorrect	Correct	.
We can't let them people vote. If we let them vote, they're not going to make the right decision.	We can't let those people vote. If we let them vote, they're not going to make the right decision.
* If Fred had known how fast people were going to buy them horses, he would have brought more horses to sell at the auction.	If Fred had known how fast people were going to buy those horses, he would have brought more horses to sell at the auction.
Well, how do you like them apples?	Well, how do you like those apples?
Why are all them people cheering? What happened? Does anyone know?	Why are all those people cheering? What happened? Does anyone know?
*They said that change was coming, but them politicians were lying to^is once again.	They said that change was coming, but those politicians were lying to us once again.
Error 12: have, of
• in writing
^My opinion is that the manager should of fired those employ-
ees on the spot.
A modal phrase expressing past time always consists of three parts: the modal,
auxiliary have, and the past participle of a verb. Examples include must have gone, might
have taken, and couldn't have been. In normal speech, the auxiliary verb have is often
reduced and sounds similar to the pronunciation of the word of. (Note that of ends in
a /v/ pronunciation; there is no /f/ in of.) Due to the similarity in sound, people mis-
takenly substitute of for have in past modal phrases. The bottom line: It is never
acceptable to substitute of for have after a modal.
Appendix 1: Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers
327
Incorrect	Correct
*My opinion is that the manager should of fired those employees on the spot.	My opinion is that the manager should have fired those employees on the spot.
*1 think the survivors of the Titanic must of felt guilty for surviving the sinking.	I think the survivors of the Titanic must have felt guilty for surviving the sinking.
*what a great speech you gave! I couldn't of said it any better.	What a great speech you gave! I couldn't have said it any better.
*If NASA had launched the rocket a day later, perhaps the accident could of been avoided.	If NASA had launched the rocket a day later, perhaps the accident could have been avoided.
*1 guess I should of thought something was up when you kept on calling me Rick instead of Rich.	I guess I should have thought some- .,· thing was up when you kept on calling"' me Rick instead of Rich.
Error 13: it's, its, its**
• in writing *If you apply enough liquid, the tick will come out on it's own.
What is the possessive adjective for the pronoun it? I changes to my, you changes
to your, and she changes to her, but what about it? The possessive form of it is its. There
is no apostrophe.	*’
The two most common mistakes are substituting its' or it's. Avoiding this error is
easy. In the case of its', remember this unequivocal statement: its' is not a word in the
English language. You can never use its' under any circumstances. As for the second"
substitution—it's, this word does exist in English but only as a contraction for it is.
If you are not sure whether to write its or it's, try using the full form it is in the slot.
If you can use it is, then the correct form is it's. If you cannot use it is, then the correct
form is its. Again, its' is not a word and is never correct.
328
Appendix ใ: Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers
Incorrect	Correct
Cover the tick with the liquid for A few seconds. * If you apply enough liquid/ the tick will let go on it's own.	Cover the tick with the liquid for a few seconds. If you apply enough liquid, the tick will let go on its own.
♦Queen School of English (UAE) is looking for two English speakers to join it's team of English teachers. A competitive, tax-free, salary/ is offered, as well as furnished accommodation, a travel allowance, and utility bills allowance. Abu Dhabi is a beautiful city and the capital of the UAE. (NOTE: Yes, this is an actual job ad for an English teaching position.)	Queen School of English (UAE) is looking for two English speakers to join its team of English teachers. A competitive, tax-free, salary is offered, as well as furnished accommodation, a travel allowance, and utility bills allowance. Abu Dhabi is a beautiful city and the capital of the UAE.
♦As part of this methodology, Huron has manufactured its' own books for a decade.	As part of this methodology, Huron has manufactured its own books for a decade.
LIMB is moving ahead. "I do believe we've finally got it! ♦Teamwork at its' best!"	UMB is moving ahead. "1 do believe we've finally got it! Teamwork at its best!"
♦South Carolina was the first southern state to hold it's primary, and it brought out a complex but straightfor- ward debate.	South Carolina was the first southern state to hold its primary, and it brought out a complex but straightforward debate.
The campus police department is proud to announce the publication of the long-awaited and revised student Safety Guide." *Note that the name has been changed to the "Annual Report & Safety Guide" to reflect it's content more appropriately.	The campus police department is proud to announce the publication of	 the long awaited and revised "Student Safety Guide." Note that the name has been changed to the "Annual Report & Safety Guide" to reflect its content more appropriately.
Appendix 1: Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers •ะ:ะ- 329
Error 14: your, you're	
• in writing	♦If you want to play on the team, please send me an email letting me know that your interested. 1 need your response no later than Saturday.
Although your and you're are pronounced exactly the same way, they have different
meanings and different grammatical functions. Your is a possessive adjective meaning
that something that belongs to you: your book, your cat, your answer. You're is the con-
traction for you are: you're late, you're thinking, you're on the list.
If you are not sure whether to write your or you're, try using the full form you are in
the slot. If you can use you are, then the contracted form you're is correct. If you cannot
use you are, then the correct form is your.
Incorrect	Correct
♦If you want to play on the team, please send me an email letting me know that your interested. I need your response no later than Saturday.	If you want to play on the team, please send me an email letting me know that you're interested. I need your response no later than Saturday.
You don't need to thank me. It was my pleasure to help you with your work today. ♦Your welcome.	You don't need to thank me. It was my pleasure to help you with your work today. You're welcome.
Pay attention! *Your not listening to me.	Pay attention! You're not listening to me.4i
♦what was you're reaction when you heard the news about the government's	What was your reaction when you heard the news about the government's
new economic plan?	new economic plan?
I've encountered a problem when I'm trying to insert a record. ♦Sometimes while your trying to build a menu list, you'll get an error message telling you something about too much recursion. What does this mean?	I've encountered a problem when I'm trying to insert a record. Sometimes while you're trying to build a menu list, you'll get an error message telling you something about too much recursion. What does this mean?
330
Appendix ใ: Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers
	Error 15: ’ร
• in writing	*The period of the data is somewhat restricted, but the results are nonetheless fascinating. The fact's presented here challenge some present-day assumptions about where the tornado threat is highest.
Errors with apostrophes have gotten out of control. We have to use an apostrophe
to indicate contractions (it's, you're, they’re), but a more common error occurs when
indicating possession.
The rule is quite simple. (1) If a noun is singular, add ร: a boy -> a boy's. (2) If a
singular noun ends in -ร, you can add just' or ร; Bess -> Bess' or Bess's. (3) If a noun
is plural, just add the boys -> the boys'. (4) If a noun is plural but does not end in
-ร, add 'ร: the children -> the children's.
For no apparent reason, native speakers are adding apostrophes on nouns when
there is no possession. 1 remember seeing a sign that said "2 Kitten's for sale." What
did the kitten own? Even more bizarre are examples of apostrophes being used with
verbs: "Oxygen require's more time in this experiment."
The bottom line: Only use an apostrophe to indicate a contraction or possession.
	
The period of the data is somewhat restricted, but the results are nonethe- less fascinating. TThe fact's presented here challenge some present-day assumptions about where the tofnado threat is highest.	The period of the data is somewhat restricted, but the results are nonethe- less fascinating. The facts presented here challenge some present-day assumptions about where the tornado threat is highest.
*Krashen came up with the concent of i + 1 to help describe the distance between a persons language proficiency and the level of the language in the material.	Krashen came upxwith..the concept- of	 i + 1 to help describe the distance between a person's language profi- ciency and the level of the language in the material.
*Maybe we will be able to see you guy's in the near future.	Maybe we will be able to see you guys in the near future.
Wou can purchase fresh or frozen shrimp from the Lind's. The price is reasonable.	You can purchase fresh or frozen shrimp from the Linds. The price is reasonable.
1 can schedule all the interviews for two-hour time frames. *Let me know if this works for you, and I will confirm the dales on everyones calendar.	1 can schedule all the interviews for two-hour time frames. Let me know if this works for you, and I will confirm the dates on everyone's calendar.
Appendix ใ: Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers •ะ:ะ- 331
Error 16: who's1 whose	
• in writing	Hf you are an employee who's contract expires annually and a renewal is done at the beginning of a semester, you may not be entered into the data system yet.
Both who's and whose are correct words in English, but their uses are completely
different. People often confuse the contraction who's with the possessive word whose
because these two words are pronounced exactly the same. Though these words sound
alike, this error is not just about spelling. It shows a lack of grammatical knowledge
and gives the reader a poor impression of your writing.
If you are not sure whether to write who's or whose, try using the full form who is in
the slot. If you can use who is, then the correct form is who's. If you cannot use who is,
then the correct form is whose. Remember that whose can come immediately before a
noun as an adjective (e.g., Whose wallet is this?), or it can be a pronoun (e.g., Whose is·
this?).	■'*
Incorrect	•Correct	1
*If you are an employee who's contract expires annually and a renewal is done at the beginning of a semester, you may not be entered into the data system yet.	If you are an employee whose contract expires annually and a renewal is done at the beginning of a semester, you may not be entered into the data system yet.
*พould you think differently of some- one who's husband or wife was in jail?	Would you think differently of some- one whose husband or wife was in jail?
I Currently, there are two children in my classroom who's primary language _is something other than English.		Currently, there are two children in my classroom whose primary language is something other than English.
*Our office computer is experiencing a problem when we attempt to delete files who's names include numbers instead of just letters.	Our office computer is experiencing a problem when we attempt to delete files whose names include numbers instead of just letters.
*The federal court who's jurisdiction includes seven heavily populated met- ropolitan areas lacks judges to hear all its assigned cases.	The federal court whose jurisdiction includes seven heavily populated met- ropolitan areas lacks judges to hear all its assigned cases.
332
Appendix 1: Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers
Error 17: to, too, two
• in writing
Wes, I'm looking for something that is more stable than my cur-
rent job, but I haven't been going to job interviews to much.
Why do people confuse these three words? The easiest (and least problematic) is
the number two. If you can insert an actual numeral in the sentence, use two, not to or
too. In the sentence 1 have (to, too, two) books, the missing word is two because you
could also write I have 2 books.
The most common mistake is misusing to for Loo. The word to is either a preposi-
tion (e.g., to the bank) or part of an infinitive (e.g., to go, to be, to do). (The infinitive
form of a verb consists of to and the simple form of the verb.) In the sentence "If the
officials would like to decide to postpone the trip, they must vote to do so at tomor-
row's meeting," there are three infinitives (i.e., to decide, to postpone, to do). The word
too is an intensifier adverb meaning very or extremely (e.g., too good, too difficult, too
much) or an adverb meaning also (e.g., Chile has a large maritime industry, too).
There is a "question test" that can help you remember when to use too. Ask your-
self if you can use verγ or also in the slot. If so, then the correct form is too. Here are
two slots where too is the only possible choice: (1) The test was______difficult. (2) The
homework was tough,. In the first sentence, too means "very or extremely," and______
in the second sentence, too means "also."
	
*Yes, I'm looking for something that is more stable than my current job, but I haven't been going to job interviews to much.	Yes, I'm looking for something that is more stable than my current job, but I haven't been going to job interviews too much.
H donfirforward a lot of emails to peo- ple, but this one was to good not to pass along.	1 don't forward a lot of emails to peo- ple, but this one was too good not to pass along.
^Having so much to do on a Saturday makes the weekend go by to fast.	Having so much to do on a Saturday makes the weekend go by too fast.
*Most people will not buy that kind of vehicle these days because it uses to much fuel.	Most people will not buy that kind of vehicle these days because it uses too much fuel.
*Did you want to go, to?	Did you want to go, too?
Appendix 1: Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers
333
Error 18: affect, effect	
• in writing	Applicants may submit their paperwork either in person or via email. *Note that the submission method will not effect the committee's decision regarding your application.
In general usage, affect is a verb and effect is a noun. In normal conversation,
stressed syllables of words are enunciated more strongly than unstressed syllables. In
the words affect and effect, the stress is on the second syllable -feet, which means that
we reduce the first syllable to the schwa /a/ sound. Thus, .in normal conversation, these
two words sound very similar, so it is not surprising that there is some confusion
regarding the spelling.
SPECIAL NOTE: In specialized academic and medical language, there are two
other uses of these words. These specialized meanings have different pronunciations
(but the same spelling}.
When affect is used as a noun, it means a feeling associated with an idea or action.
In this case, the first syllable is stressed and the vowel is pronounced as short a as in cat.
Effect can be used as a verb in the idiomatic expression to effect change, which
means to cause or bring about change. In this case, the vowel is pronounced as a long
e as in need. Note that effect is used as a verb only in the infrequent expression to effect
change, which means that the spelling effect is almost always a noun in English.
The bottom line: In general usage, affect is a verb and effect is a noun.
Incorrect	Correct
* Applicants may submit their paper- work either in person or via email. Note that the submission method will not effect the committee's decision	Applicants may submit their paperwork eithes-in person or via email. Note that the submission method will not affect the committee's decision regarding
regarding your application.	your application.
^Carolyn Chan reports on the strong wintry weather pattern that could effect much of the Great Plains in the coming week.	Carolyn Chan reports on the strong wintry weather pattern that could affect much of the Great Plains in the coming week.
A new study confirms that Florida beaches are in trouble. *This study looked at the affects of growing numbers of people living close to the seashore.	A new study confirms that Florida beaches are in trouble. This study looked at the effects of growing numbers of peo- ple living close to tile seashore.
*We hear a great deal today about global warming and its potential impact on the earth, but do we ever stop to think how this warming might effect US?	We hear a great deal today about global warming and its potential impact on the earth, but do we ever stop to think how this warming might affect us?
* With out a doubt, the government's decision will effect everyone by the middle of the year.	Without a doubt, the government's decision will affect everyone by the middle of the year.
334
Appendix ใ: Grammar Errors Made bp Native Speakers
Error 19: lose, loose	
• in writing	♦My goal for the wedding was to loose 15 to 20 pounds. 1 also decided that my future husband could stand to loose a few " pounds, too.
Native speakers know how to spell both of these words, but many people mix
them up. The word lose is a verb; the letter ร here is pronounced as /z/. The word loose
is an adjective meaning "not tight"; the letter ร here is pronounced as /s/.
Incorrect .	•Correct	1
£พ^'$·■■•จี,’,··	
♦My goal for the wedding was to loose 15 to 20 pounds. I also decided that my future husband could stand to loose a few pounds, too.	My goal for the wedding was to lose 15 to 20 pounds. 1 also decided that my future husband could stand to lose a few pounds, too.
♦This plant can withstand temperatures to 5 degrees Fahrenheit, which is the point at which the plant may loose some or all of its leaves (but still not kill the plant).	This plant can withstand temperatures to 5 degrees Fahrenheit, which is the point at which the plant may lose some or all of its leaves (but still not kill the plant).
I also began to change my lifestyle. *1 must loose weight.	I also began to change my lifestyle. I must lose weight.
♦Those pants are so lose on you. You really do have to buy new clothes soon.	Those pants are so loose on you. You really do have to buy new clothes soon.
♦I have set a goal of being down to my ideal weight range by March 1st of	I have set a goal of being down to my ideal weight range by March 1st of
2'00'0, so I need to loose about 25 pounds.	2000, so I need to lose about 25 pounds.
Appendix 1: Grammar Errors Made by Native Speakers <
>- 335
Error 20: they're, there, their	
• in writing	iln a recent ruling by five of the Supreme Court justices, there conclusion was that police should have more authority in some - cases.
Native speakers know the meanings of these three words, but some people mix
them up because they are all pronounced the same. The word they're is a contraction
for they are. The word their is a possessive adjective, so their is always in front of a
noun. There usually refers to a place, as in She lives there. You can remember there eas-
ily because you can see the word here inside there, and both of them are places.
Incorrect	Correct
Hn a recent ruling by five of the Supreme Court justices, there conclu- sion was that police should have more authority in some cases.	In a recent ruling by five of the Supreme Court justices, their conclu- r sion was that police should have more τ authority in some cases.
Hn her article "High School Writing Programs and There Effect on College Composition Grades," Professor Mar- itza Hernandez explores a very timely topic.	In her article "High School Writing Pro- grams and Their Effect on College Composition Grades," Professor Mar- itza Hernandez explores a very timely topic.
*No one wants to visit my cousins' place because they're cat has fleas.	No one wants to visit my cousins' place because their cat has fleas.
*To all employees: Be sure to put inter- national stickers on all correspondence “from this office. If-you need stickers;	- there in the top drawer of the filing cabinet.	To all employees: Be sure to put inter- national stickers on all correspondence from this office. If you need stickers,	 they're in the top drawer of the filing cabinet.
^Clothing items that will be on sale tomorrow need to have they're original price tags removed.	Clothing items that will be on sale tomorrow need to have their original price tags removed.
APPENDIX 2
Irregular Fast and
add	added	
call	called	called
like	liked	liked
map	mapped	mapped
rob	robbed	robbed
The vast majority of verbs in English are regular verbs, which means that their past
tense and their past participles end in -ed.
Other verbs, however, are irregular, which means that their past tense and past
----par-ticiples-are—formed-in-some—other-wayrhnclüdTng^mtêrnabvowelchanges
(sing-sang-sung), internal vowel changes and -en or -ne (choose, chose, chosen or go-
went-gone), and no change at all (cut-cut-cut). (Note that the present participle has not
been included here because it always ends in -ing.)
Though some sources claim to have more than 350 irregular verbs, these lists
often include rare words such as forego {forego-forwent-forgone), hew (hew-hewed.-
hewn/hewed), and unspin (unspin-unspun-unspun). The following chart lists 155 of the
most frequently used irregular verbs. A list of 155 items may seem daunting to ELLs,
but these verbs should be introduced in much smaller groups. For example, beginning
students are often given a list of 25 of the most common verbs, and this list is
increased as ELLs attain intermediate proficiency. (See Teaching Technique 15 for spe-
cific ideas for teaching these verb forms.)
336
Appendix 2: Verbs
337
Present	Past	Past Participle
arise	arose	arisen
awake:	awoke	-	awoken	
be	was / were	been
bear	bore	born / borne
beat	beat	beaten / beat
become	became	become
begin	began	begun
bend	bent	bent
bet	bet	bet
bid	bid	bid
bind	bound	bound
bite	bit	bitten
bleed	bled	bled
blow	blew	blown
break	broke	broken
bring	brought	brought
broadcast	broadcast	broadcast
build	built	built
burst	burst	burst
buy	bought	bought
cast	cast	cast
catch	caught	caught
choose	chose	chosen
come	came	come
cost	cost	cost
creep	crept	crept
cut	cut	cut
deal	dealt	dealt—
dig	dug	dug
dive	dove	dived
do	did	done
draw	drew	drawn
dream	dreamed / dreamt	dreamed / dreamt
drink	drank	drunk
drive	drove	' driven
eat	ate	eaten
fall	fell	fallen
feed	fed	fed
feel	felt	felt
fight	fought	fought
find	found	found
fit	fit	fit
flee	fled	fled
338
Appendix 2: Verbs
fly	flew	flown
forbid	forbade	forbidden
forecast	forecast	forecast
foresee	foresaw	foreseen
forget	forgot	forgotten
forgive	forgave	forgiven
forsake	forsook	forsaken
freeze	froze	frozen
get	got	gotten
give	gave	given
go	went	gone
grind	ground	ground
grow	grew	grown
hang	hung	hung
have	had	had
hear	heard	heard
hide	hid	hidden
hit	hit	hit
hold	held	hold
hurt	hurt	hurt
input	input	input
keep	kept	kept
kneel	knelt	knelt
know	knew	known
lay	laid	laid
lead	led	led
leave	left ·’	left
lend	lent	lent
let	-let	
		
lie	lay	lain
light	lit / lighted	lit / lighted
lose	lost	lost
make	made	made
mean	meant	meant
meet	met	met
mislead	misled	misled
mistake	mistook	mistaken
misunderstand	misunderstood	misunderstood
overcome	overcame	overcome
overdo	overdid	overdone
override	overrode	overridden
oversee	oversaw	overseen
oversleep	overslept	overslept
overtake	overtook	overtaken
overthrow	overthrew	overthrown
Appendix 2: Verbs
339
pay	paid	paid
prove	proved	proven / proved
put	put	put
quit	quit	quit
read	read	read
ride	rode	ridden
ring	rang	rung
rise	rose	risen
run	ran	run
say	said	said
see	saw	seen
seek	sought	sought
sell	sold	sold
send	sent	sent
set	set	set
sew	sewed	sewn / sewed
shake	shook	shaken
shed	shed	shed
shoot	shot	shot
show	showed	shown / showed
shrink	shrank	shrunk
shut	shut	shut
sing	sang	sung
sit	sat	sat
sleep	slept	slept
slide	slid	slid
sling	slung	·’	slung
slit	slit	slit
-- speak	—		spoke		-.spoken
speed	sped	sped
spend	spent	spent
spin	spun	spun
split	split	split
spread	spread	spread
- stand	stood	stood
steal	stole	stolen
stick	stuck	stuck
stink	stank / stunk	stunk
strike	struck	struck / stricken
string	strung	strung
swear	swore	sworn
sweep	swept	swept
swell	swelled	swollen
swim	swam	swum
swing	swung	swung
340
Appendix 2: Verbs
take	Look	taken
teach	taught	taught
tear	tore	torn
tell	told	told
think	thought	thought
throw	threw	thrown
thrust	thrust	thrust
understand	understood	understood
undertake	undertook	undertaken
undo	undid	undone
uphold	upheld	upheld
upset	upset	upset
wake	woke	woken
wear	wore	worn
weave	wove	woven
weep	wept	wept
wet	wet	wet
win	won	won
wind	wound	wound
withdraw	withdrew	withdrawn
write	wrote	written
APPENDIX 3
Glossary of Grammar Terms
abstract noun: a noun that names an emotion, idea, or quality; an abstract noun can-
not be perceived with any of the five senses (honesty) (see also concrete nouns)
action research: a small-scale research project that investigates a specific question*
that a teacher has about something important to his or her class
active voice: verb form used when the subject is acting upon an object—that is, the
receiver of the action (Mary wrote the letter.) (see also passive voice)
adjective: a word that describes or limits a noun or pronoun
adjective clause: a dependent clause that functions as an adjective
adverb: a word that modifies a verb, an adjective, or another adverb
adverb clause: a dependent clause that functions as an adverb
affix: a prefix or a suffix
antecedent: the noun for which a pronoun stands
appositive: a word or a group of words, usually set off by commas, that renames or
defines a noun (Seafood gumbo, a popular iCaiun dish in Louisiana, is made with
onions and green peppers.)
article:an adjective that makes a noun definite or indefinite
auxiliary verb: a helping verb (see also to be; have, has, had; do, does, did; modals)
avoidance: term applied to situations in which ELLs avoid using certain grammatical
structures because of perceived difficulty or fear of making an error
base form of a verb: a verb form without to or any endings (also called simple form
or dictionary form)
to be: a main verb in English that indicates existence or describes the subject and an
auxiliary verb that forms the progressive tenses and the passive voice; the most
irregular verb in English with eight forms (de, am, is, are, was, were, being, been)
by + agent: phrase used in passive voice constructions to indicate who performed the
action (The house was built by my two uncles.)
causative verbs: a verb that expresses the idea of somebody causing something to
occur (have, get, make, let: She had the man change the tire.)
clause: a group of words with both a subject and a verb
cognate: a word in one language that looks or sounds like a word in another lan-
guage; cognates share a common origin
341
342
Appendix 3: Glossary
comma splice: an incorrect sentence with two clauses that have been connected with
a comma in without any connector word
common noun: the name of any person, place, or thing (see proper noun)
comparative: adjective or adverb form used for comparing two or more people,
things, or actions; formed with more (more quickly) or -er (taller)
complement: the part of a sentence that comes after a verb and is needed to make the
sentence complete
complex sentence: a sentence consisting of one independent clause and at least one
dependent clause
compound-complex sentence: a sentence consisting two independent clauses and at
least one dependent clause
compound sentence: a sentence consisting of two independent clauses
concrete noun: a noun that you can perceive with your five senses (newspaper) (see
abstract noun)
conditional sentence: a sentence with a hypothetical situation and its consequence or
result
conjunction: a word that connects parts of a sentence together, including words,
phrases, and clauses
conjunctive adverb: transitional devices between two main ideas; the adverb appears
with the second of the two ideas (consequently, however, therefore)
content teachers: K-12 teachers of non-ELL subjects such as mathematics and science
who today have ELLs in their classes, which means that these teachers are a pri-
mary source of English input for the ELLs (in addition to the content subject mat-
ter)
contraction: a reduced form of a noun or pronoun and a verb (it's) made by substitut-
ing an apostrophe for the missing letters
coordinating conjunction: a word that connects two independent clauses in a com-
pound sentence (and, but, or)
correlative conjunctions: pairs of words that connect equivalent sentencejaarts
(both . . . and, neither . . . nor, not only . . . but also)
count nouns: nouns that can be counted and therefore have both a singular and a
plural form (one book, two books; a child, many children; a fish, five fish) (see also
non-count nouns)
dangling modifier: a phrase that modifies a word that it was not logically intended to
modify (Running across the street, the driver hit her brakes but hit the cat anyway.
NOTE: The driver was not running, so the phrase running across the street cannot be
next to the driver.)
declarative sentence: a statement
definite article: article that indicates a specific noun (the)
demonstrative adjective: an adjective that points out a specific noun (these books)
demonstrative pronoun: a pronoun that substitutes for a specific noun that can be
understood from context (those books are mine, but these are yours)
dependent clause: a clause that cannot stand alone as a complete sentence
descriptive grammar: a view of grammar that considers actual usage of language
rather than relying on prescribed rules
Appendix 3: Glossary i 343
dictionary form of a verb: See base form of a verb
direct object: a noun or pronoun that receives the action of the verb
double negative: the incorrect use of two negative structures within one clause
drill: a practice technique that includes multiple encounters with the target language
..
structure in a relatively short period
-ed participial adjective: a participial adjective ending in -ed, -en, -ns, or other irreg-
ular form that implies that the noun in question is receiving or being affected by
the action (an amazed viewer)
EFL: English as a Foreign Language; English learning setting in which English is not
spoken widely outside the classroom, such as Japan (see also ESL)
embedded question: a question in the form of a noun clause that is embedded in an
independent clause (No one knows where she lives.]
emphatic: a form used for expressing emphasis (I do understand.]
ESL: English as a Second Language; English learning setting in which English is widely
spoken outside the classroom, such as the น.ร., Canada, the U.K., Australia, New
Zealand (see also EFL)
ESP: English for Specific Purposes; ESL or EFL course or curriculum that meets the
unique needs of students who are learning English for one specific reason (Eng-
lish for tourism, English for pilots, English for business)
essential relative clause: an adjective clause that follows a general noun and is there-
fore essential to the reader's understanding of the sentence; never punctuated with
a comma: We want to visit a city that enjoys a warm climate, (see also non-essential
relative clause)
exclamation: a sentence that expresses strong emotion and is followed by an exclama-
tion point (Help!)
first conditional: a Structure used for talking about possibilities in the present or
future that consists of a condition clause and a result clause (also called condi-
tional type 1)_______________________________________________________
first person: subject pronouns I (singular) and we (plural)
fragment: an incomplete sentence frequently consisting of a phrase or a dependent
clause that is not properly connected to the main clause
fused sentence: an incorrect sentence with two clauses that have been put together
without a proper conjunction or punctuation (also called run-on sentence)
gender: the restriction of a noun, pronoun, or possessive adjective to a specific gender
(he, him, his for males)
Generation 1.5: term referring to the growing number of ELLs who graduate from
น.ร. high schools but enter college without sufficient English language skills; the
term refers to the fact that these ELLs resemble both first- and second-generation
immigrants
gerund: an -ing form that functions as a noun
344 ะ':ะ· Appendix 3: Glossary
idiom: a multi-word expression in which the meanings of the individual words do not
equal the meaning of the complete expression (The test was a Piece of cake.ไ
imperative sentence: a sentence that expresses a request or a command
...	indefinite article: articles that do not indicate a specific noun (a, an)
indefinite pronoun: pronouns that do not refer to any specific person or thing (any-
one, something)
independent clause: a clause that can stand alone as a complete sentence
indirect object: an object (person or thing) for whom or to whom or for which or to
which something is done; an indirect object occurs before a direct object
infinitive: to plus base form a verb (to go, to be, to take)
infix: a letter or letters inverted in a word; English does not have infixes.
-ing participial adjective: a participial adjective ending in -ing that implies that the
noun in question is actually doing or causing the action (an amazing movie)
interjection: a word that expresses strong feeling or emotion
interrogative pronoun: a pronoun that is used to form a question (who, what, whose)
interrogative sentence: a question	·■<■
intransitive verb: a verb that is never followed by a direct object (happen) -
irregular verb: a verb whose past tense and past participle forms are not formed by
adding -d or -ed
K-12: term applied to regular subjects taught from kindergarten to twelfth grades in
บ.ร. and Canadian schools
linking verb: a verb that connects the subject and a complement (be, seem, look)
main clause: the central independent clause of a sentence
mass nouns: See non-count nouns
mixed conditional: a conditional sentence in which the verb in one clause expresses
an action in the present or future and the other verb expresses an action in the
-----------------past_______________________ ____________________________________________________________________
modals: an auxiliary verb that expresses feelings, attitudes, or opinions in a verb
phrase (can, might, should)
modify: describe or limit; often used is discussing the role of adverbs
negative: the "no" form of an utterance; negative grammatical words include no, not,
never, hardly, and rarely
negative evidence: information to ELLs about what is not possible in the target lan-
guage; conduits include explicit teaching, error correction, or communication
breakdown
non-count nouns: nouns that cannot be counted and therefore have only one form
(air, homework, machinery): also called mass nouns (see count nouns)
non-essential relative clause: an adjective clause that follows a specific, known noun
and therefore provides information that is non-essential to the reader's under-
standing of the sentence; always punctuated with a comma: Miami, which enjoys a
warm climate, is the largest city in Florida, (also called non-restrictive clause) (see
also essential relative clause)
Appendix 3: Glossary -ะ:ะ- 345
non-restrictive clause: See non-essential relative clause
non-separable: term used to describe a phrasal verb in which an object cannot sepa-
rate the verb and its particle (takes after her aunt, * takes her aunt after')
non-standard: language that does not conform to the rules of standard usage
noun: the name of a person, place, thing, or quality
noun clause: a dependent clause that functions as a noun
null article: the absence of any article before a noun
number: singular or plural in reference to a noun or pronoun
object of preposition: a noun or pronoun after a preposition
object pronoun: a pronoun form that can function as a direct object, indirect object,
or object of a preposition (me, him, her) (see also subject pronoun)
order of adjectives: sequence of adjectives deemed grammatical in current English
usage, namely articles, opinion, size, shape, condition, age, color, and origin (fl
magnificent, small, oval, shin, antique, silver, French spoon)
participle: a verb form ending in -ing, -ed or -en that functions as an adjective or part,
of a verb
particle: second part of a phrasal verb
part of speech: one of the traditional eight categories of words, including noun, pro-
noun, adjective, adverb, verb, preposition, conjunction, interjection
passive voice: verb form used when the subject is being acted upon an object—that is,
the agent of the action (The letter was written by Mary.) (see also active voice)
past participle: a participle formed with -d or -ed for regular verbs and with -en, -ne,
or other ways for irregular verbs that is used in the perfect tenses, passive voice, or
as an adjective
perfect tenses: present perfect tense, present perfect progressive tense, past perfect
tense, past perfect progressive tense, future perfect tense, future perfect progressive
tense; verb tenses consisting of a form of the auxiliary verb have and a past partici-
----pie----------------------------------------------------------------------
person: three categories of subject pronouns (see first person, second person, third
person)
phrasal verb: a verb and its particle (or preposition) (take after, look over, call off)
phrase: a group of words that functions as a single part of speech
plural: the form that represents more than one person, place, or thing
polysemous: having multiple meanings
positive evidence: input or models that language learners receive about the target lan-
guage
possessive adjective: an adjective that indicates ownership (my, your, our)
possessive pronoun: a pronoun that takes the place of a possessive word and its
object (mine, yours, ours)
predicate: part of a sentence excluding the subject; the verb and anything that modi-
fies it
predicate nominative: a noun or pronoun after the verb to be or a linking verb that
renames the subject
346
Appendix 3: Glossary
prefix: a group of letters placed before a base word that changes the meaning of the
word (happy, unhappy)
preposition: a word that shows the relationship between a noun (or pronoun) and
the rest of the sentence
prepositional phrase: combination of a preposition and its object (and any modifiers
or describing words)
prescriptive grammar: a view of grammar that prescribes, or dictates, exactly what we
should or should not say without any consideration of actual usage
present participle: a participle formed with -ing that is used in the progressive tenses
and as an adjective
principal parts of a verb: the four forms of a verb from which all tenses of the verb
can be made—namely base form, past tense, past participle, present participle (go,
went, gone, going). Some sources do not count the present participle as a principal
part of a verb.
progressive tenses: present progressive tense, present perfect progressive tense, past
progressive tense, past perfect progressive tense, future progressive tense, future
perfect progressive tense; verb tenses that contain a form of the verb to be and a
present participle
pronoun: a word that can take the place of a noun
proper noun: the name of a specific person, place, or thing (see also common noun)
quantifiers: numbers and words such as many, much, a few, a little that function as
adjectives (also called quantity adjectives)
reflexive pronoun: a pronoun ending in -self that is preceded by the noun or pro-
noun to which it refers inside the same clause
regular verb: a verb whose past tense and past participle forms end in -d or -ed
relative clause: an adjective clause
relative pronoun: a pronoun that connects a relative clause to the rest of the sentence
(พfwfthat, which, whom)
run-on sentence: sentence with two clauses that have been put together without a
proper conjunction or punctuation (also called fused sentence)
schwa: vowel sound that occurs in unstressed syllables (sofa, lemon, graded)
second conditional: a structure used for talking about unreal or contrary-to-fact situ-
ations in the present or future which consists of a condition clause and a result
clause (also called conditional type 2)
second person: subject pronouns you (singular) and you (plural)
sentence: a group of words that expresses a complete thought
separable: term used to describe a phrasal verb in which an object can separate the
verb and its particle (pick up the papers, pick the papers up)
simple form of a verb: see base form of a verb
simple sentence: a sentence with one independent clause
singular: the form that represents one person, place, or thing
slot and filler: a system of grammatical analysis that uses sentence patterns containing
slots for the target grammar item
Appendix 3: Glossary -z 347
split infinitive: a nonstandard form in which an adverb has been placed between to
and the verb (w never repeat)
stranding: a structure in which a preposition does not occur next to its object (The
woman whom he is talking to is my aunt.} (also called preposition stranding)
subject: part of a sentence excluding the predicate; the noun (or pronoun) and any-
thing that modifies it that performs the action of the verb
subject-auxiliary inversion: placement of the auxiliary verb before the subject that
usually occurs in questions
subject pronoun: a pronoun that can function as the subject of a sentence (I, he, she)
(see also object pronouns)
subject-verb agreement: condition in which the subject and the verb agree in
number—that is, singular subjects accompany singular verbs and plural subjects
accompany plural verbs
subjunctive: the mood of a verb that shows hopes, doubts, or wishes (I recommend
that you be given this job.)
subordinate clause: a dependent clause	/
subordinating conjunction: a word that introduces an adverb clause and explains its
relationship to the main part of the sentence (after,; because, while)
suffix: a word ending that changes the meaning of the word (sad, sadder) or its part of
speech (sad, sadness)
superlative: the highest level of an adjective or adverb; formed with the most (the most
quickly) or -est (the tallest)
syntax: the rules that show how the words of a language can be arranged to make a
phrase or sentence
tag question: a short question attached to the end of a statement to elicit confirma-
tion from the speaker (Apples grow on trees, don't they?}
third conditional: a structure used for talking about unreal situations in the past that
consists of a condition clause and a result clause (also called conditional type 3)
third person: subject pronouns he, she, it (singular) and they (plural)
transitive verb: a verb that requires a direct object (put}
understood subject: the subject you is rarely stated and is therefore said to be understood
verb: a word that shows action or state of being
verbal: a participle, infinitive, or gerund
verb tense: simply put, the time of the action or state conveyed by the verb
voiced sounds: sounds produced by moving or vibrating the vocal cords (/b/, /g/, /v/)
voiceless sounds: sounds produced without moving or vibrating the vocal cords (/p/,
/!</, /f/)
wh- question: an information question that begins with a wh- word such as who, what,
or where (compare with yes-no question)
word part: a prefix, a root (base), or a suffix of a word
yes-no question: an information question for which the answer is either yes or no
348 -ะะะ- Appendix 3: Glossary
zero article: the use of no article before certain classes of words, including plural
nouns for general reference, non-count nouns, abstract nouns, and names of
countries
zero conditional: a structure consisting of a condition clause and a result clause that
is used for talking about things that always happen or happened under certain
conditions
REFERENCES
Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test (FCAT) 2007. Retrieved August 1, 2008, from:
http://fcat.fldoe.org/pdf/releasepdf/07/FL07_G5M_TB-Rel_WT_C002.pdf
Folse, K. (2004a). Intermediate reading practices: Building reading anã vocabulary skills,
3rd ed. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.	J
(2004b). Vocabulary myths: Applying second language research to classroom teach-
ing. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
(2006). The art of teaching speaking: Research and pedagogy for the ESL/EFL class-
room. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Folse, K., & Ivone, J. (1997). First discussion starters: speaking fluency activities for lower-
level ESL/EFL students. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Folse, K„ Mitchell, D., Smith-Palinkas, B., & Tortorella, D. (2004). Clear grammar 4:
Activities for spoken and written communication. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press.
Liu, D. (2003). The most frequently used spoken American English idioms: A corpus
analysis and its implications. TESOL Quarterly, 37, 671-700.
Seiinker, L. (1972). Interlanguage. IRAL, 10, 209-231.
West, M. (1953). A general service list of English words. London: Longman.
349
INDEX
abstract noun, 44-45
action vs. being verbs, 47, 103, 118, 299
action research, 29, 98, 112, 135, 151,
160, 178, 184, 192, 199, 208, 221,
230, 239, 251, 261
active voice, 242-51, 306-7
adjective, 42-43, 48, 53-55, 62, 98; vs.
adverbs, 324-25; comparison, 13,
241, 268, 283-84; -ed vs. -ing, 9,
245-46; endings, 62, 233, 234; plus
preposition, 6, 171-72, 174, 247-48;
sequencing, 55, 266-67, 306; types of,
42, 54-55
adjective clauses, 9, 18, 20, 21, 22, ว2,
67, 68, 70, 177, 193-200, 304-5
jdyerbs, 42, 55-56, 65; vs. adjectives, _
324-25; of degree, 37, 55, 56, 286;
endings, 235, 237; of frequency, 56,
268, 272-73; of manner, 56; types of,
56
adverb clause, 67-68
a few vs. a little, 17, 156-57
affect-vs. effect, 39, 333
after vs. in, 170, 178
ago vs. before, 170, 178
ain't, 108
another, 10, 278-79
article, 4, 10, 29, 54, 179-84
aspect, 74, 120-24
asterisk, 2
at/on/in, 4, 14, 61, 167-69
auxiliary verb, 46, 48-51
bad vs. badly, 4, 39, 330-31
base form, 74
be, 49, 90-99; eight forms of 49; vs.
have, 11, 46, 91
be going to, See going to.
because, 67
before vs. ago, 170, 178
broke vs. broken, 38
business English, 16-17
by + agent, 244-45
CAHSE, 19
clauses, 9, 57, 67-70, 193-200
cognates, 98, 239
comma, 69, 71-72, 163, 253
comma splices, 72
common noun, 45
comparative, 13, 283-84
comprehensible input, 266, 299
composition practice, 23-25, 309-12
complex sentences, 70
compound sentences, 69
compound-complex sentences, 70
concrete noun, 45
conditional, 9, 252-62, 270-71, 273-74,
323
conjugating verbs, 3, 71, 74-85, 90-151
conjunction, 57-58
contractions, 92, 108, 131, 148, 257,
280-81
conversation class, 17
coordinating conjunction, 58, 69
350
Index
351
correlative conjunctions, 58
could, errors with, 229
count/non-count nouns, 4, 8, 28, 46,
152-60, 182, 184
country names, 4, 6, 10, 29, 181
definite article, 54, 181
demonstrative adjectives, 54
demonstrative pronouns, 53
dependent clauses, 67-68, 70
describe vs. modify, 55
descriptive adjectives, 54-55
descriptive grammar, 37-38
determiner, 153
diagramming, 3
direct approach, 16
direct object, 65-66, 242-43
do vs. make, 284-85
double negatives, 2, 42, 324
double subject, 51
doubling final consonants, 5, 8, 103,
116-17, 268-69, 295-96
drill, 17, 159-60, 208-9, 230-31, 290-92
during vs. for, 171, 178
-ed, 12, 116-17, 119, 135-37, 171
-ed vs. -ing (adjectives), 245-48
editing practice, 309-16
effect~vs7~affectr-3S)—3~33---------
Eiken exam, 17
embedded question, 277-78
emphatic do, 50
-en, 47, 92
few vs. a few, 156
for vs. during, 171, 178
forvs. since, 120, 170, 178, 290-92
/or, overuse of, 174
form vs. function, 62-63
formal vs. informal language, 37-39
fragments, 57, 73, 221
fused sentences, 71-73
future (simple future), 77, 139, 141
future progressive tense, 78, 139, 144
future perfect tense, 80, 139, 145
future perfect progressive tense, 83, 139,
146
games, 253, 288
Generation 1.5, 30	·■■
gerund:; after certain verbs, 6, 14, 203-5;
after preposition, 8, 16, 172, 174,
178, 206; as subject 201-2; vs.
infinitives 16, 201-7
get (in passive voice), 245
go + gerund, 203
going to, 139-40; as gonna, 280-81;
vs. will, 143, 145, 153, 226
gonna, 280-81
good vs. well, 289
grammatical prepositions, 61
fiud--had7^7-l-=7-2----------------------
have: auxiliary, 50, 104-5; in perfect
tenses, 104; misspelled as of, 39,
326-27; vs. be, 11, 15
have someone VERB, 205
error correction, 311-12
essay writing, 18
ESLvs. EFL, 18, 20-21
ESP, 16, 23
everyone (his/her or their), 38
example sentences, 289-304, 289, 304-6
exceptions to rules, 3, 28
false beginners, 297-98
FANBOYS, 70
FCAT, 19, 21
feel bad (vs. badly), 4, 14, 324-25
have something PAST PARTICIPLE, 132
help someone (to) VERB, 205
her, 53
how many vs. how much, 155, 159-60
I vs. me, 315-16
idioms, 26, 162, 175, 184, 213
if, 9, 58, 125, 252-62, 270-71, 273-74.
323
imperative, 50
in vs. after, 170, 177, 178
indefinite articles, 179-80, 184
352
Index
indefinite pronouns, 38, 53
independent clause, 67, 69-70
indirect approach, 16
indirect object, 65
infinitives, 3, 16-17, 201-9, 263
inflection, 90, 225
informal language, 36-38
-ing vs. -ed (adjectives), 245-47
intensive language programs, 19
interactive explanations, 26-27
interjections, 7, 42, 62
interlanguage, 28
intransitive verb, 7, 65-66, 219-20,
320
inverting subject and verb, 64, 277-78
irregular verbs, 74-76, 104, 117, 303,
336-40
it's/its/its', 39, 327-28
K-12, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23-27
labels, 33-34, 211
lay vs. lie, 39, 319
let someone VERB, 205
lexical prepositions, 61
lie vs. lay, See lay vs. lie
linking verbs, 48
little vs. a little, 156
“iõs^vsriõõsè 3'97334
-ly, 232-236
make vs. do, 285
make someone VERB, 205
manner of articulation, 187
many vs. much, 4, 14, 20, 27, 152, 155,
156-59
mathematics class, 18, 19, 22, 23
me (and a person), 33
might, avoidance of, 224, 231
minimal pairs, 188
modals, 4, 6, 14, 28, 48, 51, 224-31
modify vs. describe, 55
much in affirmative, 55, 157
multiple choice, 299-300
myself, 39, 317
native vs. non native, 2-15, 17, 20-22
native errors, 33-42, 313-25
natural error, 102, 117, 176
negative expressions, 267-68
negative verbs, 11, 15, 92, 106-7,
128-30, 147, 267-68, 321-22
non-count nouns. See count nouns,
non-restrictive clauses, 190
noun clause, 10, 15, 67-68, 177,
277-78
noun phrase, 57, 66-67
nouns, 42-46, 100; endings, 232, 235;
plus preposition, 171, 173-74
null article, 182-84
objects (direct and indirect), 65-66
object of a preposition, 59, 67
object pronouns, 51, 52
ofvร. have, 326-27
omission of subjects, 64
order of adjectives, 54-55, 266-67
ordinal numbers, 123
other vs. others, 10, 15, 278-79
past modals, 230
passive voice, 242-51
parts of speech, 40-63, 232-41
participial adjectives, 245-48
qpaTtide—21'1------------------------------
past participle, 39, 74, 104, 119, 165,
196, 243-44, 323
past perfect progressive tense, 82, 126
past perfect tense, 5, 80, 115-16, 125,
271-72
past progressive tense, 10, 15, 78
perfect progressive tenses, 81-83
perfect tenses, 79-80
person, 71
phrase, 57, 67
phrasal verbs, 9, 11, 15, 210-23
place of articulation, 187
polysemy, 60, 213, 225
possessive, 4, 14, 39, 282-83, 329, 330,
331, 335
possessive adjectives, 54
Index
353
possessive pronoun, 53
predicate, 64
prepositional phrases, 59, 65, 66, 71, 98,
163, 196
prepositions, 42, 59-61, 161-78: after
adjectives, 6, 172, 174, 178, 247-48;
after nouns, 171-74; after verbs, 171,
178; at/on/in, 4, 14, 61, 167-69; lists
of, 164-67; location vs. time, 98, 163;
polysemy, 60; stranding, 177; types of,
61; unnecessary, 2, 314-15
prescriptive grammar, 37-38
present participles, 74, 103, 118, 196
pronouns, 7, 39, 42, 51-53
pronunciation, 185-92
pronunciation of -s, 7, 102, 185-86,
188, 190-92
pronunciation of ~ed, 12, 116, 135-37,
185-92, 274
proper nouns, 45
present perfect progressive tense, 81, 101,
105-6
present perfect tense, 79, 101, 104-5,
281-82; vs. simple present tense, 6,
11, 12, 14, 15, 112-13
present progressive tense, 73, 77, 101,
102-3, 139, 142, 307
principal verb parts, 47, 74-75, 336-40
proficiency level, 23, 25
progressive tenses, 77-88, 102-3, 118
punctuation, 58, 69, 72, 163, 253
quantifying phrases, 154
quantity adjectives, 54
question formation, 93-95, 109-10,
131-32, 148-49, 267-68
quizzes, 308
readability of texts, 25
reduced adjective clauses, 196-97, 199-200
reflexive pronouns, 53	I
regular verbs, 74-75, 104, 119
relative pronoun, 52, 68, 197-200
restrictive clauses, 195
RPTE, 19
run-on sentences, 71-72
—5, 5, 102
'ร vs. ร', 4, 14, 39, 108, 282-83, 329
science class, 21, 22
sentences, 64, 69, 71-73, 261-62,
270-71
separability, 214-18, 221-23
shall, 51
should of vs. should have, 4, 14, 39,
326-27
simple past tense, 12, 75, 116-117
simple future tense, 75, 139, 141
simple predicates, 65
simple present tense, 2, 75, 101-2, 139,
143	'
simple sentences, 69
simple subjects, 64
simple tenses, 76-77
simplification, 25
since vs. for, 120, 170, 178, 281
slot and filler, 47
so, 69
sociolinguistics, 36-38, 211-12, 280
so far, 123
songs, 17, 22, 171, 192, 297
spelling, 102, 103, 118-19, 192, 232,
_._._268=69,_295=9.6_______.____-_____._________________
splitting an infinitive, 37
spoken language, 92, 185-92
standard language, 37-39
stranding, 177
student expectations, 16
subject, 64, 202, 206
subject pronoun, 52
subject-verb agreement, 70-71, 321-22
subjunctive mood, 259, 260, 270-271
subordinating conjunctions, 58, 72
suffixes, 232-41
superlative, 122, 283-84
TAKS, 19
task, 16, 21, 22, 290, 299, 309
teachable moment, 27, 208-9, 263-66
354
Index
tense vs. time, 4, 6, 14, 257
tenses, switching, 48
terminology, limiting use of, 292
than vs. that, 178
that, 178, 193-97
the, 4, 6, 10, 14, 15, 28, 179-84
the other(ร), 278-79
them vs. those, 39, 326
they're/there‘/their, 39, 335
those vs. them, 39, 326
three-word prepositions, 167
three-word verbs, 210
time, 74, 100-1, 114-16, 138-39, 256
to/too/two, 39, 332
TOEFL®, 17
transitive verbs, 48, 65-66, 215-20, 244,
320
transitional devices, 59
two-word prepositions, 167
two-word verbs, 210-23
unnecessary prepositions, 2, 4, 14, 42,
314-15
used to, 115, 127-29
verb phrases, 66-67
verb tenses, 74-85, 100-37, 25-2-56
verbs, 45, 46-51, 64-66, 74-75, 171,
174, 233, 282, 304-7
visual in teaching, 295-96, 300-1,
306-7, 311-12
voiced vs. voiceless, 187-88
vowel sound, 187, 188
wait time, 27
well vs. good, 279
when vs. while, 10, 15
which vs. that, 193-207
who vs. whom, 37-38, 194
whoever vs. whomever, 39, 320
who's vs. whose, 39, 331
whose, 194, 331
will, 28, 138-39, 141; vs. going to, 140,
143, 151, 224, 280
wish, 32, 125, 251, 257-62
word forms, 232-41
word walls, 17
writing practice, 309-11
would: conditional, 252-62; past verb
form, 8, 115-16, 127-28; vs. used to,
128
yet, 121
your/you're, 39, 329