new
MICHAEL SWAN
Practical
English
Usage
Fully Revised International Edition
•	complete topic-by-topic grammar
•	guide to over 250 vocabulary problems
OXFORD
PRACTICAL ENGLISH USAGE
Michael Swan
PRACTICAL
ENGLISH
USAGE
Fourth Edition
OXFORD
NIVERSITY PRESS
OXFORD
UNiYiMin r««
Creat curendori Street. Oxford. 0X2 6i»r. United Kingdom
Oxford บท!พนty h«i is 4 department ๙ (he University of Oxford
mark ๙Oxford Unnrrsityftess in the UK and in ecruto ocher countries
©Michael Swan -0,6
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
link* to third party website* arc provided by Oxford เท good faith and for
information only Oxford disc burn any responsibility for the materials
contained เท any third party website referenced เท this work
ISBN y;8 019 4*0*4* 6
Printed in China
ACKNOWLEDCfMMm
2010. Reproduced by permission of The Independent
Sources: Entry 287.3 - The OU Man and rtr Stu (Kindle Edition) by Ernest
Classics - Kindle Edifwn) by John Steinbeck (Penguin. 2000X Entry 31*5 -
Dedication
To lohn Eckersley, who firsl encouraged my interest in this kind of thing.
Acknowledgements
I din guileful IO all the people who have helped me with lhe preparation of
(his fourth edition. I owe a particular debt to Professor Bas Aarts of University
College, London, and Ur Catherine Walter, of Linacre College. Oxford, who
both read all of the material in draft, and whose detailed comments and
suggestions have substantially improved the book. 1 am equally indebted to
Professor Loretta Gray of Central Washington University, who also read the
whole text, and whose comprehensive advice on questions of American usage
has provided valuable support for this aspect of the revision. Many teachers in
different countries were good enough to respond to a request for suggestions
for possible additions and improvements: my thanks to the individuals and
organisations concerned. My thanks also to members of the staff of the London
School of English, who kindly participated เท a very constructive workshop
designed to explore ways of using the book. Several specialists have generously
shared their knowledge of specific areas of language and usage, and numerous
teachers, students and colleagues have taken the trouble to make comments
and suggestions regarding particular entries. Their input, too, has benefited the
hook considerably. I must also reacknowledge my debt to lhe many consultants
and correspondents whose help and advice with the preparation of earlier
editions continue as an important contribution to the fourth.
Any pedagogic grammarian owes an enormous debt to the academic
linguists on whose research he or she is parasitic. There is not enough space to
mention all the scholars of lhe last hundred years or so on whose work I have
drawn directly or indirectly, even if I had a complete record of my borrowings.
But I must at least pay homage to two monumental reference works of the
present generation: the Comprehensive Grammar of lhe English Language, by
Quirk, Greenbaum, Leech and Svarivik (Longman, 1985), and the Cambridge
Grammar of lhe English Language, by Huddleston, Pulium and others
(Cambridge University Press. 2002). Their authoritative accounts of the facts of
English structure and usage constitute an essential source of information for
anyone writing pedagogic grammar materials today.
Finally, it is with particular pleasure that I express my gratitude, once again,
to the editorial, design and production team at Oxford University Press, whose
professional expertise is matched only by their concern to make an author's task
as trouble-free as possible.
page Vi
Contents summary
Acknowledgements	VI
Introduction	viii-xii
Contents overview	xiii-xix
Language terminology	xx-xxix
Phonetic alphabet	XXX
Practical English Usage
Grammar	Sections 1-28: entries 1-320
Vocabulary	Sections 29-31: entries 321-635
Index
page VI i
Introduction
What is Practical English Usage?
Practical English Usage is a combined usage guide and learner's grammar. It Is
intended mainly for advanced students and teachers of English as a foreign or
second language; it may also be useful to teacher trainers and materials writers.
It is not addressed to native speakers of English, who need a rather different
kind of reference book.
A usage guide
Usage guides deal with problem points: words and structures that people have
difficulty with, or disagree about. English, like all languages, is full of problems
for the foreign learner. Some of these points are easy to explain - for Instance, the
formation of questions, the difference" between since and for, or the meaning of
after all. Other problems arc more tricky, and cause difficulty even for advanced
students and teachers. How exactly Is the present perfect used? When do we
use past tenses to be polite? What are the differences between at. on and เท with
expressions of place? We can say a chair leg - why not arrtth-g? When can we use
the expression do so? When is the used with superlatives? Is unless the same as
if not? What are the differences between come and go, between each and every,
between big. forge and great, or between fairly, quite, rather and pretty? Is it
correct to say lhere's three more bottles in the fridge? I low do you actually say
3x4 = 12? And soon, and soon.
Practical English Usage Is a guide to problems of this kind. It deals with over
1,000 points which regularly cause difficulty to foreign students of English. It
will be useful, for example, to a learner who is not sure how to use a particular
structure, or who has made a mistake and wants to find out why it is wrong. It
will also be helpful to a teacher who is looking for a clear explanation of a difficult
language point. There is very full coverage of grammar, as well as explanations
ofa large number of common vocabulary problems. There a re also some entries
designed to clarify more general questions (e g. formality, slang, the nature of
standard English and dialects) which studentsand teachers may find themselves
concerned with.
Problems are mostly explained เท slniri separate entries. This makes it possible to
give a clear complete treatment of each point, and enables the user to concentrate
just on the question that he or she needs information about. เท longer entries,
basic information is generally given first, followed by more detailed explanations
and discussion of more advanced points.
A complete student's grammar
The grammatical entries in Practical English Usage are grouped into 28 Sections,
each dealing with a major grammatical topic (e g. present tenses, passives, nouns
and noun phrases, prepositions, relative clauses). So the book can be used not
only as a guide to particular usage problems, but also as a systematic reference
grammar For users who like to work in this way, each Section begins with one or
two pages giving a general introduction to the grammatical topic, together with a
list of common mistakes that are dealt with เท the entries that follow.
page viii
Vocabulary
The grammar Sections include a good deal of information about the structures
used with particular words. เท addition, the last three Sections of the book deal
specifically with vocabulary questions, and include an A Z guide IO over 250
common word problems of various kinds.
Approach and style
I	have tried to make the presentation as practical as possible. Each entry
contains an explanation of a problem, examples of correct usage, and (when
this is useful) examples of typical mistakes. เท some cases, an explanation
may be somewhat different from that found in many learners' grammars; this
is because the rules traditionally given for certain points (e.g. conditionals or
indirect speech) are not always accurate or helpful. Explanations are, as far
as possible, in simple everyday language. Where it has been necessary to use
grammatical terminology, I have generally preferred to use traditional terms
that are simple and easy to understand, except where this would be seriously
misleading. Some of these terms (e.g. future tense) would be regarded as
unsatisfactory by academic grammarians, but I am not writing for specialists.
There is a glossary of the terminology used in the book on pages xx-xxix.
The kind of English described
The explanations deal mainly with standard everyday southern British
English, but contrasts between British and American English are given detailed
attention. There are also brief notes on several other varieties (e.g. Australian
and Indian English). Information about stylistic differences (e.g. between
formal and informal usage, or spoken and written language) is provided where
this is appropriate.
Correctness and rules
If people say that a form is not 'correct', they can mean several different things.
They may for instance be referring to a sentence like Htavescen her yesterday,
which normally only occurs in the English of foreigners. They may be thinking
of a usage like less people (instead of fewer people), which is common in standard
English but regarded as wrong by some people. Or they may be talking about
forms like arrrt or 'double negatives', which are used เท speech by many British
and American people, but which do not occur in the standard dialects and arc not
usually written. This hook is mainly concerned with the first kind of'correctness':
the differences between British or American English and 'foreign' English.
However, there is also information about cases of divided usage in standard
English, and about a few important dialect forms.
The rules given in this book are descriptive: they explain what actually happens
in standard spoken and written English. Some usage guides give prescriptive
rules - rules devised by people who feel that the language should be tidied up
or protected against corruption. Such rules do not always correspond to actual
usage (the rule about not using less with plurals is an example). เท Practical
English Usage, I avoid giving rules which do not describe the language as it is
actually used, though I mention their existence where this is useful.
page IX
What this book does not do
Practical English Usage is not a complete guide to the English language. As the
title suggests, its purpose is practical: to give learners and their teachers the most
important information they need in order to deal with common language
problems. Within this framework, the explanations are as complete and accurate
as I can make them. However, it is not always helpful or possible in a book of this
kind to deal with all the details of a complex structural point; so readers may well
find occasional exceptions to some of the grammatical rules given here. Equally,
the book does not aim to replace a dictionary. While it gives information about
common problems with the use of a number of words, it does not attempt to
describe other meanings or uses of the words beside those points that are selected
for attention. Nor does it attempt to cover all the vocabulary problems that
learners may meet: for this, another complete book would be needed.
Changes เท the fourth edition
After consultation with users, the alphabetical organisation which was used in
previous editions has been replaced by a thematic arrangement (see above), so
as to make it easier to search for information. A number of amendments have
also been made to particular entries to reflect recent changes in the language
for instance, the reduced frequency of some modal verbs, the disappearance of
shall, or cases where British English is adopting American usage.
How much do mistakes matter?
It depends on how much people need, or want, a high level of correctness when
speaking or writing another language. For many learners this is important - for
instance for work, examinations, or their own personal goals - and Practical English
Usage will help them to approach standard British, American native speaker usage.
However, it it is important for such learners not to become obsessed with correctness,
or to worry every time they make a mistake. It is quite unnecessary to speak or write
a language like a native speaker in order to communicate effectively, and very few
adults in fact achieve a perfect command of another language. For some learners,
on the other hand, accuracy is relatively unimportant: people can use English
successfully for international communication even when their grammar differs
considerably from native-speaker models. However, too many such differences can
make a speaker or writer difficult to understand, so it is good even for these learners
to aim at a reasonable level of correctness.
Note also that mistake' is a relative term. The mistakes listed in this book arc wrong
if produced by someone aiming to write standard British or American English. They
would not necessarily be incorrect in some other varieties of the language.
How to find things: the Index
The best way to find information about a particular point is to look in the Index at
the end of the book. Most points are indexed under several different names, so it is
not difficult to locate the entry you need. For instance, if you want to know about
using to instead of a whole infinitive, in structures like I hope to, rd tike to, you
can find the number of the entry where this is explained by looking เท the index
under to', 'infinitives', ‘ellipsis' or 'leaving out words'. (On the other hand, it would
obviously not be helpful to look under hope' or 'want: the rule is a general one
about infinitive structures, not about these two verbs in particular.)
page
Using the Index
to (infinitive marker) 89.6; used instead of
whole infinitive ใwttt
pronunciation
infinitives SECTIONS 8-10; introduction
88; progressive, perfect, passive and
negative infinitives 89; split infinitive
89.7; perfect infinitives (e g. to have left)
90; without to 91; to instead of whole
infinitive 280.1; as subject, object or
complement 92; infinitive or -mg form
95; infinitive or -mg form with different
uses 105; after verbs 97; after verb +
Object 98; after hear, see, etc + object 110;
'after adjectives 101; after easy, difficult,
impossible, etc 101.4; after superlatives
(eg. the youngest person to) 101.3;
after nouns and pronouns 102; after
280 ellipsis: infinitives /
1 to used instead of whole infinitive: We hope to.
We can use to instead of the whole infinitive of a repeated verb (and following
words), if the meaning is clear.
'Are you and Gillian getting married?' 'We hope to.’
'Lei's go fora walk.’ ‘I don't leant to.'
I don 7 dance much now, but 1 used to a lot.
Sorry / shouted al you. I didn't mean to.
Somebody ought to clean up the bathroom.' 771 ask Jack to.1
Be and have (used for possession) are not usually dropped.
There are more flowers than there used to be. (not . . . than there used to.)
She hasn't been promoted yet, but she ought to ร· II but rhe
You've got more freckles than you used to hhe. (Ncrr. . but she ought
(not You've got more freebies
than you Hsed-to7)
ellipsis (leaving out words) 27cf 280;
after adjectives 278.1; aftei will but urà
or 276; after as and than 2 7$ ft: after
auxiliary verbs 279; after conjunc lions
275.11; after determiners 2 71.2;
after if 244.6; after question words 275 8;
at the beginning of a sentem b 277;
before question tags 306.8; I
in advertisements, instructions, etc 291;
in emails, etc 290.2; in hea<flincs 292 1;
in infinitives (e.g. I don't want to) 280.1;
in noun phrases 278; in replies 275.1;
leaving out articles 142; leaving out
if 2444; leaving out prepositions 214;
leaving out prepositions before that
210.1; leaving out that 265; object relative
pronoun 234.4; subject relative pronoun
237.19; ellipsis causing comprehension
leave preposition 213; + object + infinitive
98; and forget 470; with preparatory it
(e.g. ru leave it to you to decide) 269.4;
with two objects 8.1
leave off .. .mg 100.1
leaving out words see ellipsis
left (= remaining) 509
leisurely adjective and adverb 194.1
problems 285.6-7
page
How to find things: the Contents overview
Larger grammatical topics (e.g. 'simple present', ‘articles', 'reflexive pronouns')
can also be found quite easily by looking through the Contents Overview on
pages x-xvi.
4 Talking about the Future
INTRODUCTION
35 going to 36 present progressive for future
39	U'itl. going to and present progressive: advanced points
40	future perfect 41 future progressive
4 2 be to · infinitive: I am to .... you arc to .... etc 43 future เท the past
12	Determiners: a/an and the; my, your, etc; this, that, etc
INTRODUCTION
133 articles, introduction 134 articles: basic information (A)
135 articles: basic Information (B) 136 more about the 137 more about a/an
138	no article with plural and uncountable nouns
139	the difference between tome! any and no article 140 talking in general
141 the: difficult cases 142 special rules and exceptions
143 possessive determiners: my, your, etc 144 this and that
145 thill that and ir things that have just been mentioned
14 Pronouns
INTRODUCTION
173	personal pronouns: basic information
174	personal pronouns: advanced points 175 singular they
176 possessive pronouns: mine, yours, etc 177 a friend of mine, etc
179	reciprocal pronouns: each other and one another
181	one, you and they, used for people เท general
182	one (substitute word):	ablgone
However, many smaller topicswill not show up in the Contents Overview,
because they do not have their own separate entries. So for instance to find
what structurescan be used with expect or hope, or what is the correct plural
form of phenomenon, it is best to go to the Index.
xii
Contents overview
This overview gives a general picture of the topics covered เท the book; it is not
a complete guide to the contents. References arc to entry numbers. To find
information about a particular point, consult the Index at the back of the book.
Grammar
Verbs
INTRODUCTION
1 irregular verbs 2 active verb tenses 3 progressive structures
a non-progressive verbs ร progressive with always, etc
6	perfect structures 7 subjects, objects and complements
8 wrbs with two objects 9 verbs with both active and passive meanings
to verb · object · complement: You make me nervous.
11	linking verbs: be, seem, look, etc 12 two-pan verbs: phrasal verbs
13	two-part verbs: prepositional verbs 14 verbs of movement: she ran เท, etc
15 verb f verb: auxiliary verbs 16 verb I verb: other structures
Be, have and do
INTRODUCTION
17 be general 18 be: progressive forms 19 be with auxiliar)'do 20 there is
21 /tote: introduction 22 have·, auxiliary verb 23 have: actions
24 have (got): possession, relationships and other states 25 be and have
26 do: introduction 27 da. auxiliary verb 28 do: substitute verb (I may do.)
29	do so/It!that
Present Tenses
INTRODUCTION
30	simple present: forms 31 simple present: use
32 present progressive 33 stones, commentaries and instructions
34	present tenses: advanced points
Talking about the Future
INTRODUCTION
35	going to 36 present progressive for future
37 simple present for future 38 will
39	will, going to and present progressive: advanced points
40	future perfect 41 future progressive
42 be to · infinitive: I am to .... you are to .... etc 43 future in the past
Past and Perfect Tenses
INTRODUCTION
44 simple past 45 past progressive
46 past form with present or future meaning 47 present perfect: basic information
48 present perfect or past? 49 present perfect or past: advanced points
Contents overview · xiii

so present perfect progressive
ร 1 present perfect simple or progressive? 52 present perfect or present?
S3 past perfect: basic information 54 past perfect: advanced points
55 past perfect: progressive 56 แน่ร is lhefirst/last .... etc
b Passives
INTRODUCTION
57 passive structures and verb forms SB by - agent
59	passive modal structures: It can be done tomorrow.
60	get as passive auxiliar)·: He got caught.
61	verbs with two objects เท tile passive 62 verbs with prepositions in the passive
63 II was thought that... 64 He is believed lobe ...
65 He was considered a genius. 66 My suitcase is packed.
67	When do we use passive structures?
7	Modal Auxiliary Verbs
INTRODUCTION
68	modals: grammar, pronunciation and contractions
69	deduction (deciding that something is certain): must, can't, etc
70	deduction (deciding that something is probable): should, ought to, etc
71	chances: may. might and could 72 may and might: some special uses
73 Strong obligation: must, will 74 strong obligation: have (got) to
75 have (got) io and must 76 w eaker obligation: should and ought to
77 weaker obligation: had belter 78 expectations: supposed to
79	willingness: will, can
80	instructions and requests: will, would, can, could, might, shall
81	permission: can, could, may, might, be allowed to 82 ability: can and could
83 ability: advanced points 84 can and could with see, hear, etc
85 be aide to 86 typical behaviour: can, could, may, might, will, would
87	typical behaviour: used to ' infinitive
8	Infinitives, -ing forms and Past Participles
INTRODUCTION
88	infinitives: introduction 89 infinitives: forms
90	use of perfect infinitives: glad to have left
91	infinitives without to: I saw you come in.
92	infinitive as subject or complement 93 ·Ing forms: introduction
94	-ing form as subject, object or complement
95	infinitive or -mg form? 96 participles: -Ing and ed forms used like adjectives
9	Infinitives, -ing forms and Past Participles after Nouns, Verbs, etc
INTRODUCTION
97	infinitives after verbs: It's beginning to rain
98	verb · object · infinitive: I want you to listen. 99 try and .... go and .... etc
100 -ing forms after verbs: I enjoy travelling.
tot infinitives after adjectives: pleased to see you
102	infinitives after nouns and pronouns: my decision to leave.
103	-ing forms after nouns and adjectives: tired of listening
Contents overview · xiv
104	-ing forms after prepositions: without breaking eggs
105	infinitives or -ing forms: both possible with different uses
106	active and passive infinitive with similar meaning
107	causative structures with make 108 causative and similar structures with get
109	causative and similar structures with have
110	hear, see, etc - object · verb form
10	Infinitives, -ing forms and Past Participles: Other Uses
INTRODUCTION
111	infinitives after question words: who to..., etc
112	infinitive of purpose: I sal down to rat. IB for ...to ...
114 infinitives: other uses 115 participle clauses'
11	Nouns and Noun Phrases; Agreement
INTRODUCTION
116 spelling of plurals 117 irregular and special plurals
118 pronunciation of plurals
11S countable and uncountable nouns: basic information
120	countable and uncountable nouns: advanced points
121	piece· and group words: a blade of grass; a bunch of flowers
122	noun . complement: What can follow a noun?
123	possessive»: noun ♦ 'ร (forms) 124 nouns in combination: my father's house
125	nouns in combination: milk chocolate
126	classifying expressions: noun * noun or preposition structure?
127	classifying expressions with ’ร: a child's toy; cow's milk
128	singular expressions with plural verbs
129	plural expressions with singular verbs
130	mixed singular and plural: other structures
131	distributive plural: Tell them to bring raincoats.
132	turning verbs into nouns: a cough, a taste
12	Determiners: a!an and the; my, your, etc; this, that, etc
INTRODUCTION
133	articles: introduction 134 articles: basic information (A)
135 articles: basic information (B) 136 more about the 137 more about α/αη
138	no article with plural and uncountable nouns
139	the difference between some!any and no article 140 talking in general
141 the: difficult cases 142 special rules and exceptions
143 possessive determiners: my, your, etc 144 this and that
145 this/that and it: things that have just been mentioned
13	Determiners: Quantifiers
INTRODUCTION
146 all: introduction 147 all (of) with noun phrasesand pronouns
148 «//with the verb: Wecan all swim. 149 all. everybody/everyone and everything
150 all and whole 151 every (one) 152 every and all 153 each
154 each and every-, the difference 155 both 156 either 157 neither
158 some 159 any 160 any - it doesn't matter who/ which/what'
Contents overview · XV
To find the answer to a specific question, see the
161 some and any. the main differences 162 any and every, the difference
163 no. none and not alany 164 no one and none 165 much and many
166 more 167 most 168 (a) little and (a) feu/ 169 las and fewer
170 least and fewest 171 enough
172	quantifying expressions: a lot, lots, a great deal, the majority, etc
14	Pronouns
INTRODUCTION
173	personal pronouns: basic information
174	personal pronouns: advanced points 175 singular they
176 possessive pronouns: mine, yours, etc 177 a friend of mine, etc
178	reflexive pronouns: myself, etc
179	reciprocal pronouns: each other and one another
180	somebody, someone, anybody, anyone, etc
181	one, you and they, used for people in general
182	one (substitute word): a bigone
15	Adjectives
INTRODUCTION
183	adjectives: normal position 184 order of adjectives 185 adjectives with and
186	adjectives after nouns and pronouns
187	adjectives: position after as, how, so. too 188 adjectives without nouns
189	gradable and non gradable adjectives
190	measurements: 'marked' and 'unmarked' forms
191	pronunciation of aged, naked, etc 192 What can follow an adjective?
16	Adverbs and Adverbiais
INTRODUCTION
193 adverbs of manner and adjectives 194 adverbs or adjectives: confusing case?
>95 adverb panicles: up, down, back, away, etc
196 position of adverbiais: introduction 197 connecting and comment adverbi;
198 indefinite frequency, certainty and completeness 199 focusing adverbiais
200 mid-position: details 201 manner, place and time
202	adverbiais modifying adverbiais: terribly sorry, right past me
17	Comparison
INTRODUCTION
203	as ...as; as much! many as 204 comparative and superlative adjectives
205	comparative and superlative adverbs
206	using comparatives and superlatives 207 much older, by far the oldest, etc
208	comparison: advanced points
18	Prepositions
INTRODUCTION
209	prepositions at the ends of clauses 210 prepositions before conjunctions
211	- ing forms and infinitives
212	prepositions before particular words and expressions
Contents overview · xvi
213	prepositions after particular words and expressions
214	expressions without prepositions
19	Basic Clause Types
INTRODUCTION
21 ร seทน.·ทce structure: basic word order 216 questions: basic rules
217 negative structures: basic rules 218 negative questions
219	negative structures with think, hope. seem, etc
220	multiple negatives: htmtMn'fsemohody.
221	ambiguous negatives
222	non affirmative words: anybody, ever. yet. etc 223 exclamations
224 imperatives 225 let introducing imperatives
20	Conjunctions, Sentences and Clauses
INTRODUCTION
226	putting things together: and, but, or
227	not ... or. not ... nor, and not
228	emphatic coordination: both ... and; {ท)either ... (n)or, not only
229	subordinate clauses: some general points
230	who. which, what, etc alter prepositions
231	tense simplification เท subordinate clauses
232	subjunctive: that she go, that they he, if I were, etc
21	Relative Clauses
INTRODUCTION
233	relatives: basic information
234	identifying and non-identifying clauses:
the tall man who...; Mr Rogers, who...
235	uprose 236 what 237 relatives: advanced points
INTRODUCTION
238 ordinary structures 239 special structures with past tenses and would
240 if I wereyou 241 unreal past situations 242 if only 243 if... will
244 other points 245 other structures found เท spoken English
246 other words and expressions with similar uses 247 unless
248	in case and if
23	Other Adverbial Clauses
INTRODUCTION
249	after, conjunction 250 before: conjunction
251 as. when and while, simultaneous events 252 whoever, whatever, etc
253 no matter who, etc 254 whether ...or ...
255	as and though: special word order
256	than- and ns clauses: leaving out subjects, etc
Contents overview · xvil
To find the answer to a specific question, see the Index ►
24	Noun Clauses, Direct and Indirect Speech
INTRODUCTION
257	direct speech: reporting verbs and word order
258	indirect speech: introduction 259 indirect speech: tenses
260 indirect speech: questions and answers 261 tààr and if
262 indirect speech: infinitives 263 indirect speech: advanced points
264 àr clauses 265 leasing out that 266 interrogative (question· word) clauses
25	Information Structure
INTRODUCTION
267	information structure: normal order and variations
268	preparatory it: subject 269 preparatory it: object
270	inversion: auxiliary verb before subject
271	inversion: full verb before subject
272	fronting: This question we have already disclosed.
273	cleft sentences: It teas my secretary U'ho ...
274	cleft sentences: What I need is a rest.
275	ellipsis (leaving words out): introduction
276	ellipsis with and, but and or 277 ellipsis at the beginning of a sentence
278 ellipsis in noun phrases 279 ellipsis after auxiliary verbs
280 ellipsis: infinitives
26	Written Texts
INTRODUCTION
281 formality 282 pronouns and other proforms
283 linking with conjunctions and adverbs 284 discourse markers in writing
285 reading complicated structures 286 paragraphs 287 repetition
288 academic writing 289 correspondence: letters
290 correspondence: emails, text messages, etc 291 abbreviated styles
292 headlines 293 punctuation: full Slop, question mark and exclamation mark
294 punctuation: colon 295 punctuation: semi-colon
296 punctuation: comma 297 punctuation: dash
298	punctuation: quotation marks
27	Speech and Spoken Exchanges
INTRODUCTION
299	spoken sentence structure 300 avoiding repetition: Wonderful, isnΊ it ?
301 discourse markers in speech 302 declarative questions: that's the boss?
303	rhetorical questions: Who cures?
304	echo questions: She's invited hou> many?
305	question tags: basic information 306 question lags: advanced points
307 reply questions: Was it? Did you, dear? 308 short answers: Yes. he can, etc
309 so am I, neither do they, etc 310 politeness: using questions
311 politeness: distancing verb forms 312 politeness: softening expressions
313 pronunciation: stress and rhyihm 314 pronunciation: intonation
315 pronunciation: weak and strong forms
Contents overview · xviii
28	Varieties of English
INTRODUCTION
rib standard English and dialects 317 correctness 318 changes in English
319 American and British English 320 other varieties of English
Vocabulary
29	Vocabulary Areas
INTRODUCTION
321 nationalities, countries and regions 322 numbers 323 talking about age
324 dates 325 telling the time 326 names and titles: Daniel; Mr Lewii
327 names: l lorence. Homer, etc 328 gender (references to males and females)
329 ‘social’ language 33 meals 331 telephoning
332	idioms, collocations and formulaic expressions
333	formal and informal vocabulary 334 slang
335	discriminatory and offensive language
30	Word Formation and Spelling
INTRODUCTION
336	abbreviations 337 contractions: I'll, don't, etc 338 prefixes and suffixes
339 de and deal 340 apostrophes 341 capital letters 342 hyphens
343 dsc and -Of 344 able and -ible 345 -fy 346 final e
347 doubling final consonants 348 y and i 349 ch and tch. 4 and ck
350 ie andei 351 spelling and pronunciation
31	Word Problems from A to z 352 635
find the
Contents overview · xix
specific question, see the Index
Language terminology
The following words and expressions are used In (his book to talk about grammar
and other aspects of language.
abstract noun (the opposite of a concrete noun) the name of something
which we experience as an idea, not by seeing, touching, etc. Examples: doubr,
height, geography.
active An active verb form Is one like breaks, told, will help (not like is broken,
was told, will be helped, which are passive verb forms). The subject of an
active verb is usually the person or thing that does the action, or that is
responsible for what happens.
adjective a word like green, hungry, impossible, which is used when we
describe people, things, events"etc. Adjectives are used in connection with
nouns and pronouns. Examples: a green apple, She's hungry.
adjective clause another name for relative clause
adverb a word like tomorrow, once, badly, there, also, which is used to say,
for example, when, where or how something happens.
adverbial an adverb, or a longer expression which has a similar function to an
adverb in a clause. Examples: I usually get up al seven o'clock on weekdays.
adverbial clause a clause which functions as an adverbial. Examples: On Sundays
I usually get up when I wake up; ru phone you if I have time.
adverb particle a short adverb like up, out, off, often used as part of a phrasal
verb (e g. clean up. look out, tell off).
affirmative an affirmative sentence เร one that makes a positive statement -
not a negative sentence or a question. Compare I agree (affirmative); I don't
agree (negative).
agent เท a passive sentence, the agent is the expression that says who or what
an action is done by. Example: this picture was probably painted by a child.
article A. an and the are called articles! Alan is called the 'indefinite article’;
the is called the ’definite article!
aspect Many grammarians prefer to talk about progressive and perfective aspect,
rather than progressive and perfect tense, since these forms express other ideas
besides time (e g. continuity, completion). I lowever, in this book the term lense
is often used to include aspect, for the sake of simplicity.
attributive Adjectives placed before nouns are in 'attributive position!
Examples: a green thirl; my noisy son. See also predicative
auxiliary verb a verb like be, have, do which is used with another verb to make
tenses, passive forms, etc. Examples: She was writing; Where have you pul it?
Sec also modal auxiliary verb.
base form the form of a verb that has no endings or other changes, used for
example in infinitives, imperatives and present lenses (except third person
singular). Examples: I'd like lophone; Pass the salt.
clause a stretch of language which contains a subject and a finite verb. Sentences
consist of one or more clauses. Examples: Alex couldn’t come today. I'll be
glad when Harry gels back. Tile word clause is also sometimes used for some
structures containing participles or infinitives. Example: Nol knowing what to
do. I telephoned Kobin. See also co-ordinate clause, main clause, subordinate
clause
l anguage terminology · XX
cleft sentence a sentence in which special emphasis is given to one pan (e.g.
the subject or the object) by using a structure with it or U'hat. Examples: Il
was you that caused the accident. What I need is a drink.
collective noun a singular word for a group. Examples: family, team.
comparative the form of an adjective or adverb made with -er (e.g. older,
faster); also the structure more · adjective adverb, used in the same way
(e.g. more useful, more politely).
complement I. (predicative complement) a part of a sentence that gives more
information about the subject (after be, seem and some other verbs), or, in some
structures, about the object. Examples: You ‘re the right person to help; She looks
very kind; they elected him President.
2. a structure or words needed after a noun, adjective, verb or preposition
to complete its meaning. Examples: the intention to travel; full of water,
try phoning, down the street.
compound a compound noun. verb, adjective, preposition, etc is one that is
made of two or more parts. Examples: bus driver, get on with; one-eyed.
concrete noun (the opposite of an abstract noun) the name of something which we
can experience by seeing, touching, etc. Examples: cloud; petrol, raspberry.
conditional a clause or sentence containing -/(or a word with a similar meaning).
Examples: If you try you'll understand; I would be surprised if she knew.
Supposing the train had been late, what would you have done?
conjunction a word like and, but. although, because, when, if, which can be
used to join clauses together. Example: I rang because I was worried.
consonant for example, the letters b, c, d.'f, g and their usual sounds (see
Phonetic alphabet, page xxx). See also vowel
continuous the same as progressive.
contraction a short form เท which a subject and an auxiliary verb, or
an auxiliary verb and the word not, are joined together into one word.
Contractions are also made with non-auxiliary be and have.
Examples: I'm; who'VC, lohn'lt. can't.
co-ordinate clause one of two or more clauses of equal 'value' that are connected.
Examples: Shall I come to your place or would you like to come to minef,
It’s cooler today and there's a bit of a wind. See also clause, main clause,
subordinate clause.
co ordinating conjunction a conjunction that joins co-ordinate clauses or other
co ordinate structures. Examples: and, but, or.
countable noun a noun like car, dog, idea, which can have a plural form, and
can be used with the indefinite article alan. Sec also uncountable noun.
declarative question a question which has the same grammatical form as a
statement. Example: lhat's your girlfriend?
definite article the.
defining relative see identifying relative.
demonstrative this, these, that, those.
determiner one of a group of words that begin noun phrases. Determiners
include a!an. the, my, this, each, either, several, more, both, all.
direct object see object
Language terminology · xxi
direct speech speech reported 'directly; in the tvords used by the original
speaker (more or less), without any changes of tense, pronouns, etc. Example:
She looked al me and said, 'This is my money’. See also indirect speech.
discourse marker a word or expression which shows the connection between
what is being said and the wider context. A discourse marker may, for
example, connect a sentence with what comes before or after, or it may show
the speaker’s attitude to what he/she is saying. Examples: on the other hand;
frankly, as a matter of fact.
duration how long something lasts. 1 he preposition for can be used with an
expression of time to indicate duration.
ellipsis leaving out words w hen their meaning can be understood from the context.
Examples: (It ร a) Nice day, isn’t it?; Il was better than I expected (it would he).
emphasis giving special importance to one part of a word or sentence
(for example by pronouncing it more loudly; by writing it in capital letters;
by using do in an affirmative clause; by using special word order).
emphatic pronoun reflexive pronoun (myself, yourself, etc) used IO emphasise
a noun or pronoun. Examples: Til tell him myself, I wouldn't sell this to the
president himself. See also reflexive pronoun.
ending something added to the end of a word, e g. -er, ing, ed.
finite verb Verbs which show time (e g. goes, went) are often called finite in
grammars; other forms (e.g written, playing) are called non finite;
first person see person.
formal the style used when talking politely to strangers, on special occasions,
in some literary writing, in business letters, etc. For example, commence is a
more formal word than start.
frequency Adverbiais of frequency say how often something happens. Examples:
often; never, daily; occasionally; every three days.
fronting moving a part of a clause to the beginning in order to give it special
emphasis. Example: lack I like, but his wife I cant stand.
full verb a verb that is not an auxiliary verb. Examples: work, remove, explain.
future a verb tense made with the auxiliary will (or sometimes shall) · infinitive
without to. Example: I will arrive on Tuesday evening.
future perfect a verb tense made with shall’will - have · past participle.
Example: I will have finished by lunchtime.
future progressive (or future continuous) a verb tense made with
shall!will	.ing. Example: I will be needing the car this evening.
gender the use of different grammatical forms to show the difference between
masculine, feminine and neuter, or between human and nonhuman.
Examples: he; she; if, who; which.
gerund the form of a verb ending in -trig, used like a noun (for example, as the
subject or object of a sentence). Examples: Smoking is bad for you; I hale
getting up early. See also present participle.
gradable Pretty 1 hard or coki are gradable adjectives: things can be more or
less pretty, hard or cold. Adverbs of degree (like rather, eery) can be used with
gradable words. Perfect or dead are not gradable words: we do not usually say
that something is more or less perfect, or very dead.
Language terminology · xxii
grammar lhe rules that show how words are combined, arranged or changed
to show certain kinds of meaning.
hypothetical Some words and structures (c.g. modal verbs, if-clauses) are used for
hypothetical situations - that is to say, situations which may not happen, or are
imaginary. Example: What would you do if you had six months free?
identifying (or defining) relative clause a relative clause which identifies a
noun which tells tis which person or thing is being talked about. Example:
Ί here’s the woman who tried to steal your cat (The relative clause who tried
to steal your cal identifies the woman - It tells US which woman is meant.)
See also non-identifying relative clause.
imperative the form of a verb used to give orders, make suggestions, etc.
Examples: Bring me a pen·. Hatt a good holiday.
indefinite article a/an.
indirect object see object
indirect speech a structure เท which we report what somebody said by making
it part of our own sentence (so that the tenses, word order, pronouns and
other words may be different from those used by the original speaker).
Compare: He said 'I'm tired'(the original speaker's words are reported in
direct speech) and He said that he was tired (the original speakers words are
reported เท indirect speech).
infinitive the base form of a word (usually with to), used after another verb,
after an adjective or noun, or as the subject or complement of a sentence.
Examples: / want to go home. It's easy to sing. ΓIt got a plan to start a
business; To err is human, to forgive divine
informal the style used in ordinary conversation, personal letters, etc, when there is
no special reason to speak politely or carefully. I ll is more informal than I will; get
is used mostly in an informal style: start is a more informal word than commence.
-ing form the form of a verb ending in -ing. Examples: finding, keeping
running. See also gerund, present participle.
initial at the beginning. Sometimes is an adverb that can go เท initial position
เท a sentence. Example: Sometimes I wish I had a different job.
intensifying making stronger, more emphatic. Very and terribly are intensifying
adverbs.
interrogative Interrogative structures and words are used for asking
questions. เท an interrogative sentence, there is an auxiliary verb (or non-
auxiliary be) before the subject (e g. Can you swim?·. Are you ready?).
What, who and where are interrogative words.
intonation the 'melody' of spoken language: the way the musical pitch of the
voice rises and falls to show meaning^sentence structure or mood.
intransitive An intransitive verb is one that cannot have an object or be used
เท the passive. Examples: smile, fall; come; go.
inversion a structure เท which an auxiliary or other verb comes before its
subject. Examples: Never had she seen such a mess; Here comes lohn.
irregular not following the normal rules, or not having the usual form. An
irregular verb has a past tense and/or past participle that does not end in ed
(e g. swam, taken); children is an irregular plural.
Language terminology · xxlii
linking verb (or copular verb) be, seem, feel and other verbs which link a subject
IO a complement that describes it. Examples: My mother is เท /(นMy 7 ft' seems
unhappy, this feels soft.
main clause, subordinate clause Some sentences consist ol a main clause and
one or more subordinate clauses. A subordinate clause acts like a pan of the
main clause (e.g. like a subject, or an object, or an adverbial). Examples:
When she is doesn't matter (the subordinate clause Where she is is the subject
of the main clause); I told you that I didn't care (the subordinate clause that I
didn't care is the direct object in the main clause); You'll find friends wherever
you no (the subordinate clause wherever you go acts like an adverb in the
main clause: compare You'll find friends anywhere).
main verb A verb phrase often contains one or more auxiliar)' verbs together with
a main verb. The main verb is the verb which expresses the central meaning;
auxiliary verbs mostly add grammatical information (for instance, they may
show that a verb is progressive, future, perfect or passive). Examples: is going,
will explain; has arrived; would have been forgotten.
manner an adverbial of manner describes how something happens. Examples:
well; suddenly, fast; without any delay.
mid position If an adverbial is in mid position เท a sentence, it is with the verb.
Example: / have never been to Africa.
misrelated participle (also called hanging or dangling participle) a participle
which appears to have a subject which is not Its own. Example: Looking out of
the window the mountains appeared very close. (This seems to say that the
mountains were looking out of the window.) The structure is usually avoided
เท careful writing because of the danger of misunderstanding.
modal auxiliary verb one of the verbs can, could, may, might, must. will, shall,
would, should, ought.
modify An adjective เร said to 'modify' the noun it is with: it adds to or defines
its meaning. Examples: a fine day, my new job. An adverb can modify a verb
(e.g. run fast), an adjective (e.g. completely ready) or other words or expressions.
เท sports car, the first noun modifies the second.
negative a negative sentence is one in which the word not is used with the
verb. Example: I didn't know.
nominal relative clause a relative clause (usually introduced by what) which
acts as the subject, object or complement of a sentence. Example: I gave him
what he needed.
non-affirmative (also called non assertive) The words some, somebody,
somewhere, etc are used most often in affirmative sentences. เท other kinds of
sentence they are often replaced by any, anybody, anywhere, etc. Words like
any, anybody, etc are called 'non affirmative’ or non assertive' forms. Other
non-affirmative forms are yer and ever.
non identifying (or non defining) relative clause a relative clause which does
not identify the noun it refers to (because we already know which person or
thing is meant). Example: there's Hannah Smith, who tried to steal my cat.
( The relative clause, who tried to steal my cat. does not identify the person -
she is already identified by the name Hannah Smith.) Sec also identifying
relative clause.
Language terminology · XXIV
noun a word like oil, memory, arm. which can be u serf with an article. Nouns
are most often the names of people or things. Personal names (e.g. George)
and place names (e.g. Birmingham) are called ‘proper nouns'; they are
mostly used without articles.
noun phrase a group of words (e.g. article · adjective · noun) which acts as
the subject, object or complement เท a clause. Example; the Iasi bus.
number the way in which differences between singular and plural are shown
grammatically. Ihe differences between house and houses, mouse and mice,
this and these are differences of number.
object a noun phrase or pronoun that normally comes after the verb in an
active clause. The direct object most often refers to a person or thing (or
people or things) affected by the action of the verb. In the sentence lake the
dog for a walk, the dog is the direct object. The indirect object usually refers to
a person (or people) who receives) the direct object. เท the sentence Anna
gave me a watch, the indirect object is me, and the direct object is a watch.
See also subject.
participle see present participle and past participle
participle clause a clause like structure which contains a participle, not a verb
tense. Examples: Discouraged by his failure, he resigned from his job; Having
a couple of hours to spare, I went IO see a film.
passive A passive verb form is made with be - past participle. Examples:
is broken; was told; will be helped (but not breaks, told, will help, which are
active verb forms). The subject of a passive verb form is usually the person or
thing that is affected by the action of the verb. Compare: 7hey sent Lucas to
prison for five years (active) and Lucas was sent to prison for five years
(passive). See also active.
past participle a verb form like broken, gone. Slopped, which can be used to
form perfect tenses and passives, or as an adjective. (The meaning is not
necessarily past, in spite of the name.)
past perfect a verb tense made with had - past participle. Examples: I had
forgotten; lhe children had arrived; She had been working; It had been
raining. The first two examples are simple past perfect; the last two
(with had been ».. .Ing) are past perfect progressive (or continuous).
past progressive (or continuous) a verb tense made with was/were · .. .Ing.
Examples; I was going; They were stopping.
past simple see simple past.
perfect a verb form made with the auxiliary have * past participle. Examples:
I have forgotten; She had failed; having arrived; to have finished.
perfect conditional should/would have » past participle. Examples:
I should, would have agreed; He would have known.
perfect infinitive (to) have· past participle. Example; to have arrived.
perfect participle a structure like having lost, having arrived.
person the way in which, in grammar, we show the difference between the
person(s) speaking (first person), the person(s) spoken to (second person), and
the person, people or thing(s) spoken about (thirdperson). The differences
between I, you, and he/she, or between am, are and is, arc differences of person.
personal pronouns the words I. me, you, he. him. etc.
language terminology
phrase two or more words that function together as a group. Examples: dead
tired; the silly old unman; would have been repaired; in the country.
phrasal verb a verb form that is made up of two pans: verb . adverb particle.
plural a grammatical form used to refer to more than one person ใ!’.!!’ชิ.
Examples: we, buses; children; are. many·, these. See also Singular.
possessive a form used to show possession and similar ideas. Examples:
lohn’s; our. mine.
possessive pronoun My, your, his, her, etc are possessive pronouns (they· stand
for the speaker ■ร: 'the hearer's! 'that person's, etc). Mine, yours1 his. hers, etc
are also possessive pronouns, for the same reason. My. your, etc arc used
before nouns, so they are not only pronouns, hut also determiners. (They are
often called ‘possessive adjectives! but this is not correct.) Mine, yours, etc are
used without following nouns.
postmodifier a word that comes after the word which it modifies, e g. invited
in The people Invited all came late. See also premodifier
predicative Adjectives placed after a verb like be, seem, took are in predicative
position. Examples: Ihe house is enormous; she looks happy. Sec also
attributive.
prefix a form like ex·, anti- or un-, which can be added to the front of a word
to give an additional or different meaning. Examples: ex-wife. anti British,
unhappy. Sec also suffix.
premodifier a word that comes before the word which it modifies, e g. invited
in an invited audience. See also postmodifier.
preparatory subject, preparatory object When the subject of a sentence is an
infinitive or a clause, we usually put it towards the end of the sentence and
use the pronoun ii as a preparatory subject. Example: It is important to get
enough sleep. It can also be used as a preparatory object in certain structures.
Example: He made it clear that he disagreed, there is used as a kind of
preparatory subject in there is... and similar structures. Example: There is
somebody al the door.
preposition a word like on. off. of, into, normally followed by a noun or
pronoun.
prepositional verb a verb form that is made up of two parts:
verb form * preposition. Examples: insist on; care for; listen to
present participle the form of a verb ending เท ing used as an adjective,
a verb or part of a verb. Examples: a crying baby. Opening his newspaper,
he started to read; She was running. (The meaning IS not necessarily present,
in spite of the name.) Sec also gerund
present perfect a verb tense made with have has , past participle. Examples:
I have forgotten; Ihe children have arrived; I've been working all day,
แ has been raining. The first two examples are simple present perfect; the last
two (with have been - .. .ing) are present perfect progressive (or present perfect
continuous).
present progressive (or continuous) a verb tense made with ami arc! is ♦ .. .ing.
Examples: I am going. She is staying for two weeks.
prevent simple see simple present.
progressive (or continuous) A verb form made with the auxiliary be·., .ing.
Examples: to be going; We were wondering. I'll be seeing you.
Language terminology · xxvi
progressive (or continuous) infinitive a form like to be going; to be waiting.
pronoun a word like it, yourself, their, which isused instead of a more precise
noun or noun phrase (like the cat. Tom's self, the family's). The word pronoun
can also he used for a determiner when this includes the meaning of a
following noun which has been left out. Example: I'll take these.
proper noun or proper name a noun (most often with no article) which Is the
name of a particular person, place, organisation, etc. Examples: Alex. Brazil;
the European Union.
quantifier a determiner like many, few, little, several, which is used in a noun
phrase to show how much or how many we are talking about.
question tag an expression like do you? or isn't it?, consisting of an auxiliary
verb (or non-auxiliary be or have) · pronoun subject, put on to the end of a
sentence. Examples: You don't eat meat, do you?; It's a nice day, isn't it?
reflexive pronoun myself, yourself, himself, etc. Example: I cut myself shaving
this morning. See also emphatic pronoun
regular following the normal rules or having the usual form. Hoped is a
regular past tense; cats is a regular plural. See also irregular.
relative clause a clause which modifies a noun, usually introduced by a
relative pronoun like who or which. Example: I like people who like me.
See also identifying relative clause, non-identifying relative clause
relative pronoun a pronoun used to connect a relative clause to its noun.
Who. whom, whose, which and that can be used as relative pronouns, and
sometimes also when, where and why. Examples: /here’s the man who wants
to buy my car. This is the room which needs painting. Do you remember the
day when we met?
reply question a question (similar in structure to a question tag) used to reply
to a statement, for instance, to express interest. Example: 'I’ve been invited to
spend the weekend in London.’ 'Have you, dear?'
second person see person.
sentence a group of words that typically expresses a statement, command,
question or exclamation. A sentence consists of one or more clauses, and usually
has at least one subject and verb. เท writing, it begins with a capital letter and
ends with a full stop, question mark or exclamation mark.
short answer an answer consisting of a subject and an auxiliary verb (or non-
auxiliary be or have). Examples: 'Has anybody phoned the police?' '/ack has. 'ะ
' Who's ready for more?' Ί am:
simple past (or past simple) a past verb tense that has no auxiliary verb in the
affirmative. Examples: I stopped; You heard; We knew.
simple present (or present simple) a present verb form that has no auxiliary
verb in the affirmative. Examples: He goes there often; I know; I like chocolate.
simple a verb form that is not progressive.
singular a grammatical form used to talk about one person, thing, etc. or about an
uncountable quantity or mass. Examples: met bus; water, is; much; this. See also
plural.
slang a word, expression or special use of language found mainly in very
informal speech, often in the usage of particular groups of people. Examples:
thick (- stupid); lose one's cool (-get upset); sparks (- electrician).
Language terminology · xxvii
split infinitive a structure in which an adverb comes between roand the rest
of the infinitive. Example to easily understand. Some people consider split
infinitives ‘incorrect,’ but they are common in standard usage.
standard A standard form of a language is the one that is most generally
accepted for use in government, the law, business, education and literature.
I'm not is standard English; 1 ain't is non standard.
statement a sentence which gives information; not a question. Examples:
I'm cold; Daniel didn't come home last night.
stress the way in which one or more parts of a word, phrase or sentence arc
made to sound more important than the rest, by using a louder voice and/or
higher pitch. เท the word particular, the main stress เร่ on the second syllabic
(particular); in the sentence Where's the new secretary? there are three
stresses (WHERE'S the NEW secretary?).
strong form, weak form Certain words can be pronounced in two ways:
slowly and carefully with the vowel that is written (strong form), or with a
quicker pronunciation with the vowel or /,/ (weak form). Examples:
can (/krcn/, /ksn/), was(เพoil,/waz/),/or(/fa:(r)/, /fa(r)/).
subject a noun phrase or pronoun that normally comes before the verb in an
affirmative clause. It often says (in an active clause) who or what does the
action that the verb refers to. Examples: Ellie gave me a wonderful smile,
OU floats on water. See also object
subjunctive a verb form (not very common เท British English) used เท certain
structures. Examples: If I were you...; It's important that he be informed
immediately, IVe prefer that he pay in cash.
subordinate clause a clause which functions as part of another clause, for
example as subject, object or adverbial เท the main clause of a sentence.
Examples: I thought that you understood; What I need is a drink; I'll follow
you wherever you go. See also clause, main clause.
subordinating conjunction a conjunction that joins a subordinate clause to the
rest of Its sentence. Examples: when, if, because.
suffix a form like -ology, able or -ese, which can be added to the end of a
word to give an additional or different meaning. Examples: climatology;
understandable; Chinese. See also prefix.
superlative the form of an adjective or adverb made with the suffix est
(e g. oldest, fastest); also the structure most · adjective/adverb, used เท the
same way (e g. most intelligent, most politely).
syllable The word cat has one syllable, cattle has two, cataract has three and
category has four. Λ syllable normally has a vowel, and usually one or more
consonants before and/or after the vowel. Sometimes the consonant sounds
I, m and ท can act as syllables (for instance เท the words bottle / 'boil/, capitalism
/‘kspitahz(9)m/, button /*hAtn/).
tag a short phrase (e g. pronoun subject » auxiliary verb) added on to the end
of a sentence, especially in speech. Examples: He likes to talk. Josh does; You
can't swim, can you?. Very noisy, those kids. See also question tag.
tense a verb form that shows the time of an action, event or state, by a change เท
its form and/or the use of an auxiliary. Examples: worked, saw, will go; is sitting.
third person see person.
transitive a transitive verb is one that can have an object. Examples: eat
(a meal); drive (a car); give (a present). See also intransitive.
Language terminology · xxvlii
uncountable noun a noun which has no plural form and cannot normally be
used with the article a!an. Examples: mud; rudeness; furniture.
verb a word like ask, wake. play, be, can. Most verbs refer to actions, events or
states. See also auxiliary verb, modal auxiliary verb, verb phrase
verb phrase a verbal structure that has more than one part. Example: would have
been forgotten.
vowel the letters a. e, I, o. น and their combinations, and their usual sounds
(see Phonetic alphabet, page xxx). See also consonant.
weak form see strong form
language terminology
Phonetic alphabet
Il	is necessary to use a special alphabet IO show the pronunciation of English
words, because the ordinary English alphabet does not have enough letters
to represent all the sounds of the language. Ihe following list contains all the
letters of the phonetic alphabet used เท this book, with examples of the words
in which the sounds they refer to are found.
Vowels and diphthongs (double vowels)
i: seat /si:</, feel /fi:l/
I	sit /sit/, เท 'เท/
e set/set/, any/'eni/
:e sat IvfAl, match 'maM//
น: march /mo:tj7,after ''o:fta(r)/
ท pot pot, , gone 'yon/
ว: port /pxt/, law /1ว:/
o good; god', could'kud,
น: food 'fu:d', group 'gru:p/
A much 'mstf', front 'frsnt'
3: turn lvy.nl, word พว:d'
ว away /ว·พ*!/, collect 'ka'lekv,
until 'วท til'
ei take'teik/, wait'welt'
ai mine 'main', light 'Ian/
วเ oil 'ว!!/. boy bõi'
so no 'ทวน/, open /’วนpan/
au house haos', now/nao,
IS hear hia(r)/, deer /dia(r)'
ea air /eo(r)', where /พ·eว(r)/
00 tour /too(r)/, endure /in’djua(r)/
Consonants
p pull'pol/, cup'kAp'
b bull'bol', rob'rnb/
f ferry /’feri/. life /lair/
V very /’veri/, live Ίιν/
B think '01 ok/, bath 'bo:0/
rt then/den/, with/wtA/
t take 'teik/, set 'set/
d day /del/, red 'red'
ร sing 'siq', rice 'rats'
f zoo /zนะ/, day» /delz/
Í show /J"วน', wish 'พ!//
3 pleasure ‘plejafr)/,
occasion /sketzn/
tj cheap /t/i:p/, catch 'kfetj/
dz Jail dzeil/, bridge /brtdz/
k case /kets/, take /teik'
y go '«วน', rug /rag/
m my /mat/, come /kAm/
ท no 'ทวน/, on 'nn/
Y sing /siq/, finger /’fiQija(r)/
I love /Iav/, hole / haul /
r round /round/, carry /'ka-ri/
พ well/wel/
j young /Jaij/
h house 'haos/
the sign (·) shows stress (► .113).
Phonetic alphabet
Practical English Usage
Grammar	Sections 1-28: entries 1-320
Vocabulary	Sections 29-31: entries 321-635
Section 1 Verbs
INTRODUCTION
forms
Verbs are I be cemral element in sentences. Most of the things we say arc built
around them. English verbs have up to five one-word forms (except be, which
has eight). These are:
•	the base form: the one found เท dictionaries, for example go, write, play. This
is used for present tense forms after I, we. you (singular and plural) and they,
in infinitives, and เท imperatives.
We go skating on Saturdays. I must write to Laura.
Please play something.
•	the third person singular present, for example goes, writes. plays
•	the past tense, for example went, wrote, played
•	the past participle, for example gone, written, played. Note that เท regular
verbs the past participle is the same as the past tense.
•	the ing form, for example going, writing, playing. Depending on how it is
used, the ing form may be called a 'present participle' or a gerund' (► 93.1).
Verb forms which show time (e g. goes, went) are often called finite in
grammars; other forms (e g. written, playing) are non finite.
tenses
Tenses are verb forms that show the time of actions and situations, cither as
single words or including auxiliary verbs (see below).
We went home, (simple past tense)
Hate you written to lamie? (present perfect tense)
For a list of active tenses, ► 2.3. For passive tenses, and an explanation of active
and passive structures, ► 57.
auxiliary verbs
Auxiliary ('helping') verbs are used with other verbs to add various kinds of
meaning. Be, have and do help to make progressive (or 'continuous') and perfect
structures, questions and negatives (see below and ► Section 2).
Modal auxiliary verbs (must, can, could, will, would, may. might, shall, should
and ought) are used with other verbs to add ideas such as futurity, certainty,
probability, obligation and permission. For details, ► Section 7.
What can follow a verb?
Different non auxiliary verbs can be followed by different kinds of words and
structures. This is partly a matter of meaning: after a verb like eat or break, for
instance, it is normal to expect a noun; after try or slop, it is natural to expect a
verb. It is also partly a matter of grammatical rules that have nothing to do with
meaning. Before an object, wait is followed by for, expect has no preposition. One
can tell somebody something, but one cannot explain somebody something. One
hopes to see somebody, but one looks forward to seeing somebody. One advises
somebody to see the doctor, but one does not suggest somebody io see the doctor
One thinks that something will happen, but one does not want that it will happen
grammar · Section I Verbs
Unfortunately, there are no simple rules เท this ajca; it is necessary to learn, for
each verb, what kind of structures can folio** Ã dictionary will normally
give this information.
Io. more it™i vrrtn follo^d br"rhJ ”nimi« ► IS-16.
Do you know what's wrong with these, and why?
G I laid down and went to sleep. ► 1.2
G She switched off it. » 12.4
G What are you thinking of the government? ► 4.3
G I'm seeing what you mean. ► 4.3
G Is raining again. » 7.1
G Give back me my watch. ► 12.4
G Is that the light off which you switched? » 12.4
G You never listen me. » 13.1
G Listen 1๙ ► 13.1
G About what arc you thinking? ► 13.3
G He gave you it. ► 8.3
G Who did you buy it? ► 8.4
G I'd like him to explain US his decision. » 8.6
G Can you suggest me a good dentist? ► 8.6
G Please describe US your wife. ► 8.6
G Sing us. ► 8.7
G He painted red the wall. * 10.1
G She made that she disagreed clear. ► 10.5
G You surprised! ► 7.2
G Do sit that chair. ► 7.2
G The problem appears impossibly. » 11.3
G Isabel sudden appeared เท the doorway. ► 11.3
G He fell unconsciously on the floor. » 115
G He pulled his belt tightly and started off. » U.S
G She crossed the garden dancing. » 14
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
1	irregular verbs
2	active verb tenses
3	progressive structures
4	non-progressive verbs
5	progressive with always, etc
6	perfect structures
7	subjects, objects and complements
8	verbs with two objects
9	verbs with both active and
passive meanings
10	verb · object « complement:
You make me nervous.
11	linking verbs: he, seem, look, etc
12	two-part verbs: phrasal verbs
13	two-pan verbs: prepositional
verbs
14	verbs of movement: she ran in, e
15	verb · verb: auxiliary verbs
16	verb · verb: other structures
grammar - Section I Verbs
1	irregular verbs
1	common irregular verbs
This is a list of the more common irregular verbs. Students should check that
they know all of them. For a complete list, see a good dictionary.
Infinitive	Simple past	Past participle
arise	arose	arisen
awake	awoke	awoken
be	was, were	been
bear	bore	bom(e)
beat	beat	beaten
become	became	become
t>egin	began	begun
bend	bent	bent
bet	bet. betted	bet. betted
bind	bound	bound
bite	bit	bitten
bleed	bled	bled
blow	blew	blown
break	broke	broken
bring	brought	brought
broadcast	broadcast	broadcast
build	built	built
burn	burnt, burned	burnt, burned
burst	burst	burst
buy	bought	bought
catch	caught	caught
choose	chose	chosen
come	came	come
cost	cost	cost
cut	cut	cut
deal	dealt .'dell	dealt /dell/
dig	dug	dug
do	did	done
draw	drew	drawn
dream	dreamt .dremt/.	dreamt /dremt/.
	dreamed driimd	dreamed /driimd/
drink	drank	drunk
drive	drove	driven
eat	ate/ct.eii/	eaten / i:tn
fall	fell	fallen
feed	fed	fed
feel	felt	felt
fight	fought	fought
find	found	found
fly	(lew	flown
grammar - I irregular verbs
Verbs
Seclion
Infinitive
forbid
forget
forgive
freeze
ge<
8»
grow
hang
have
hear 'hia{r)/
hide
hit
hold
hurt
keep
kneel
know
lay
lead
lean
learn
leave
lend
let
lie
light
lose
make
mean /mi:ท/
meet
pay
put
quit
read เท·.d!
ride
ring
rise
say
sell
Simple past	Past participle
forbade	forbidden
/fa*bed. fo'bcid	forgotten
forgave	forgiven
froze	frozen
got	got
	given
went	gone, been
grew	grown
hung	hung
had	had
heard ha:d	heard ha:d
hid	hidden
hit	hit
held	held
hurt	hurt
kept	kept
knelt	knelt
knew	known
laid	laid
led	led
leant /lent/.	leant lent/.
leaned 1i:nd	leaned li:nd
leapt dept/, leaped learnt, learned	leapt /lept, leaped learnt, learned
left	left
lent	lent
let	let
lay	lain
lit, lighted	lit. lighted
lost	lost
made	made
meant ment/	meant ment/
met	met
paid	paid
put	put
quit, quitted	quit, quitted
read red.	read red
rode	ridden
rang	rung
ΓΟΗ·	risen
ran	run
said 'ร€๕	said sed/
saw	seen
sold	sold
grammar · I irregular verbs
Infinitive	Simple past	Past, pactifipk*
send	sent	sent
set	set	set
shake	shook	shaken
shine	shone /on	shone //on
shoot	shot	shot
show	showed	shown
shrink	shrank, shrunk	shrunk
shut	shut	shut
sing	$<ing	sung
sink	sank	sunk
sit	sat	sat
sleep	slept	slept
slide	slid	slid
smell	smelt, smelled	smelt, smelled
speak	spoke	spoken
speed	sped	sped
spell	spelt spelled	spelt, spelled
spend	spent	spent
spill	spilt, spilled	spilt, spilled
spin	span, spun	spun
spit	spat	spat
split	split	split
spoil	spoilt, spoiled	spoilt, spoiled
spread	spread	spread
stand	stood	Stood
steal	stole	stolen
stick	stuck	stuck
sting	stung	stung
strike	struck	struck
swear	swore	sworn
sweep	swept	swept
swing	swung	swung
swim	swam	swum
take	took	taken
teach	taught	taught
tear	tore	tom
tell	told	told
think	thought	thought
throw	threw	thrown
understand	understood	understood
wake	woke	woken
wear	wore	worn
win	won	won
wind /waind	wound waund'	wound /waund/
write	wrote	written
grammar · I irregular
Verbs
Seclion
2	verbs that are easily confused
Infinitive (all feel fill	Simple past fell felt filled	Past participle fallen felt filled
find (- get back something lost)	found	found
found (= start up an organisation or institution)	founded	founded
Bow (of a liquid a move)	Bowed	flowed
By (- move in the air) Bee (■ run away) lay (- put down flat)	flew fled laid	flown Bed
		laid
lie (a be down)	lay	lain
lie l- say things that arc lied	lied
not true)
to* more delaih ot these Ihirr >»rbi » พ
leave	left	left
live	lived	lived
raise l- put up)	raised	raised
rise t- go/get up)	rose	risen
strike (- hit)	struck	struck
stroke l- pass the hand	stroked	stroked
gently over)		
wind vvamd (ะ turn.	wound waond·	wound waond'
tighten a spring, etc)		
wound /wu:nd'	wounded	wounded
t- injure in a battle)
3	notes
•	Note the standard AmF. pronunciations of ale (/eil/) and shone (/Joon/).
Cl/ (or ale is substandard เท AmE (but a standard variant in BrÈ).
•	Burn, dream, kneel, lean, learn, smell, spell, spill and spoil are all generally
regular in American English. เท British English, irregular past tenses and
participles with -t are also quite common.
•	Dive is regular in British English, but can be irregular in American:
dive - dived/dove (i’doov/J - dived
•	The old past participle drunken is used as an adjective in some expressions
(e g. a drunken argument, drunken driving), but these are not very common.
grammar · I irregular verbs
•	Hl and quit arc usually irregular in American English.
fit - fit - fit. quit - quit - quit
•	The American past participle of gel is either got or gotten (► 172.6).
•	Hang is regular when used to mean ‘execute by hanging*.
•	Prove (regular) has an irregular past participle proven which is sometimes
used instead of proved, especially as an adjective (e g. น proven liar).
•	Says is pronounced /sez/.
•	Speed can also have regular forms, especially in the expression speeded up.
•	Spit has both spit and spat as past tense and participle in American English.
•	Sung and sunk are sometimes used instead of sang and sank.
2	active verb tenses
1	present, future and past; simple, progressive and perfect
English verbs can refer to present, future or past time.
present: I'm watching you.
future: She will see you tomorrow.
past: Who said that?
For each kind of time, there are three possibilities with most verbs:
simple; progressive or continuous (be ' tug ► 3); and perfect
(à-e - past participle ► 6).
simple present: I start
present progressive: I am starting
present perfect: I have started
Some grammarians use the word 'tense' only for simple forms like goes or went;
for forms like is going or has gone they prefer to talk about progressive or perfect
aspect, and they say that English has no future tense'. These are principally
questions of terminology, not grammatical fact, and have no practical
importance. เท Practical kngiish Usage the term tense' is used for all verb forms
and structures that indicate time.
2	tenses and time
There is not a direct relationship between verb forms and time. For example, a
past verb like went is not only used to talk about past events (e g. We went to
Morocco last lanuary), hut also about unreal or uncertain present or future
events (e g. Il would he belter if we went home now). And present verbs can be
used to talk about the future (e g. I'm seeing Daniel tomorrow). Also, progressive
and perfect forms express ideas that are not simply concerned with time for
example continuation, completion, present importance.
grammar · 2 active verb tenses
Verbs
Section
table of active verb tenses
This is a list of all the active affirmative forms of an ordinary English verb, with
their names, examples, and very brief descriptions of typical uses. For more
information about the forms arid their uses, see the entries for each tense in
► Seaions 3-5.
NAME	CONSTRUCTION	EXAMPLE	TYPICAL USE
simple present	form/infinitivc, but -s on third person singular (e.g. l/you/we/ they work; he/the	It always rains in November.	'general' time; permanent situations (► 3I)
present progressive	ami are! is .. .ing	I can’t talk to you now; I’m working.	actions continuing at the moment of
present perfect	hare has 1 past participle	I half worked with children what to expect.	past action with some present connection (► 47)
present perfect	haveihas been	It has been	continuation up
progressive	’ · l/Ig	raining all day.	to the present (- 50)
(simple) future	will ♦ infinitive (//u«e shall also	It will rain tomorrow.	information about the future
future progressive·	(//we shall also possible)	This time tomorrow 17/ be lying on the beach.	continuing situation at a particular future time (► 41)
future perfect	will half * past participle (//we shall also	I will half finished the repairs by this	completion by a particular future time (► 40)
future perfect	will half been	เท lune I will	continuity up to a
progressive	(//we Jshall also	have been working here for	particular future time (► 40)
simple past	regular verbs: base form/ infinitive * -(efil irregular verbs: various forms	I worked all last weekend. I saw lack yesterday.	past events (► 44)
grammar» 2 active verb tenses
NAME	CONSTRUCTION	EXAMPLE	TYPICAL USE
past progressive	was/were.. .ing	1 saw lack when 1 was coming out of the	action continuing at a particular past time (► 15)
past perfect	had · past participle	I couldn't get in because 1 had lost my keys.	action before a particular past time (► 53)
past perfect progressive	had been .. .ing	1 was tired because 1 had been working all	continuation up 10 a particular past time (► 55)

the นพ· of present farm» co talk about the fature, a 36-37.
pau verbi with present or future meanings, ► 4- For subjurxuvcs (e R .. khol iAe<o) ► r-r.
3	progressive structures
1	construction
Progressive verb siruciures (also called 'continuous') arc made with be * ing.
lam waiting for the shops to open, (present progressive)
Your suit is being cleaned, (present progressive passive)
She phoned while I was cooking, (past progressive)
Will you be going out this evening! (future progressive)
I'd like to be lying on the beach now. (progressive infinitive)
Progressive and perfect forms can be combined.
I	didn't know how long she had been sitting there, (past perfect progressive)
2	terminology and use
A progressive does not simply show the time of an event. It also shows how the
speaker sees the event - generally as ongoing and temporary, not completed or
permanent. (Because of this, grammars often talk about 'progressive aspect'
rather than ‘progressive tenses'.) Compare:
-	I've read your email, (completed action)
I’ve been reading a lol of thrillers recently, (not necessarily completed)
-	The Rhine runs into the North Sea. (permanent)
We ll have Io phone the plumber water’s running down the kitchen wall.
(temporary)
When a progressive is used to refer to a short momentary action, it often
suggests repetition.
Why are you jumping up and down?
The door was banging in the wind.
grammar · 3 progressive Structures
Verbs
Section
3	distancing: I was wondering ...
Progressives can make requests, questions and statements less direct.
(They sound less definite than simple forms, because they suggest something
temporary and incomplete.)
I’m hoping you can lend me £10. (less definite than I hope...)
What time are you planning to arrive?
I'm looking forward to seeing you again.
I'm afraid we must be going.
I	was wondering if you had two single rooms.
Will you be going away at the weekend?
For more üboor à kind of d.MMior* » 111.
tor mar del.il, of the mr of pengrrwhe,. ire the mdh-idual e»<-v 0*1 the preu-nt prapcMive.
prowewlve. tu.
4	ก๐ก-progressive verbs
1 verbs not often used in progressive ('continuous') forms
Some verbs are not often used in progressive forms.
I like this music, (not I’m liking this music.)
I called her because I needed to talk, (not ... because I was needing Io talk.)
Some other verbs are not used เท progressive forms when they have certain
meanings (sec below). Compare:
I’m seeing the doctor at ten o'clock.
I see what you mean, (not I'm seeing what you mean.)
Many of these non progressive verbs refer to states rather than actions. Some
refer to mental states (e g. know, think, believe); some others refer to the use of
the senses (e g. smell, taste).
Modal verbs (e g. can, must) have no progressive forms, ►68.1.
2	common non-progressive verbs
Here is a list of some common verbs which are not often used เท progressive
forms (or which arc not used in progressive forms with certain meanings).
mental and emotional states
(dls)like
love
realise
recognise
remember
smell
see (ะ understand)
suppose
think (- have an opinion)
understand
want
wish
sound
taste
grammar - 4 non progressive verbs
communicating and causing reactions
appear astonish deny	impress look l- seem)
other	deserve
belong	fit
concern	include
consist	involve
contain	lack
depend	matter
promise
seem
surprise
measure (= have length, etc)
owe
own
possess
weigh (- have weight)
More details on usage are given เท entries for some of these verbs.
progressive and non-progressive uses
Compare the progressive and lion-progressive uses of some of the verbs listed
above.
-	I'm feeling fine, (on I feel fine. ► 163.1)
I	feel lee shouldn't do it. (noi Im feeling u<e shouldn't do it - feel here - have
an opinion.)
What are you thinking about?
What do you think of the government? (.NOT What am you thinking ofthe
government? - think here = have an opinion.)
-	I’m seeing Leslie tomorrow.
I see what you mean, (not I'm seeing U'hat you mean - see here
- understand.)
-	Why are you smelling the meat? Is it bad?
Does the meal smell bad? (not Is the meat smelling bad? ► 581.)
-	I'm just tasting the cake to see if it 'ร OK.
The cake tastes wonderful. (หเ The take's fasting wonderful. ► 603.)
The scales broke when I was weighing myself this morning.
weighing 6Λ kilos ...” weigh here = have weight.)
Occasionally non progressive' verbs are used in progressive forms in order to
emphasise the idea of change or development.
These days, more and more people prefer are preferring to retire early.
I he water tastes / Is tasting better today
<3s I gel older1 I remember f I'm remembering less and less.
I'm liking it here more and more as time goes by.
Need, want and mean can have future or present perked progressive uses.
Will you be needing the car this afternoon?
I've been wanting to go to Australia for years.
I've been meaning to tell you about Andrew. He...
grammar · 4 non progressive· verbs
Verbs
Section I
4	can see. etc
Can is often used with see. hear. fed. lasle, smell, understand and remember to
give a kind of progressive meaning, especially in British English (► 84).
I	can see Emma coming down the road.
Can you smell something burning?
5	-ing forms
Even verbs which are never used tn progressive tenses have ing forms which
can be used in other kinds of structure.
Knowing her tastes. I bought her a large box of chocolates.
You can respect people's views without agreeing with them
5	progressive with always, etc
We can use always, continually and similar words with a progressive form to
mean ‘very often'.
I’m always losing my keys.	Cranny's always giving people little presents.
I'm continually running into Oliver these days.
that cat's forever getting shut in the bathroom.
This structure Is used to talk about things which happen very often (perhaps
more often than expected), and which are unexpected or unplanned. Compare:
When Alice comes to see me, I always meet her al the station, (a regular,
planned arrangement)
I'm always meeting Mrs Bailiff in the supermarket, (accidental, unplanned
meetings)
- When I was a child, we always had picnics on Saturdays in the summer.
(regular, planned)
Her mother was always arranging little surprise picnics and outings.
(unexpected, not regular)
lire structure is often used in critical remarks.
He’s always scratching himself in public.
6	perfect structures
1 construction
Perfect verb forms are made with have » past participle.
She has lost her memory, (present perfect)
I told him dun I had never heard of the place, (past perfect)
When I went back to the village the house had been pulled down, (past perfect
We will have finished by tomorrow afternoon, (future perfect tense)
I'm sorry to have disturbed you. (perfect infinitive)
Having seen the film. I don’t want to read the book, (perfect ing form)
Perfect and progressive forms can be combined.
They have been living in Portugal for the last year, (present perfect
progressive)	->
grammar · 6 perfect Structures
2	terminology and use
Λ perfect verb form generally shows the time of an event as being earlier than
some other time (past, present or future). But a perfect does not only show the
time of an event. It also shows how the speaker sees the event perhaps as
being connected to a later event, or as being completed by a certain time.
Because of this, academic grammars often talk about ’perfect aspect’ rather than
'perfect tenses'.
lor detail, of <br IKT of Iho vanmn perfect .f,t> fo-tnv MO (be Irxfe·.
7	subjects, objects and complements
1	subjects
The subject of a verb is a noun phrase, noun or pronoun that comes before It in
a statement. Often the subject indicates the agent - the person or thing that
causes the action of the verb
My brother gave me this. Kain stopped play. You woke me up.
But the subject can also, for example, indicate the receiver or experiences of an
action - it depends on the verb.
Ail the soldiers not medals I saw the accident.
Subjects cannot normally be dropped,
vnr	Is Ji L J >1 น1 น J Λ	íaaa/Í ^>1
>’VI Πν rnmiinnKvu HU i/ictrij,	rt 1’V
M>r /5 ruining.
For special structures เท which it is possible to drop subjects, ► 224, 275.
2	transitive and intransitive verbs
Some verbs are usually followed by nouns, noun phrases or pronouns that a Cl as
direct objects. These typically show who or what is affected by the action of the
verb เท grammars they arc called transitive’. Examples are Invite, surprise.
Let's Invite Sophie and Bruce, (but Let's invite.)
You surprised me. (เทท KOT ¥owsurprised.)
Some verbs are not normally followed by direct objects. These are called
intransitive’. Examples are »/, sleep.
Do sit down. (เพI SOI Do sit that chair.)
I usually sleep well, (am SOT She-slept ike-baby.)
Many verbs can be both transitive and intransitive. Compare:
-	England lost the match - I can't eat this.
England lost.	Let’s eat.
Some transitive verbs can be followed by two objects (indirect and direct).
For details, ► 8.
I'll send you the form tomorrow. I’m going to buy Sarah some flowers.
Some verbs arc used transitively and intransitively with different kinds of
subject; the intransitive use has a meaning rather like a passive (► 9) or reflexive
(► 178) verb. Compare:
-	She opened the door. - The wind's moving the curtain.
The door opened.	The curtain ’ร moving.
grammar» 7 subjects, objects and complements
Verbs
Seclio
Some transitive verbs can be followed by an object together with an object
complement (an expression that gives more information about the object).
For details. ► 10.
You make me nervous. Lei's paint it blueÍ
3	complements of place
Usually, a preposition is necessary before an expression of place.
She arrived at the station last night, (not she arrived the station ...)
Don't walk on the grass, (wn Don't walk the grass.)
A few verbs can be used with direct objects referring to place.
I	like climbing mountains, (not LMeelimbMg on mountains;)
Some verbs are incomplete without an expression of place.
He litres in York, (but not He lives.)
4	linking verbs
Some verbs are followed nut by an object, but by a subject complement -
an expression which describes the subject. These arc called ‘linking verbs
For details, ► 11.
Your room is a mess. t he bathroom is upstairs.
That looks nice.	I felt a complete idiot.
8	verbs with two objects
1 indirect and direct objects: I gave Jack the keys.
Many verbs can have two objects - usually a person and a thing. This often
happens with verbs that arc used to talk about transferring or communicating
things from one person to another, or doing things for somebody. Λ few other
vert» are also used in this way. Common examples.
bet
bring
build
buy
cost
post
promise
read
refuse
sell
tell
throw
wish
write
The thing that is given, sent, bought, etc is called the 'direct object; the person
who gets it is the ‘indirect object Most often, the indirect object comes first.
I bet you ten dollars you can't beat me at chess.
He built the children a tree house.
Shall I buy you some chocolate while. I'm out ?
Could you bring me the paper ?
Ihe repair cost me a lot. I gave lack the keys.
If you're going upstairs, could you gel me my coatf
He left his children nothing when he died. lend me your bike, can you?
I'll make you a cake tomorrow. / owe my sister a lot of money.
Can I /day you some relaxing music? I'll send her the report tomorrow.
I hey promised me all sorts of things.	Daddy, read me a story.
He sent his mother a postcard let's take her some flowers
Will you teach me poker?	We bought the children pizzas.
grammar
with two objects
Throw me the ball. We wish you a Merry Christmas.
Not all verbs with this kind of meaning can be used like this, » 8.6.
2	indirect object last: / gave the keys to Jack.
We can also put the indirect object after the direct object. In this case it normally
has a preposition (usually to or for).
I	gave the keys to Jack. I handed my licence to the police officer.
Mrs Norman sent some flowers to the nurse.
Mother bought the ice cream for you, not for me.
(Not all grammars call these prepositional phrases 'indirect objects'.)
3	two pronouns: Lend them to her.
When both objects are pronouns, it is common to put the indirect object last.
To is occasionally dropped after it in informal British English.
Lend them to her. Send some to him. Give it (to) me.
It is also possible to put the indirect object first.
Give her one. Send him some.
However, this structure is avoided in some cases: phrases ending with it or them
(e.g. He gave you it or Send them them) are often felt to be unnatural.
4	wh-questions: Who did you buy it for ?
Prepositions are used in น^-questions referring to the indirect object.
Who did you buy it for? (not Who did yowhuy-if?)
Who was it sent to? (not Who was it sent?)
5	passives: I've been given a picture.
When these verbs are used in passive structures, the subject is usually the
person who receives something, not the thing which is sent, given, etc.
I've just been given a lovely picture.
We were all bought little presents.
However, the thing which is given, sent, etc can be the subject if necessary.
' What happened to the stuff he left behind?’ ‘ Well, the picture was given to
Mr Ferguson.’
For details of these passive structures, ►61.
6	structures with donate, push, carry, explain, suggest, describe
and take
Not all verbs that refer to transferring or communicating can be followed by
indirect object + direct object. The structure is not possible, for example, with
donate, push, carry, explain, suggest or describe.
They donated money to the museum, (but not They thmairdthe museum
friottcy )	They donated the museum
ไ pushed the plate to Anna, (but not I pushed Anna the plate.)
He carried the baby to the doctor, (but not He carried the doctor the baby.)
I'd like him to explain his decision to us. (but not . . ■ to explain US his
decision;)
Can you suggest a good dentist to me? (but not Can you suggest me a good
dentist?J
Please describe your wife to US. (but not Please describe US your wife.)
grammar · 8 verbs with two objects
Verbs
Section
Take can be used with indirect object > direct object when It means 'take to'
but not take from'.
I took her some money. (- I took some money to her - N<ir ... from her.)
7	one object or two
Some verbs can be followed by either a direct object, or an Indirect object, or
both.
I asked lack. I asked a question.	I asked lack a question.
Other verbs like this include teach, tell, pay, show, sing, play and write. Note that
when sing, play and write have no direct object, we put to before the indirect
object. Compare:
Write me a letter. Write to me when you get home.
(More common than write me ...เท standard British
English.)
9	verbs with both active and
passive meanings ___________________________________
1	She opened the door. / The door opened.
Some verbs are used transitively and intransitively with different kinds of
subject. The intransitive use has a meaning rather like a passive (► >7) or
reflexive (► 178) verb. Compare:
-	She opened the door
The door opened.
The wind's moving the curtain.
The curtain's moving.
Marriage has really changed her.
She’s changed a lol since she got married.
-	We're selling a lot of copies of your book.
Your book’s selling well.
-	Something woke her.
Suddenly she woke.
-	I can't start the car.
The car won't start.
2	It scratches easily.
I he intransitive structure is used with many verbs referring to things we can do
to materials: e g. bend, break, crack, meh, polish, scratch, stain, tear, unscrew.
lie careful what you pul on the table II scratches easily. (- You can easily
scratch It.)
These glasses are so fragile: they break if you look at them.
The carpet's made of a special material that doesn't slain
The handle won't unscrew - can you help me'
grammar - 9 verbs with both active and passive meanings
10	verb + object + complement: You make
me nervous.
1 adjective and noun complements
Some transitive verbs can be followed by an object together with an object
complement (an expression that gives more information about the object),
this is often an adjective or noun phrase.
You make me nervous.	She's driving US erary	Let’s paint it blue.
I find her attitude strange. Don't call me a liar.
I don’t know why they elected him President.
'Would you like to join the committeer 7 would consider it an honour.'
A complement may come before a long and heavy object. Compare:
lie painted rhe wall red. (not Me pawled ml the wall.)
He painted red the walls, the window frames and the ceiling.
After some verbs, an object complement is introduced by as. This is common
when we say how we see or describe somebody/something.
I see you as a basically kind person
She described her attacker as a tall dark man with a beard.
His mother regards him as a genius.
After tests, they identified the metal as gold.
The structure is also possible with as being.
The police do not regard him as (being) dangerous
3	I considered him to be ...
Some verbs that refer to thoughts, feelings and opinions (e g. believe, consider,
feel, know, find, understand) can be followed by object » infinitive (usually
to be) in a formal style. เท an informal style, l/mt clauses are more common.
I considered him to be an excellent choice.
(Less formal: I considered that he was an excellent choice.)
We supposed them to be married.
(Less formal: IVe supposed that they were married.)
They believed her to be reliable.
(Less formal: They believed that she was reliable.)
This structure is very unusual with think.
I thought that she was mistaken.
(More natural than I thought her to be mistaken.)
To be can be dropped after consider.
I considered him (to be) an excellent choice.
Passive forms of these structures may be less formal than active forms (► 10.6).

4	They found her (to be)...
After find · object, to be suggests the result of a test or investigation. Compare:
Everybody found her very pleasant.
The doctors found her to be perfectly fit.
grammar · 10 verb ♦ object · complement: You make
Verbs
Section
- I found the bicycle very comfortable to ride.
The testerร found this bicycle to be the best value for money.
5	introductory it: She made it clear that...
when the object of a verb is a clause, Infinitive structure or -ing structure, and
there is an object complement, it is common IO use it as a preparatory object.
Compare:
She marie her views clear.
She made it clear that she disagreed, (not She madeJhrn-she disagreed flear;
6	passive structures
Passive versions of these structures are common (► 65).
Il was painted blue. He was elected President.
Her attacker was described as a tall man with a beard.
The metal was identified as gold.
He is not regarded as being dangerous.
Tor a long time he was thought to be a spy.
She was believed to belong to a revolutionary organisation.
Seven people are understood to have been injured in the explosion.
It was considered impossible to change the date.
11	linking verbs: be, seem, look, etc ________________
1	common linking verbs
Some verbs arc used to join an adjective or noun complement to a subject.
These verbs can be called "linking verbs', 'copulas’ or 'copular verbs'. Common
examples: be, seem, appear, look, sound, smell, taste, feel, become, get.
The weather is horrible. She became a racehorse trainer.
I do feel a fool.	The stew smells good.
That car looks fast. It’s getting late.
2	adjectives after linking verbs
After linking verbs we use adjectives, not adverbs. Compare:
He spoke intelligently. (Intelligently is an adverb. It tells you about how the
He seems intelligent. (Intelligent is an adjective. It tells you about the person
himself - rather like saying He is intelligent. Seem is a linking verb.)
3	other uses
Some of these verbs arc also used with other meanings as ordinary non linking
verbs. They are then used with adverbs, not adjectives. Compare:
The problem appeared impossible, (not ... impossibly.)
Isabel suddenly appeared in the doorway, (not ... sudden ..)
Other verbs used in two ways like this arc look (► 51B), taste (► 603) and feel
(* 463).	-*
grammar » 11 linking verbs: be, seem, look, etc
4	change: become, get, grow, etc
Some linking verbs are used IO talk about change, or the absence of change.
The most common are: become, gel, grow, go, turn, รlay, remain, keep.
Il‘ร becoming colder.	I’m getting sleepy.
It’s growing late.	rhe leaves are going brown.
How does she slay so young! I hope you will always remain so happy.
Keep calm.	His hair Is turning grey.
Fo* the diAerrnies between thrte trrta. > .W4
5	other verbs followed by adjectives
Sometimes other verbs, too, can be followed by adjectives. This happens when
we are really describing the subject of the sentence, and not the action of the
verb. It เร common in descriptions with sit, stand, lie,/all.
lhe valley lay quiet and peaceful in the รนท.
She sat motionless, waiting for their decision.
He fell unconscious on the floor, (nut ... unconsciously. ..)
Adjectives can also he used in the structure verb « object * adjective, to
describe the object of the verb.
New SUMtn GUB washes clothes SUPER WHITE. (not ... wnmt¥...)
He pulled his belt tight and started off. (sot ... tightly ..)
<h· Altrrrnce hetwn adjective, and Mh«rte, » เห.
Ser .|I«> Ihe entile· for pnrticuUr linking verb.
12	two-part verbs ^phrasal verbs
1	verb + adverb particle: get back, walk out
Many English verbs can be followed by small adverbs ('adverb panicles'). These
two-pan verbs are often called phrasal verbs'.
Get back!	She walked out I switched the light off
Common adverb panicles: about, across, ahead, along, (a)round. aside, away,
back. by. down, forward, in, home. off. on, out, over, past, through, up.
Some of these words can also be used as prepositions. Compare:
I switched the light off. (adverb panicle)
I jumped off lhe wall, (preposition)
Foe a detailed rompjflMir. ► 19».
2	idiomatic meanings: break out; turn up
The meaning of a phrasal verb is often very different from lhe meanings of the
two pans taken separately.
War broke out in 1939. (broke out is not lhe same as broke - out.)
joe turned up last night. ( appeared’ - not the same as turned · up.)
I looked the word up in the dictionary. (Look up is not the same as look - up.)
iVe pul off. the meeting till Tuesday. (Put off is not the same as put · off.)
grammar · 12 two-part verbs: phrasal verbs
Verbs
Section
3	phrasal verbs with and without objects
Some phrasal verbs are intransitive (they do not have objects).
I got up at 7.ÍXI today. That colour really stands out.
Others are transitive.
Could you switch the light off' I helped Anna to clean up the room
4	word order with objects
Adverb panicles can go either before or after noun objects (unlike most
adverbs). ►196.1
She switched off the light. OK She switched the light off.
But they can only go after pronoun objects.
She switched it off. (koi She switched off ฬ่.)
Is that the light which you switched off' (not ... the light off which you
jilifcM?)
OÜV me back my watch. OR Gfte me my watch back, (not Ghv hack me my
For details ๗ partKuUf phrawl vrrbv « a good dktMifUQ
13	two-part verbs: prepositional verbs
1	verb ♦ preposition: listen to; look at
Many English verbs are regularly followed by prepositions before objects.
You never listen to me. (นΟΙ You never listen พ)
Luke walked down the road without looking at anybody.
Prepositions are not used when there is no object.
Listen! (not l isten <๙)
2	idiomatic meanings: look after, get over
The meaning of a prepositional Serb can be very different from the meanings of
the two parts taken separately.
Could you look after the kids while I'm out? (look after is not the same as
He look ages to gel over his illness. (Cel over is not the same as ger ' over.)
3	word order: What are you thinking about?
When an object comes at the beginning of a clause (e g in a question or relative
clause), a prepositional verb usually stays together, so that a preposition can be
separated from its object and go at the end of the clause. For details of this and
other preposition final structures, ► 209.
What are you thinking about' (soi About what are you thinking?)
I’ve found the book which I was looking for. (More natural เท an informal
style than ... the hook for which I นน้ร์ footing.)
4	verbs with prepositions and particles together
A few verbs can be used with both an adverb panicle (► 12) and a preposition
(making them three pan verbs).
I get along with her quite น*//.	Stop talking and get on with your work. -»
grammar · 13 two-part verbs: prepositional verbs
It's hard to put up with people who won't stop talking.
If you're on the road on Saturday night, look out for drunk drivers.
I'll think about it and gel back to you.
She went up to the officer and explained her problem.
I'm looking forward to the party.
For the diflmnce between prepirtitlon» and I,tvrib panlde*. » 1*>.
For prrpoUuonal verbi เท the paw»·. » 62.
14	verbs of movement: she ran in, etc
When we want co calk about a movement, its direction and its nature, there are
several possibilities.
We can use three separate words for the three ideas:
She came in running.
We can use a verb which Includes the Idea of direction, and describe the nature
of the movement separately:
She entered running.
Or we can use a verb which makes clear the nature of the movement, and
describe the direction separately:
She ran เท.
In English, the third of these solutions is the most common.
I walked back. (More natural than I went back walking.)
She danced across the garden.
(More natural than She crossed the garden dancing)
I jumped down the stairs.
(More natural than I came down the stairs jumping.)
they crawled out of the cellar.	The eagle flew away.
15	verb + verb: auxiliary verbs
1	the need for auxiliary verbs
เท English sentences, a lot of important meanings are expressed by the verb
phrase for example questioning, negation, time, completion, continuation,
repetition, willingness, possibility, obligation. Hut English verbs do not have
many different one word forms: the maximum (except for be) is five (e g. see,
sees, string, saw, seen). So to express all these meanings, ‘auxiliary’ (or ’helping')
verbs are added to other verbs. There are two groups.
2	be, do and have
He is added to other verbs to make progressive and passive forms.
Is it raining f	she was imprisoned by a military court.
Do is used to make questions, negatives and emphatic forms of non-
auxiliary verbs.
Do you smoker It didn't matter. Do come in.
Have is used to make perfect forms.
What have you doneT	/ realised that I hadn't turned the lights off.
For details, ► Section 2.
grammar
verbs of movement: she
Verbs
Section
3	modal auxiliary verbs
The verbs will, shall, would, should, can, could, may, might, must and ought are
usually called 'modal auxiliary verbs'. They are used with other verbs to add
various meanings, mostly to do with certainty or obligation.
She may be in Mexico. You must call Uncle Arthur.
For details, ► Section 7.
4	Other verb + verb structures
Other verbs (e.g. seem} which are used เท verb - verb structures are not usually
called 'auxiliary verbs'. One important difference is grammatical. เท auxiliary
verb structures, questions and negatives are made without do; in other verb «
verb structures the auxiliary do has to be added to the first verb. Compare:
-	She should understand. - She seems to understand.
Should she understand?	Does she seem to understand?
-	He is swimming	- He likes swimming.
He is not swimming	He doesn Ί like swimming.
16	verb + verb: other structures
1	infinitives, -ing forms and clauses
Many verbs besides auxiliaries can be followed by forms of other verbs (or by
structures including other verbs). This can happen, for example, if we talk about
our attitude to an action: the first verb describes the attitude and the second
refers to the action. The second verb structure is often rather like the direct
object of the first verb.
I hope to see you soon. I enjoy playing cards.	I saw that she was crying.
Different structures are possible, depending on the particular verb. Some verbs
can be followed by infinitives with or without to (► 97-98), some verbs can be
followed by ing forms will, or without a preposition (► 100), and some by
clauses. Many verbs can be followed by more than one of these structures, often
with a difference of meaning or use. For each verb, it is necessary to know which
structures arc possible.
We seem to haIV a problem, (noi Weseem luH-tngrt problem:}
Can I help wash the dishes?
It's not very easy to stop smoking, (not ... to stop !" smoke.)
We're thinking of moving, (not We're thinking to move.)
I suggest that you see a solicitor. OR I suggest seeing a solicitor, (not I suggest
you to see* solicitor.}
Sometimes the first verb does not give information about the subject It says
more about the action which the second verb refers to.
I happened to see Alice the other day.
We're starting to get invited to some of the neighbours' parties.
My keys seem to have disappeared
Il is possible to have ‘chains' of verbs following each other.
I keep forgetting to go shopping.	Don Ί let me stop you working
He seems to be trying to sit up.
I don't want to have to get her to start telling lies.
grammar · 16 verb · verb: oilier structures
verb + object + verb
Many verbs can be followed by an object as well as a verb structure.
I'd like you to meet Sophie.
We all want you to be happy, (not We all want flan you tire happy.)
We tv not to Slop him making a fool of himself.
IVhcn are you going to gel the elock repairedÍ
Nobody told me that you
grammar · 16 verb « verb: other structures
Section 2 Be, have and do
INTRODUCTION
These three verbs live a double life. They can be auxiliary verbs used to form
questions, negatives, emphatic forms, perfect and progressive tenses, and
passives. Be can also be a linking verb, and have and do can be ordinary full
verbs, l or this reason, each of them can appear twice in a single phrase.
I am being served. Have you had an invitation ? What do you do'
There are some grammatical complications, particularly as regards have.
For details, see the following entries.
Do you know what's wrong with these, and why?
Ο 1 was being depressed when you phoned. ► 18
Q 1 don't often be sick. ► 19
Q A hole is in my sleeve. ► 20.1
Õ It is a lot of noise in the street. ► 20.1
Q I don't know how many people there is in the waiting room. ► 20.1
Õ There was swimming a girl in the lake. ► 20.4
o There seems to be some problems. ' 20.5
Õ There was the door open. · 20.7
o Do you have heard the news? ► 22.2
Õ IN not having seen her anywhere. ► 22.3
Õ Had you a good trip? ► 23.2
Õ I’ve lunch at 12.30 most days. ► 23.2
Q She is having three brothers. ► 24.2
Q Do you have got a headache? ► 24.6
Q 'Have you got a pen?’ 'Sorry, I haven't got.'» 24.6
õ 1 had got a cold last week. » 24.6
Õ You have right. ► 25 I
G She has nearly thirty. ► 25.2
Õ It's 37 kilos heavy. ► 25.2
Õ l-ike you football? » 27.1
o Do you can play football? » 27.1
Q Hike not football » 27.2
Q I haven't got time to get the tickets. Who's going to do so? » 29.2
õ I like the saxophone, and I have always done it. ► 29.3
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
18	be: progressive forms
19	be with auxiliary do
20	there is
21	have, introduction
22	have, auxiliary verb
23	have, actions
24	have (got): possession,
relationships and other states
25	be and have
26	do: introduction
27	do: auxiliary verb
28	do: substitute verb (/ may do.)
29	do so! U! that
grammar - Section 2 Be, have and do
17	be: general
Be can be an auxiliary verb, used to form progressive and passive structures
(► 3, 57).
What are you doingr
We weren’t told about the meeting.
As an auxiliary verb, be can have progressive forms in passive structures
(► 57.2)
The hospital is being rebuilt.
I	knew we were being watched.
Be can also be a linking verb, used to join a subject to a complement.
This is difficult.
Andy was I>ery tired.
Progressive forms of the linking verb be are not usual.
It’s cold today, (not unbeing told today·.)
But they are possible in some cases (► 18).
You're being stupid.
Questions and negatives are formed without do, but do is used in negative and
emphatic imperatives (» 19).
Don’t be afraid.
Do be carefuL (stronger than Be careful.)
hK hr . Infinitive (».g She Ú Io arriiv romwrou'). » «. for conn«Uon· (e f t'm, iwi'r). » 337
18	be: progressive forms
I	am being / you are being, etc - adjective/noun
We can use this structure to talk about temporary situations to do with actions
and behaviour, but not usually to talk about feelings. Compare:
- You're being stupid. (= You're doing stupid things.)
I was being very careful. (■ I was doing something carefully.)
Who's being a silly baby, then?
I’m happy at the moment, (not I'm being happy <ti the moment.)
I was depressed when you phoned, (not /<™ being depressed...)
Note the difference between He's being sick (BrE ะะ He's limiting - bringing food
up from the stomach) and He's sick (- He's ill).
19	be with auxiliary do
Normally, be is used without the auxiliary do.
I'm not Offen sick, (not /don't often be sick.)
But do is used to make negative Imperative sentences with be (when we tell
somebody not to do something).
Don Ί be silly! Don Ί be such a nuisance.·
grammar
beะ general
Be, have and do
Section 2
And do be can begin emphatic imperatives.
1)0 be careful!	1)0 be quiet!
เท an Informal style, people sometimes use do with be in one or two other
structures which have a similar meaning to imperative sentences.
Why don't you be a good hoy and ill down?
If you don’t be quiet you’ll go straight to bed.
20	there is
1	use
เท sentences which say that something exists (or does not exist) somewhere, we
usually use there as a kind of preparatory subject, and put the real subject after
the verb. Note the pronunciation of there. usually /ôa(r)7, not fdea(r)/.
there’s a hole in my sleeve. (More natural than A hole is in my sleeve.)
there’s ice on the lake. (More natural than Ice is on the lake.)
It cannot be used in this way.
there IS a lot of noise เท the street, (koi II ba lot of noise in lhe street.)
There are is used with plural subjects.
I don't know how many people there are in lhe waiting room.
However, there’s can begin sentences with plural subjects in informal speech.
There's two men at the door. Dad.
There’s some grapes in the fridge, if you're still hungry.
2	indefinite subjects
We use there in this way particularly with subjects that have indefinite articles,
no article, or indefinite determiners like some. any. no; and with indefinite
pronouns like somebody, nothing.
There are some people outside;
there were no footsteps to be seen.
Is there anybody at home?
There was dancing เท the streets.
There's something worrying me.
Note the use of wrong and the matter (► 524).
there’s something wrong. Is there anything lhe matter?
Note also the structures with sense, point, use (► 373) and need.
There's no sense in making him angry.
Is there any point เท talking about it again?
Do you think there’s any use trying to explain?
There's no need to hurry - we've got plenty of time.
grammar · 20 there i
3	all tenses
There can be used in this way with all tenses of be.
Once upon a time there were three wicked brothers.
There hat never been anybody like you.
There will be snow later in the week.
And.there can be used in question tags (► 306.4).
There'll be enough for everybody, won't there?
4	structures with auxiliary be
There can also be used in structures where be is a progressive or passive
auxiliary. Note the word order.
There was a girl swimming in the lake. 1= A girl was swimming ...)
(sot There was swimming a girl...)
There have been more Americans killed in road accidents than in all the wars
since 1900. (ะ More Americans have been killed ...)
(พr there have been killed more Americans. ..)
There’ll be somebody meeting you at the airport.
5	more complex structures
There can be used with modal verb · be, and with some other verbs (e g seem,
appear, happen, tend) before to be.
There might be drinks if you wail for a bit.
There must be something we can do.
If the police hadn't closed the road, there could have been a bad accident
Could you be quiet? There, happens to be a lecture going on.
There tends to be jealousy when a new little brother or sister comes along
Note also the structure there is/are certain/sure/likely/bound to be.
There is sure to be trouble when she gels his message.
1)0 you think there are likely to be delays?
Infinitives (there to be) and ing forms (there being) are also used.
I don't want there to be any more trouble.
What's the chance of there being an election this year?
6	Other verbs: there lived...
เท a formal or literary style, some other verbs can be used with there besides be.
these are mostly verbs which refer to states or arrivals.
เท a small town in Germany there once lived a poor shoemaker.
There remains nothing more to be done.
Suddenly there entered a strange figure dressed all in Mack.
There followed an uncomfortable silence.
า definite subjects
There is not normally used in a sentence with a definite subject (e.g. a noun with
a definite article, or a proper name).
The door was open, (noI Uterewas fketloor open.)
lames was at the party, (noi There ttพ lames al the parly.)
One exception to this is when we simply name people or things, in order to
draw attention to a possible solution to a problem.
grammar · 20 there is
, have and do
Section .
' Who could we ask? 'Well, there’s lames, or Miranda, or Anna, or Emma...
’ Where can he sleepr 'Well, there's always the attic '
Another apparent exception is in oral Stories that begin I here was this.... when
this has an indefinite sense.
there was this man, see, and he couldn't net up เท the mornings. So he. ..
21	havejntroduction
Have is used in several different ways:
a as an auxiliary verb, to make perfect verb forms (► 22)
Have you heard about Daniel and Corinne?
I	remembered his face, but I had forgotten his name.
b to talk about actions and experiences (► 23)
I'm going to have a bath.	What time do you usually have breakfast?
c to talk about possession, relationships and other states (► 24)
They have three cars. Haire you (got) any brothers or sisters?
Do you often have headaches?
d with an infinitive, to talk about obligation, like must (► 74)
I	had to work last Saturday.
e with object * verb form, to talk about causing or experiencing actions and
events (► 109)
He soon had everybody laughing I must have my shoes repaired.
We had our car stolen last week.
>o- conOMXton* (l ie. helm «cl · รท. fo. พ«เ fo™ » JIS,	Fo> เพd brtlrr . เท·ทเน.». - 77.
22	have: auxiliary verb
have · past participle
1 perfect verb forms
We use have as an auxiliary verb with past participles, to make perfect verb
forms.
You've heard about Daniel and Corinne? (present perfect: ► 47, 52)
I realised that I had met him before, (past perfect: ► 53 55)
We'll have been living here for two years next Sunday, (future perfect
progressive: ► 40)
I'd like to have lived เท the eighteenth century, (perfect infinitive: ► B9)
Having been there before, he knew what to expect, (perfect participle)
grammar
have: auxiliary verb
2	questions and negatives
like all auxiliary verbs, have makes question* and negatives without do.
Haw you heard the news? (not Do you เพพ heard... ?)
I	haven't seen them, (not เ don't haw seen them.)
3	progressive forms
there are no progressive forms of the auxiliary verb haw.
I haven't seen her anywhere, (not I'm not having seen her anywhere.)
For lonirMnom. » 337 For น»»เ lormi . 315.
23	have: actions
1 meaning and typical expressions
We often use have ♦ object to talk about actions and experiences, especially in
an informal style.
Let's have a drink. I’m going to haw a hath. (BrE)
I'll have a think (BrE) and let you know what I decide.
Haw a good lime.
เท expressions like these, haw can be the equivalent of eat', 'drink', ‘enjoy’,
’experience' or many other things - the exact meaning depends on the following
noun. Common expressions:
haw breakfast / lunch / supper / dinner / tea / coffee / a drink / a meal
haw a bath (BrE) / a wash / a shaw / a shower (BrE)
haw a rest / a lie-down (BrE) / a sleep / a dream
haw a good time / a bad day / a nice evening I a day off / a holiday (BrE)
haw a good journey / flight I trip, etc
haw a talk / a chat / a word with somebody .1 a conwrsalion / a disagreement /
a row (BrE) i a quarrel / a fight
haw a swim / a walk / a ride / a dance / a game of tennis, etc
haw airy I ago (BrE) haw a look haw a baby (- give birth)
have difficulty / trouble (in) .. .ing (something)
have an accident / an operation / a nervous breakdown
Note American English take a bath/shower/rest/swim/walk.
Haw can also be used to mean receive' (eg. I've had a phone call from Emma).
2	grammar
เท this structure, we make questions and negatives with do. Progressive forms
are possible. Contractions and weak forms of haw are not used.
Did you haw a good time (not Had you a good time?)
I’m having a bad day.
I have lunch at 12.30 most days, (not I'w lunch...)
grammar
haw. actions
have and do
Section.
24	have (got): possession, relationships and
other states
1	meanings
We often use have to talk about stales: possession, relationships, illnesses, the
characteristics of people and things, and similar ideas.
Her father has an office in Westminster.
they hardly have enough money to live on.
Do you have any brothers or sisters?
The Prime Minister had a bad cold.
My grandmother didn’t have a very nice personality.
Sometimes have simply expresses the fact of being in a particular situation.
She has a houseful of children this weekend.
I think we have mice.
2	progressive forms not used
Progressive forms of have are not used for these meanings.
She has three brothers, (not She is having three brothers.)
Do you have a headache?(ran Are yrrtt hm-tny a hmtltfthe')
3	questions and negatives with do
เท American English and modern British English, questions and negatives are
commonly formed with do for these meanings.
Does the house haw a garden?
Her parents did not haw wry much money.
4	shorter question and negative forms: have you ... ?, she has not
Short question and negative forms (e g. haw you... ?, she has not) were
common in older English. เท modern English they arc rather formal and
uncommon (except in a few fixed expressions like I hawn’t the faintest idea).
they are not normally used in American English.
-	Haw you an appointment? (formal BrE only)
Do you haw an appointment? (AmE/BrE)
-	Angela has not the charm of her older sisters, (formal BrE only)
Angela does not have the charm ... (AmE/BrE)
5	have got
เท conversation and informal writing, we often use the double form haw got.
I’ve got a new boyfriend. (More natural in speech than I haw a new
boyfriend.)
Has your sister got a car?	I haven Ί got your keys.
Note that haw got means exactly the same as have เท this case - it is a present
tense of haw, not the present perfect of get.
6	have got. details
Do is not used in questions and negatives with got.
Haw you got a headache? (Nor Df> you haw gut. ..)
The house hasn’t got a cellar, (noj The house doesn T haw got ..)
grammar · 24 haw (golf, possession, relationships and other states
Got-forms of have arc not used in short answers or tags.
'Haveyou gal a lightr 'No. / haven’t: (not No, I haven't got)
Annes got a bike, hasn't sheใ
Go,-forms of have are less common in the past tense.
I had some problems last week, (not / had-got^ome-problems...)
Did you have good teachers when you were at school?
Got is not generally used with infinitives, participles or Ing forms of have, you
cannot usually say to /taw got a headache or having got a brother, rhe infinitive
of have got is occasionally used after modal verbs (e g. She must have got a new
boyfriend).
Have got is rather less common in American English, especially in questions and
negatives.
เท very informal American speech, people may drop've (but not 'ร) before gal.
If've) got a problem.
Got- and do forms may be mixed เท American English, especially when short
answers, reply questions and tags follow gof-forms.
‘I’vegot a new apartment: ‘You doใ’
7	repeated states: got not used
When we arc talking about repeated or habitual states, go,-forms of have an· less
often used. Compare:
I have / I've got a headache.
I often have headaches.
Do you have Have you got time to go to London this weekend?
Do you ever have time to go to London?
- Sorry, I don't have haven’t got any beer.
IVe don't usually have beer in the house.
8	repetition: a change in British English
Traditionally เท British English, do was used with have mostly in references to
habit or repetition. Compare:
Do you often have meetings?
Have you Igor) a meeting today?
เท modern British English (which is heavily influenced by American English),
do-forms arc common even when there is no idea of repetition.
Do you have lime to go to the beach this weekend? (AmE I modern BrE)
25	be and have
1 physical conditions: hunger, thirst, etc
To talk about experiencing hunger, thirst, heat, cold and certain other common
physical conditions, we normally use be (on fee!) · adjective, not have · noun.
Note the following expressions:
be hungry (noi have-bungee), be thirsty, be warm, be hot. be cold, be sleepy,
be afraid
Note also:
be right, be wrong be lucky
grammar
In· and have
Be. have and do
Section
2	age, height, weight, size and colour
Be is also used to talk about age, height, length, weight, size, shape and cotour.
I'm nearly thirty, (not I have neatly thirty.)
She is nearly my age.	He is six feel tall.
I wish I was ten kilos lighter. What size are your shoes ?
The room is ten metres long. What colour are his eyes?
She is the same height as her father.
Be heavy is not usually used เท measuring expressions.
It weighs 37 kilos, (not h’s 37 kilos heavy.)

26	do: introduction
Do has three main uses.
1	auxiliary verb
The auxiliary do is used to form the questions and negatives of other verbs, as
well as emphatic and shortened forms. For details, » 27.
Did you remember to buy milk?	This doesn Ί taste I>ery nice.
I do like your earrings. ‘lack eats too much.’ 'He certainly docs.'
2	general-purpose verb
l>o is also an ordinary (non-auxiliary) verb. It can refer to almost any kind of
activity, and is used when it is not necessary or not possible to be more precise.
For details, and the difference between do and make, ► 435.
What are you doing? Don! just stand there. Do something.
I've finished the phone calls, and I'll do rhe letters tomorrow.
3	substitute verb
เท British English, do can be used alone as a substitute for a main verb after an
auxiliary. For details, ► 28.
'Do you think lake will corner 'He might do.' (AmE He might.)
Do so,'ll,* 1 that can be used as a substitute expression when we want to avoid
repeating another verb and what follows. For details. ► 29.
I need to lake a rest, and I shall do so as soon as I can find time.
He told me to Often the door. I did it as quietly as I could.
4	combined forms
Auxiliary do and non auxiliary do can occur together.
Do you do much gardening? How do you do?
The company didn't do very well last year.
grammar
do: introduction
7 do: auxiliary verb
The auxiliary verb do เร followed by infinitives Without to. It has several uses.
1	questions
We use do to make questions with ordinary verbs, but not with other auxiliary
verbs (► 216). Compare:
On unff	fanfhntlt (พ*T 1 ai.»
Can you ;day football' (.M/r 1)0 you «พ/. play football'}
The auxiliary do can make questions with the ordinary verb do.
What do you do เท the evenings'
2	negatives
We use do to make negative clauses with ordinary verbs (including the ordinary
verb do), but not with other auxiliary verbs (► 21/ ).
I don’t like football, (not I like Hot football.)	Don’t go.
I don’t do much เท the evenings.
BUT I can’t play football, (not I don’t can play football.)
3	emphasis
We can use do in an affirmative clause for emphasis.
Do sit down. You do look nice today!
She thinks I don’t love her, but I do love her.
I don’t do much sport now, but I did play football when I was younger.
4	inversion
Do is used in some structures with inversion (verb before subject) (► 270).
Λι no time did he lose his self-control.
5	ellipsis
เท cases where an auxiliary is used instead of a whole verb phrase (► 279), do is
common เท affirmative clauses as well as questions and negatives.
She doesn’t like dancing, but I do. (ร... but I like dancing.)
Dun meal smells funny.’' Yes, it does, doesn't it f
Anna thinks there's something wrong with lames, and so do I.
IM <*0 with hr » IS	l or «a. pronumUilom 0( do uxl à. ► ,15.	5.» do in Jmrt ห.«1! . 3M
grammar
da auxiliary verb
Be, have and do
Section 2
28	do: substitute verb (/ may do.)
auxiliary verb + do
เท British English (but not American), do can be used alone as a substitute verb
after an auxiliary verb.
‘Come and slay with US.' 7 may (do), if I have the time.' (AmE I may, if...
ox I may come. If...)
He's supposed to have locked the safe.' "He has (done): (AmE He has.
O" He has locked it.)
He didn't pass his exam, but he could have (done) if he'd tried harder.
He smokes more than he used to (do)
Progressive forms are possible, but not very common.
'You should be getting dressed: 7 am (doing):
Note that the auxiliary verb is stressed in this structure.
■Close the door.' 7 HAVE done.' (noI.. .4-httve-noM'.)
Fot amilurv will, น»«t	of rompkte »rrt pbniiri. » 279
29	do so/it/that
1	do so
The expression do so can be used to avoid repeating a verb and its object or
complement. It is usually rather formal.
'Put the car away, please: ‘I've already done so.'
Eventually she divorced loshua. It was a pity she had not done so earlier.
He told me to gel out, and I did so as quietly as possible.
2	do SO and do it/that
Do it and do that can be used instead of do so.
/ promised to get the tickets, and I will do so/it as soon as possible.
She rode a camel: she had never done so/ that before.
We use do so mainly to refer to the same action, with the same subject, that was
mentioned before. เท other cases we prefer do it/that or do alone.
I haven’t got time to get the tickets. Who's going to do itI (not ... Wh&sgofHg
lodoso?)
Ί rode a camel in Morocco: 'I'd love to do that (not ... todoso.)'
I always eat peas with hone)'. My wife never does
f SMVT
l ••บ I · · ·	(HrCTalZf I
grammar
do SO/it/that
3	do so/it/that: deliberate actions
1)0 so/it/that are mainly used IO refer to deliberate dynamic actions. We do not
usually use these expressions to replace verbs like fall, lose1 like, remember,
think, own. which refer to involuntary actions or states.
/ like the saxophone, and I always have (done). (AmF.... and เ always have ]
(not .. and Utave always ÃmmMM)
She lost her money. I wasn't surprised that she did.
(Mil	thili <12» JU	\
I	think lake's wrong. I did when he first stroke to me.
(xor... I didso/it'dtal when...)
4	Other verbs
Note that so. it and that are not normally used in this way after auxiliary verbs.
It is not possible in standard English to say / can so, She was it or I have that.
grammar · 29 do so!in that
Section 3 Present Tenses
INTRODUCTION
the two present tenses
Most English verbs have two present tenses. Forms like I wail, she thinks are
called simple present' or present simple’; forms like I am waiting or she's
thinking are called present progressive' or 'present continuous'.
general time: simple present
When we talk about timeless truths, permanent situations or things that happen
repeatedly, we usually use the simple present (► 30 31 for details).
Water freezes al O’Celsius. My parents live near Dover. I often go swimming.
around now: present progressive
When we talk about temporary continuing actions and events, which arc just
going on now or around now, we usually use a present progressive tense (► 32).
'What are you doing? ‘I’m reading.' I'm travelling a lol these days.
future
noth present tenses can be used to talk about the future (► 31.4. 36-37).
I'll meet you when you arrive.
Call me if you’re passing through London.
terminology: tense and aspect
เท academic grammars, the term 'aspect' is often used for progressive forms. We
use 'tense' for all Serb forms which show time.
Do you know what’s wrong with these, and why?
o that baby crys all the time. ► 30.2
o What are frogs eating? * 31.1
o Ihe kettle boils - shall 1 make tea? ► 31.2
Õ I'm liking this wine very much. ► 4.1
Ο I promise 1 don't smoke any more. ► 31.4
o 'There's the doorbell.' ’ I get it.' ► 31.4
o I'll phone you when I'll get home. ► 31.4
Ο I know her since 1990. ► 32.8
Õ I'm going to the mountains twee a year. » 34.1
o I’m swearing that I will tell the truth. - 34.4
o Here is coming your husband. ► 34.5
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
30	simple present: forms
31	simple present: use
32	present progressive
33	stories, commentaries
and instructions
34 present tenses: advanced points
grammar · Section 3 Present Tenses
30	simple present: forms
1	forms
affirmative	Question	Negative
1 work	do I work?	1 do not work
you work	do you work?	you do not work
he/she/it works	does he/she/it work?	he/she/it does not work
we work	do we work?	we do not work
they work	do they work?	they do not work
- Contracted negatives (► 337): I don't work, he doesn't work, etc
Negative questions (► 218): do I not work3 or don't I work7 etc

2 spelling of third person singular forms
3	pronunciation of third person singular forms
The pronunciation 0Í the (e)s ending depends on the sound that comes before
it. The rules are the same as for the plural -(e)s ending, ►lie.
Irregular pronunciations: says (.'sc zJ, NO I seiz/); does (/daz/. NOT /du://).
31	simple present: use
1	general time: It always rains in November.
We often use the simple present to talk about timeless truths, permanent
situations, or things that happen regularly, repeatedly or all the lime.
What do frogs eat? (not What are frogs eating?)
grammar · 30 simple present: forms
Present Tenses
Section 3
Alice works for an insurance company.
แ always rains here in November. I play tennis every Wednesday.
simple present: permanent situations
Alice works for an insurance company.
simple present: things that happen repeatedly
I play tennis every Wednesday.
2	not used for things happening just around the present
We do not usually use the simple present to talk about temporary situations or
actions that are only going on around the present. Compare:
Water boils at 100· Celsius.
The kettle's boiling - shall I make tea?(NOT the kettle bods ...)
-	It usually snows in January.
took - it’s snowing(not took -it snows'.)
-	I play tennis every Wednesday.
'Where's Bernard?’ ‘He's playing tennis.' (not .. . He plays tennis.)
3	non progressive verbs
However, the simple present is used for this 'around the present' meaning with
verbs that do not usually have progressive forms (► I).
I like this wine, (not I'm Ming ...)	I believe you. (not I'm believing you.)
4	talking about the future
We do not normally use the simple present to talk about the future.
I promise I won't smoke any more, (not I promtse-tdon'f-smoke ...)(► 793)
We’re going to the theatre this evening. (NO! We go to the theatre this evening)
‘There's the doorbell.' 'TH get it.' (not I gel it) (►79.1)
However, the simple present is used for 'timetabled' future events (► 37.1).
His train arrives al I Ι.4β. I start my new job tomorrow.
And the simple present is often used instead of will... in subordinate clauses
that refer to the future. (For details, ► 231).	H
grammar · 31 simple present:
I'll kill anybody who touches my thing,ร. (รพ? .. .aehwwiU-fOHelt-. ..)
I'll phone you when I get home, (not ... when f’U gel home.)
I he simple present is also used เท suggestions with Why don't you ... ?
Why don’t you take a day off tomorrow1
ร series of events: demonstrations, commentaries, instructions,
stories
When we talk about a series of completed actions and events, we often use the
Simple present. This happens, for example, in demonstrations, commentaries,
instructions and present tense stories (► 33 for more details).
l int I lake a bowl and break two eggs into it. (not hits! I anUaktHg. ..)
lydiard passes to I'aylor, laylor shoots - and it's a goal!
How do I get to the station? ’ You go straight on until you come to the traffic
lights, then you turn left,..
So I go into the office, and I see this man, and he says to me...
6 how long? present tenses not used
We use a perfect tense, not a present tense, to say how long a present action or
situation has lieen going on. (► 52 for details.)
I've known her since 1990. (sot I know her since 1990.)
32	present progressive
1	present progressive: forms
ami are! is · ing
I am waiting.	Are you listening?	She isn't working today.
ร») ,pâ* ๗ 1-* ftxmv ► M6-3W. I'or panrw tai ,k u nt «พ* I, พ.ท1; done} ► ร?.
2	use: 'around now'
We use the present progressive to talk about temporary situations that arc going
on now or around now : before, during and after the moment of speaking.
Hurry up! We're all waiting lor you! (not We all wail. .,)
' What are you doing' ‘I'm writing emails, (not ... I write emails.)'
He's working in Saudi Arabia al the moment.
present progressive: temporary actions and situations going
on now or around now
We're all waiting for you.	Why are you cryingt
grammar
present progressive
Present Tenses
Section 3
3	repeated actions
The present progressive can refer to repeated actions and events, if these are just
happening around the present (for more details, ► 34.1).
Why is he hilling the dog? I’m travelling a lot these days.
4	changes
We also use the present progressive to talk about developments and changes.
That child's getting bigger every day.	House prices arc going up again.
5	talking about the future
We often use the present progressive to talk about the future (► 36).
What are you doing tomorrow evening?
Come and see US nett week if you’re passing through London
6	things that happen all the time: present progressive not used
We do not normally use the present progressive to talk about permanent
situations, or about things that happen regularly, repeatedly or all the time.
Compare:
- Look - the cat’s eating your breakfast.'
' What do bears eatT Everything.' (not ‘WhMare bears eating?-. . .ๅ
Why is that girl standing on the table?
Chetford Castle stands on a hill outside the town, (not ...» standing...)
My sister's living at home for the moment.
Your parents live in North London, don’t they?
7	verbs not generally used in progressive forms
Some verbs are not generally used เท progressive forms (► 4). even if the
meaning is ‘just around now1.
I like this wine, (noI I'mMfng this wine.)
Do you believe what he says? (not Are you believing... ?)
lhe lank contains about 7,000 litres at the moment.
8	how long? present tenses not used
We use a perfect tense, not a present tense, to say how long something has been
going on. (► 52 for details.)
I've been learning English for years, (not I'm learning English for years.)
33	stories, commentaries and instructions
1 stories
Present tenses are often used informally to tell stones. The simple present is
used for the events - the things that happen one after another. The present
progressive is used for ‘background’ - things that are already happening when
the story starts, or that continue through the story. (This is like the difference
between the simple past and past progressive. ► 45.3)
So I open the door, and I look out into lhe garden, and I see this man.
He's wearing pyjamas and a policeman ร helmet. 'Hello,' he says...	-♦
grammar
stories, commentaries and instructions
There’s this Scotsman, and he's walking through the jungle when he meets a
gorilla. And the gorilla's eating a snake sandwich. So the Scotsman asks ...
The simple presen! is common in summaries of plays, stories, etc.
เท Λα I. Hamlet secs the ghost of his father. The ghost tells him...
Chapter 2: Henry goes to Scotland and meets the Loch Ness Monster.
2	commentaries
เท commentaries, the use of tenses is similar. The simple present is used for the
quicker actions and events (which are finished before the sentences that
describe them); the present progressive is used for longer actions and situations
There are more simple and fewer progressive tenses in a football commentary,
for instance, than in a commentary on a boat race.
Smith Ilasses to Devaney, Devaney to Hames - and Harris intercepts ...
Harris passes back to Simms, nice ball - and Simms shoots.'
Oxford are pulling slightly ahead of Cambridge now; they're rowing with a
beautiful rhythm; Cambridge are looking a little disorganised...
3	instructions and demonstrations
We often use the two present tenses in a similar way to give instructions,
demonstrations and directions.
OK, let’s go over it again· You wait outside the bank until the manager arrives
Then you radio Louie, who's waiting round the corner, and he drives round
to the front entrance. You and Louie grab the manager...
First I put a lump of butter into a frying pan and light the gas; then while the
butter’s melting I break three eggs into a bowl, like this...
34	present tenses: advanced points
1	repeated actions: simple or progressive?
The present progressive can refer to repeated actions and events, if these are
happening around the moment of speaking.
Why is he hitting the dog? lake's seeing a lot of Felicity these days.
We normally use the simple present for repeated actions and events which are
not closely connected to the moment of speaking.
Water boils at 100· Celsius, (not Waler is boiling al 100"Celsius.)
I go to the mountains about twice a year.
But we can use the present progressive for things that are going on around these
actions and events.
At seven, when the mail comes. I’m usually having breakfast.
You look lovely when you're smiling.
2	long-lasting changes
We use the present progressive for changes and developments, even if these arc
very long-lasting.
The climate is getting warmer, (not The climate gets warmer.)
The universe is expanding, and has been since its beginning
grammar
present tenses: advanced points
Present Tenses
Section 3
3	/ promise.... etc
Sometimes we do things by saying special words le g. promising, agreeing).
We usually use the simple present เท these cases
I	promise never to smoke again, (not I'm promising .)
I swear that I will tell the truth... I agree, (not lam agreeing)
He denies the accusation, (not He is denying...)
4	/ hear, etc
lhe simple present is used with a perfect kind of meaning (- I have learnt’) in
introductory expressions like I hear. I see. I gather. I understand (► 482).
I hear you're getting married. (= I have heard ...')
I see there's been trouble down al the factory.
I gather Daniel's looking for a job.
Other people’s statements, opinons. etc arc often introduced with says.
It says in the paper that /Tirol's going up again.
ΛΌ doubt you ail remember what Hamlet says about suicide.
5	Here comes.... etc
Note the structures here comes... and there goes...
Here comes your husband, (not Here-is coming...)
There goes our bus.
6	/ feel / I'm feeling
Verbs that refer to physical feelings (e g. feel, hurt, ache) can often be used in
simple or progressive tenses without much difference of meaning.
How do you feel10R How arc you feeling'
My head aches. OR My head is aching.
7	formal correspondence
Some fixed phrases that are used in letters, emails, etc can be expressed either
in the simple present (more formal) or เท the present progressive (less formal).
We write to advise you ... (less formal: We are writing to let you know...)
I enclose a recent photograph. (Less formal: I am enclosing. ..)
I look forward to hearing from you. (less formal: I'm looking forward to
hearing...)
progreiilve form» with and atimfor	(r g Shei ๙™ท foUflg ho	· ร
progreuiw form» in general. · J »« the diuanring น· of piogrewne for rm. » 311.
iirnfiM and progreufre frxim เท older InglHh. · 'IS 10
LLL
grammar
present tenses: advanced points
Section 4 Talking about the Future
INTRODUCTION
There are several ways ro use verbs IO talk about the future เท English. This is a
complicated area OÍ grammar the differences between the meanings and uses of
the different structures are not easy to analyse and describe dearly. เท many, but
not all situations, two or more structures are possible with similar meanings.
present-tense forms: I'm leaving; I'm going to leave
Villen we talk about future events which have some present reality - which have
already been planned or decided, or which we can see are on the way - we
often use present tense forms. The present progressive is common. For details,
I'm seeing lack t amor cow.	What are you doing ihis evening?
T he present progressive of go (be going IO...) is often used as an auxiliary verb
to talk about the future. For details, ► 35.
Sandra is going Io have a baby. When are you going Io get a job?
These present forms are especially common in speech (because conversation is
often about future events which are already planned, or which we can see are on
the way).
will/shall
When we are simply giving information about the future, or talking about
possible future events which are not already decided or obviously on the way,
we usually use will (or sometimes shall) . infinitive. This is the most common
way of talking about the future. For details, ► 38.
Nobody will ever know the truth. I think Liverpool will win.
Will (and sometimes shall) are also used to express our intentions and attitudes
towards other people: they are common in offers, requests, threats, promises
and announcements of decisions. For details, ► 79 80.
Shall I carry your bag?	I'll hit you if you do that again.
simple present: the train leaves ...
The simple present can also be used to talk about the future, but only เท certain
situations. For details, ► 37.
The train leaves at half past six tomorrow morning
Other ways of talking about the future
We can use the future perfect to say that something will be completed, finished
or achieved by a certain time. For details, ► 10.
By next Christmas we'll have been here for eight years.
The future progressive can be used to say that something will be in progress at a
particular time. For details, and other uses of this tense, ►41.
This time tomorrow I'll be lying on the beach
grammar · Section 4 Talking about the Future
Be about to ' infinitive (► 353) suggests that a future event is vet) dose.
The plane's about to lake off
Be to · infinitive is used to talk about plans, arrangements and schedules, and
to give instructions. For details, ► 12.
The President is to visit Beijing. You're not to tell anybody.
‘future in the past1
To say that something was still in the future at a certain past time, we can use a
past form of one of the future structures. For details, ► 13.
Something Ufa! going to happen that was to change the world.
I	knew she would arrive before long.
subordinate clauses
เท many subordinate clauses we refer to the future with present tenses instead of
will * Infinitive. For details, ► 231.
Phone me when you have time, (sot .. . when yow'U have time.)
I'll follow him wherever he goes, (not ..	hell go.)
Do you know what’s wrong with these, and why?
Q What do you do this evening? ► 36.1
Õ I’m seeing him this evening and I'm really telling him what I think.
► 362
o It's snowing before long. ► 36.2
o Lucy comes for a drink this evening. ► 37.4
Q I promise I phone you soon. »> 37.4
Õ ‘There's the doorbell.' ฯ go.' > 37.4
Õ See those clouds? It will rain. ► 35.3
o I'll phone you when I will arrive. ► 37.2
Õ I'll tell you what I'll find out. » 37.2
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
35	going to
36	present progressive for future
37	simple present for future
38	will
39	will, going to and present
progressive: advanced points
40	future perfect
41	future progressive
42	be to . infinitive: I am to..
you are to ..., etc
43	future in the past
grammar - Section 4 Talking about the Future
35	going to _____________	_________________ _________
1	a present tense
This structure is really a present lense (the present progressive of go). We use it
to talk about future actions and events that have some present reality. If we say
that something in the future is going to happen, it is usually already planned or
decided, or it IS starting to happen, or we can see it coming now. The structure
is very common in an informal style, especially in speech (because conversation
is often about future actions and events of this kind).
2	plans: We're going to get a new car.
We use be going to * infinitive to talk about plans, especially in an informal
style. This structure often emphasises the idea of intention, or a decision that
has already been made.
We're going to gel a new car soon.
lack says he's going to phone this evening.
When are you going to get your hair cut'!
I'm going to keep asking her out until she says ‘Yes'.
I’m going to stop him reading my emails if it's the last thing I do.
3	things that are on the way: She's going to have a baby.
Another use of the going-to structure is to predict the future on the basis of
present evidence - to say that a future action or event is on the way. or starting
to happen.
Sandra's going to have another baby in lune.
Look at the sky. It’s going to rain. Look out.' We’re going to crash.'
4	commands and refusals
Going to... can be used to insist that people do things or do not do things.
You’re going to finish that soup if you sit there all afternoon!
She's going to take that medicine whether she likes it or not!
You're not going to play football in my garden.
It is also used in emphatic refusals.
I’m not going to sit up all night listening to your problems!
5	gonna
เท informal speech, going to is often pronounced gana/. This is sometimes
shown in writing as gonna, especially in American English.
Nobody 's gonna talk to me like that.
for IO... complied with Ihr |Krwni (XORinuve. · J6.2.	X» t companion with utíl » M.
grammar · 35 going to
Talking about the Future
Section 4
36	present progressive for future
1	present reality: I'm washing my hair this evening.
We use the present progressive for future actions and events that have some
present reality. It is most common in discussions of personal arrangements and
fixed plans, when the time and place have been decided.
‘What are you doing this evening?’ ‘I'm washing my hair.’
I'm seeing Larry on Saturday.
Did you know I'm getting a new job?
We're touring Mexico next summer.
What are we having for dinner?
My car's going in for repairs next week.
We often use the present progressive with verbs of movement, to talk about
actions which are just starting.
Are you coming to the pub?
I'm just going next door. Back in a minute.
Get your coat on! I'm taking you down to the doctor!
Note that the simple present is not often used to talk about the future
(but ► 37).
What are you doing this evening? (not Wh&Ldoyou do-thi^evemng?)
2	present progressive and going to.. differences
In many cases, both structures can be used to express the same idea.
I'm washing / going to wash my hair this evening.
But there are some differences. For example, we prefer going to . . . when we are
talking not about fixed arrangements, but about intentions and decisions.
Compare:
-	I'm seeing Jake tonight, (emphasis on arrangement)
I'm really going to tell him what I think of him. (emphasis on intention:
NOT I'm really telling him . . .)
-	Who's cooking lunch? (asking what has been arranged)
Who's going to cook lunch? (asking for a decision)
Because the present progressive is used especially for personal arrangements, it
is not generally used to make predictions about events that are outside people’s
control.	It's snowing before long.)
It’s going to snow before long, (not It's sHOHHHg before long.)
I can see that things are going to get better soon, (not . . . things are getting
belter soon )
And the present progressive is used for actions and events, but not usually for
permanent states. Compare:
Our house is getting / is going to get new windows this winter.
Their new house is going to look over the river, (not Their new house is
lo&king rwer the rwer.)	->
grammar · 36 present progressive for future
3	commands and refusals
The presen! progressive can lie used to insist that people do things or do not do
things.
She's taking that medicine whether she likes it or not!
You're not Uffaring that skirt to school.
The present progressive is common เท emphatic refusals.
rm sorry - you're not taking my car.
I'm not washing your socks - forget it!
hor a oxnpartMin with k'UL ► 39.
37	simple present for future
1	timetables, etc: The summer term starts...
We can sometimes use the simple present to talk about the future. This is
common when we are talking about events which are part of a timetable, a
regular schedule or something similar.
The summer term starts on April loth.
What time does the bus arrive เท Seattle?
My plane leaves at three o’clock.
The รนท rises at 6.13 tomorrow.
Will is also usually possible in these cases.
The summer term will start on April loth.
2	subordinate clauses: when she gets a job
The simple present is often used with a future meaning in subordinate clauses -
for example after what, where, when, until, if, than. For details, ►231.
I'll tell you what I find out. (not ... what I'll find out.)
She'll pay us back when she gets a job. (not ... wheH-shòlTgeCfe-pib)
Alex will see US tomorrow if he has time, (not ... if he will have time)
3	instructions: Where do I pay?
Occasionally the simple present is used with a future meaning when asking for
and giving instructions.
Where do I pay? Well, what do we do now?
So when you gel to london you go straight to Victoria Station, you meet up
with the others, Ramona gives you your ticket, and you catch the 17.15 train
to Dover. OK?
4	Other cases
เท other cases, we do not usually use the simple present to talk about the future.
Lucy’s coming for a drink this evening, (not Lucy comes ...)
I promise I'll call you this evening, (not Λ promise I call you this evening.)
There's the doorbell.' 'I'll go.' (not .. .Igo)
grammar
simple present for future
Talking about the Future
Section 4
38	will
1	forms
will · infinitive without to
It will be cold tomorrow. Where will you spend the night?
Some British people use I shall and we shall instead of 1/we will, with no
difference oi meaning เท most situations. However, shall is now rare, and it is
almost non-existent เท American English. For situations where it is still used.
Contractions: I’ll, you'll, etc: won7 woont/
2	use: giving information about the future; predicting
Will · Infinitive is used to give (or ask for) information about the future.
It’ll be spring soon.
Will all the family be al lhe wedding?
Karen will start work some time next week.
เท another thirteen minutes the alarm will go 00. this will close an electrical
contact, causing lhe explosive to detonate.
We often use will in predictions of future events - to talk about what we think,
guess or calculate will happen.
Tomorrow will be warm, with some cloud in the afternoon.
Who do you think will win on Saturday?	You’ll never finish that book.
3	conditional use: You'll fall if you're not careful.
Will is often used to express conditional ideas, when we say what will happen if
something else happens.
He'll have an accident if he goes on driving like that.
If the weather'ร fine, we'll have the party in the garden.
look out - you'll/ส//.'(If you’re not more careful.)
'Come out for a drink.' 'No, I’ll miss the film on TV if I do.'
Don’t leave me. I'll cryI
4	future events already decided: will not used
When future events are already- decided, or when we can see them coming', we
often prefer a present form (usually present progressive or going to...).
I'm seeing the headmaster on Monday.	My sister's going to have a baby.
hoc deulK .KM,
5	not used in subordinate clauses: when I arrive
เท sulxirdinate clauses, we usually use present tenses Instead of will (» 231.2).
I'll phone you when I arrive. (ΜΠ... when I win arrive.)
For exceptions, ► 231.4, 243.
Io: other นพ. ๙ นฬ » ย9 ร. 73. 79 HO.
grammar · 38 will
39	will, going to and present progressive:
advanced points
Will is the bask structure for talking about the future. We use will if there is not
a good reason for using present forms.
1	present reality
We prefer present forms (present progressive or going to...) when we are
talking about future events that have some present reality (► 35-36). in other
cases we use will. Compare:
I'm teeing lessica on Tuesday. (The arrangement exists now.)
I wonder if die'll recognise me. (not talking about the present)
We're going to gel a new car. (Ihe decision already exists.)
I hope it will be belter than the last one. (not talking about the present)
2	predictions: thinking and guessing about the future
เท predictions, we use going to when we have outside evidence for what we
say - for example black clouds in the sky, a person who is obviously about to fall
See those clouds' It’s going to rain, (not See those clouds' Il นท่น rain.)
Look - that kid’s going to fall off his bike, (not hoeH FhafddfTUfaU off
his bike.)
We prefer will for predictions when there is not such obvious outside evidence -
when we are talking more about what is inside our heads: what we know, or
believe, or have calculated. (When we use will, we are not showing the listener
something; we arc asking him or her to believe something.) Compare:
Look out - we’re going to crash! (Ihere is outside evidence.)
Don’t lend him your car. lie's a terrible driver - he'll crash it.
(the speaker's knowledge)
- I've just heard from lhe builder. That roof repair's going to cost £7,OOP.
(outside evidence - the builder's letter)
I reckon it'll cost about £3,000 to put เท new lights, (the speaker’s opinion)
Alice is going Io have a baby, (outside evidence - she is pregnant now)
The baby will certainly have blue eyes, because both parents have.
(speaker's knowledge about genetics)
grammar - 39 will, going to and present progressive: advanced points
Talking about the Future
Section 4
will and present forms: both possible
The differences between the structures used to talk about the future are not
always very clear cut. Will and present forms (especially going to...) are often
both possible เท the same situation, if‘present* ideas like intention or fixed
arrangement are a pan of the meaning, but not very important. The choice can
depend on which aspect we wish to emphasise.
-	What will you do next year? (open question about the future; perhaps no
clear plans have been made)
What are you doing next year? (emphasis on fixed arrangements)
What are you going to do next year? (emphasis on intentions)
All the family will be there.
All the family are going to be there.
-	If your mother comes, you'll have to help with the cooking.
If your mother comes, you're going to have to help with the cooking.
-	You won’t believe this.
You're not going to believe this.
-	Next year will be different.
Next year is going to be different.
lack will explain everything to you.
lack’s going to explain everything to you.
Both going to... (► 35) and stressed will (► 79.1) can express a strong intention
or determination.
I’m really going to stop smoking! I really will stop smoking!
เท cases like these, the different forms are all correct, and it is unimportant
which one is chosen.
official arrangements: The Princess will meet the President
at 14.30.
Will is often used, rather than present forms, in giving information about
impersonal, fixed arrangements - for example official itineraries. Compare:
We're meeting Sandra at 6.00.
The Princess will arrive at the airport at 14.00. She will meet the President at
I4.no. and will then attend a performance of traditional dances.
predictions as orders: The regiment will attack at dawn.
Predictions can be used as a way of giving orders - instead of telling somebody
to do something, the speaker just says firmly that It will happen. This is common
in military sty le orders.
The regiment will attack at dawn.
You will start uork at six o’clock sharp.	-»
grammar
will, going to and present progressive: advanced points
6	different meanings of will you ...?
With a verb referring (o a state, เพ·// you...? asks for information.
How soon will you know your travel dales?
Will you he here next week?
With a verb referring to an action, will you... ? usually introduces an order or
request (► 80.1 J.
Will you turn off that music’
Will you do the shopping this afternoon, please?
To ask for information about planned actions, we use a present form (► 35-36)
or the future progressive (► 41).
When are you going to see Andy?
Are you doing the shopping this afternoon?
Will you be doing the shopping...?
า expressing certainty about the present or past
We can use will to talk about the present - to say what we think is very' probably
or certainly the case.
'There's somebody al the door.' ‘That’ll be the electrician.'
Don't phone them now - they'll he having dinner.
Will have... can express similar ideas about the past.
/Is you will have noticed, there Is a new secretary in the front office.
Il’s no use expecting Harry to turn up. He'll have forgotten.
8 obligation: shall
In contracts and other legal documents, shall is often used with third-person
subjects to refer to obligations and duties, in both British and American English.
The hirer shall be responsible for maintenance of the vehicle.
เท normal usage, we prefer will, must or should to express ideas of this kind.
40	future perfect
will have ' past participle
We can use the future perfect to say that something will be finished or complete
by a certain time เท the future.
The builders say they will have finished the roof by Tuesday.
I’ll have spent all my savings by the end of the year.
A progressive form can be used to talk about a continuous activity.
I'll have been teaching for twenty years this summer.

grammar · 40 future perfect
Talking about the Future
Section 4
41	future progressive
shall/will * be ... .ing
1	events in progress in the future
We can use the future progressive to say that something will be in progress
(happening) at a particular moment เท the future.
This time tomorrow I'll be lying on the beach.
Good luck with the exam. We ll be thinking of you.
2	events that are fixed or expected to happen
The future progressive is often used to refer to future events which are fixed or
decided, or which are expected to happen in the normal course of events.
Professor Hoxter will be giving another lecture on Homan glass making al the
same time next week.
I'll be seeing you one of these days. I expect.
this is useful if we want to show that we are not talking about making decisions,
but about things that will happen 'anyway*.
‘Shall I pick up the laundry· for youT 'Oh. no. don't make a special journey.'
'It's OK. I'll be going to the shops anyway.’
The tense can be used to make polite enquiries about people’s plans. (By using
the future progressive to ask ‘What have you already decided?·, the speaker
shows that hc/she does not want to influence the listener’s intentions.)
Compare:
Will you be staying in this evening? (very polite enquiry, suggesting I simply
want to know your plans')
Are you going to stay เท this evening? (pressing for a decision)
This usage is possible with verbs that do not normally have progressive
forms (► 4).
Will you be wanting lunch tomorrow?
3	progressive form with going to
A progressive form of the going to structure is also possible.
I’m going to be working all day tomorrow, so I won’t have time to shop.
เพธ Í*.. «r uwd to nprru renaเท1» about the preOTM tn /ton 1Í-XMI. KM!· they·» be fuiKrut
à*» ’พ’.
grammar · II future progressive
42	be to + infinitive: / am to ..
you are to ..etc
1	plans and arrangements: He is to visit Nigeria.
We use this structure in a formal style to talk about official and other plans and
arrangements.
the President is to visit Nigeria next month.
We are to get a 10 per cent wage rise in lune.
I fell nervous because I was soon to leave home for the first time.
A perfect infinitive can be used to show that a planned event did not happen.
I was to have started work last week, but I changed my mind.
2	'fate': We were to meet again.
Another use is to talk about things which are/werc 'hidden เท the future’, fated
to happen.
I thought we were saying goodbye for ever. Hut เห- were to meet again, many
years later, under very strange circumstances.
3	pre-conditions: If we are to get there in time ...
This structure is common in r/clauses, when the main clause expresses a pre-
condition - something that must happen first if something else is to happen.
If we are to gel there by lunchtime, we had better hurry.
He knew he would have to work hard if he was to pass his exam.
4	orders: You are to do your homework.
The structure is used to give orders, for example by parents speaking to children.
You are to do your homework before you watch TV.
She can go to the parly, but she's not to be back late.
5	be * passive infinitive: It is not to be removed.
Be ♦ passive infinitive is often used in notices and instructions.
ami are! is (no/) to be * past participle
This cover is not to he removed
Sometimes only the passive infinitive is used.
To be taken three limes a day after meals, (on a medicine bottle)
Some other common expressions with he · passive infinitive:
There's nothing to he done. She was nowhere to he found.
I looked out of the window, but there was nothing to be seen.
grammar · 12 be to · infinitive
to
Talking about the Future
Section 4
43	future in the past_____________________________
Sometimes when we are talking about the past, we want to talk about something
which was เท the future at that time - which had not yet happened. To express
this idea, we use the structures that are normally used to talk about the future
(► 35-42), but we make the verb forms past. For example, instead of is going to
we use was going to; instead of the present progressive we use the past
progressive; instead of will we use would; instead of IS to we use was to.
Last time I saw you, you were going to start a new job.
I had no time to shop because I was leaving for Germany เท two hours.
In 19B81 arrived เท the town where I would spend ten years of my life.
I went to have a look at the room where I was to talk that afternoon.
Perfect forms of be going to are also possible.
I’ve been going to write to you forages, but I've only just found time.
For «น to (น11·. . p.M partldpte (e« ร'* MU Io *o>* 1-1*0 OCT* 1ท, fob. but Λ* feU เต. ► 4? I.
grammar · 43 future in the past
Section 5 Past and Perfect Tenses
INTRODUCTION
English has six different verb forms to refer to past events and situations.
They are:
NAME	EXAMPLE
simple past	/ worked
past progressive (or ‘continuous’)	I was working
(simple) present perfect	i have worked
present perfect progressive (or 'continuous') I have been working
(simple) past perfect	/ had worked
past perfect progressive (or 'continuous') เ had been working
เท academic grammars, a distinction is often made between 'tense' (present or
past) and 'aspect' (perfective and progressive). Tense shows time; aspect shows,
for example, whether an event is seen as ongoing or completed at a particular
lime. เท more practical books like this one, it is convenient to use tense for all
verb forms which show time.
Hie various uses of these six verb forms are covered in the following entries.
Note in particular that the English present perfect (e g. I have seen) is
constructed เท the same way as a tense เท some other Western European
languages (e g.- of บน, ich habe gesehen, ho visto, jeg har set), but that it Is not
used เท exactly the same ways (► 48.2).
grammar · Section 5 Past and Perfect Tenses
Do you know what's wrong with these, and why?
o gallopped regre led - 14.3
G ‘What did you do at eight o'clock yesterday evening?’ I watched TV.'
► 45.2
G When I got up this morning the รนท shone and the birds sang. ► 45.2
G When I was a child we were walking to school every day. ► 45.4
G She said she wasn't believing me. ► 45.5, 4
G Some people think that Shakespeare has travelled in Germany. ► 47.3
Q Once upon a time a beautiful princess has fallen in love with a poor
farmer. ► 48.1 -48.2
G When has the accident happened? ► 48.2
G 1 know her for years. ► 52.1
G How long are you studying English? ► 52.1
G ’Why are you crying?' 'Granny has hit me. ► 49.1
G The Chinese have invented paper. · 49.1
G Il’s not as big as I have expected. ► 49.2
o I've only been knowing her for two days. ►51.1
G Look at all the rose bushes I've been planting! ► 51.3
G This is the first time I hear her sing. ► 52 2
G During our conversation, I realised that we met before. » 53.2
G I told her that I have finished. ► 53.2
G Alex Cary, who had worked for my father a few years ago, is now living
in Greece. ► 53.2
G I had left a jacket to be cleaned. Is it ready yet? ► 53.3
G She told me that her father was ill since Christmas. ► 53.5
G When I opened the windows, I sat down. ► 54.1
G We were walking since sunrise, and we were very hungry. ► 55.3
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
44	simple past
45	past progressive
46	past form with present or
future meaning
47	present perfect: basic information
48	present perfect or past?
49	present perfect or past:
advanced points
50	present perfect progressive
51	present perfect simple
or progressive?
52	present perfect or present?
53	past perfect: basic Information
54	past perfect: advanced points
55	past perfect progressive
56	This is the first!last.... etc
grammar · Section 5
and Perfect lenses
44	simple past
This form is also called 'past simple’,
forms (regular verbs)
Affirmative	Question	Negative
1 worked	did 1 work? you worked	did you work? he/she/it worked did he/she/it work? etc	etc	1 did not work you did not work he/she/it did not work etc
-	Contracted negatives (► 337): I didn't work, you didn't work, etc
Negative questions (► 21 a): did I not work?or didn't I work?, etc
-	For the affirmative past forms of common irregular verbs, ► I.
-	Questions and negatives of irregular verbs are made in the same way as those
of regular verbs (with did + infinitive).
Hx of qutwriii vtnxturtx » 216.	Ι-» ncgMve*. » 217-221.
fo« tuwnr form» (».g Work	๘0พเ ► 57.
2	pronunciation of -ed
The regular past ending ed is pronounced as follows:
•	Idl after vowels and voiced consonants (except d):
<v, 1'๖!, Ivl, 111, 131, /dy, Igl, Ind, ini. zy, m
tried traid lived nivdi	tamed hi ะ md'	failed: fetid
•	HI after unvoiced consonants (except Hl}‘.
พ, Ipl, If I, hl, ///, Zip, ZkZ
Slopped 'stnpt passed Zpo:stZ laughed ZlutftZ	watched ZwntJiZ
worked Zw3:k(Z
•	Id after .■๕ and t/
ended . 'end'd/ started 'stu:t id
lor	Ute wa luilnt » 191,
3	spelling of regular affirmative past tense forms
Most regular verbs:	work -> worked
add ed	stay -> stayed show -> showed wonder -> wondered visit -> visited
	gallop > galloped
Verbs ending in e: add -๘	hope -» hoped decide -> decided
grammar
simple past
Past and Perfect Tenses
Section 5
Verbs ending in one stressed vowel รhop > shopped
• one consonant (except น' or y): plan -> planned
double the consonant and add ed refer -> referred
regret -> regretted
But (last syllabic not stressed):	offer -» offered
___________________________________óúít -> visited
Verbs ending เท consonant » -y. hurry -> hurried
change y to i and add -ed	cry -> cried
study -> studied
But (vowel , y):play -> played
Verbs ending เท c have ck in the past (e.g. picnic > picnicked}.
เท British English, -/ is doubled เท the past after one short vowel even if the
vowel is not stressed: travel -> travelled.
use
We use the simple past for many kinds of past events: short, quickly finished
actions and happenings, longer situations, and repeated events.
Daniel broke a window last night.
I	spent all my childhood in Scotland.
Regularly every summer, lessica fell in love.
The simple past is common in stories and descriptions of past events.
One day the Princess decided that she didn't like slaying at home all day,
so she told her father that she wanted to get a Job ...
The simple past Is often used with words referring to finished times.
I	saw lack yesterday morning lie told me...
เท general, the simple past tense is the normal one for talking about the past;
we use it if we do not have a special reason for using one of the other tenses.
simple past with finished time expressions
One day, the Princess decided...	1 saw tack yesterday.
For the *i">plc pail with » praMM or futtire mean in* พ * ท'ร tlmrxou น*'น). » I»
·<“ «pesi»! นพ» in »นhxdmale <:.·“พ1. · 731.
grammar
simple past
45	past progressive
1	forms
was! were · -ing
I นพ working Were you listening to me? She นพ not trying.
For litLilla of qufUKin «nurture ► 2 It. >«' nrptrm. . 217-221.
For fU""t forms (e g Work «ยเ being done}. » 57.
2	use: What were you doing at eight o'clock?
We use file past progressive to say that something was in progress (going on)
around a particular past time.
’What were you doing at eight o'clock yesterday evening?" Ί was watching TV.'
(not Wha t did you à ..?! watched TV.)
Hhen I got up this morning the รนท was shining, the birds were singing ...
(not ... ihe-sttH-shoHerllie-birds-sang...)
past progressive: things happening around a past time
'What were you doing at 8 o'clock?' Ί was watching TV
3	past progressive and simple past: 'background' events
We often use the past progressive together with a simple past lense. The past
progressive refers to a longer background' action or situation: the simple past
refers to a shorter action or event that happened in the middle of the longer
action, or that interrupted it.
As I นพ walking down the road. I saw lames.
The phone rang while I was having dinner.
Mozart died while he was composing the Requiem.
past progressive for 'background' events
/Is I was walking down the road
grammar · 15 past progressive
Past and Perfect Tenses
Section 5
4	not used for repeated actions
The past progressive is not the normal tense for talking about repeated or
habitual past actions. The simple past เร usually used with this meaning.
I	rang the bell fit limes, (μη I was ringing lite Ml Mt limes )
When I was a child we walked to school, (not ...พe were walking to school.)
However, the past progressive is possible if the repeated actions form a
background" lot the main action.
At the time when it happened, I was travelling to New York a lol.
5	non-progressive verbs: She said she believed
Some Serbs are not often used in progressive forms (► 4).
She said she believed foe was dying, (not She said she was believing ..)
6	used for shorter, temporary actions and situations
lhe past progressive, like other progressive forms (► 3), is used for temporary
actions and situations. When wo talk about longer, more permanent situations
we use the simple past. Compare:
II	happened while I was living in Eastbourne last year.
I lived in London for ten years while I was a child.
When I got home, water was running down lhe kitchen walls.
When they first discovered the river, they thought it ran into the Atlantic.
7	special uses
Because we often use the past progressive to talk about something that is a
"background", not the main "news', we can make something seem less important
by using this tense. Compare:
I had lunch with the President yesterday, (important piece of news)
I was having lunch with the President yesterday, and she said... (as if there
was nothing special for the speaker about lunching with the President)
Tire past progressive is quite often used with verbs of saying: this gives more
relative importance to the following verb - to what is said.
lack was saying that he still can’t find a job.
With always, continually and similar words, the past progressive can be used for
things that happened repeatedly and unexpectedly or in an unplanned
way (► 5).
Aunt Lucy was always turning up without warning and bringing US presents.
I didn ’t like him - he was continually borrowing money'.
><" th' <H*urKin«· นพ of |>»I proptuivn !»K t Mni urnttrnng .พ roti a flir u> <omr oul น»น! IKT 1ท|>
ονοιο,Ι · 311.
grammar
past progressive
46	past verb form with present or
future meaning
A past tense does not always have a past meaning. In some kinds of sentence wt
can use verbs like I had, you went or I was wondering to talk about the present
or future.
1	after conjunctions, instead of would: HI paid now...
In most subordinate clauses (e.g. after if, supposing, wherever, what), we use
past tenses (and not would___) to express 'unreal' or conditional ideas
(► 231.6).
If I had the money now I'd buy ต car.
if you caught the ten o'clock train tomorrow, you would be เท Edinburgh by
supper-lime, unless the train was delayed, of course.
Supposing we didn't go abroad next year?
Would you follow me wherever I went?
เท a perfect world, you would be able to say exactly what you thought.
Ten o'clock - it's time (that)you went home. (► 502)
Don't come and see me today - I'd rather (that) you came tomorrow.
(► 566.3)
I wish (that) I had a belter memory. (► 632.4)
2	distancing in questions, requests, etc: / wondered if...
We can make questions, requests and offers less direct (and so more polite) by
using past tenses. (For more about ‘distancing’ of this kind, » 311.) Common
formulae are I wondered, / thought. I hotted, did you น«ท/. (► 311.1.)
I wondered if you were free this evening.
I thought you might like some flowers.
Did you want cream with your coffee, sir?
Past progressive forms (I was thinking.'wondering:hoping, etc) make sentences
even less direct. (► 311.2)
I was thinking about that idea of yours.
/ was hoping we could have dinner together.
3	past' modals: could, might, would, should
The past' modal forms could, might, would and should usually have present or
future reference; they are used as less direct, ‘distanced* forms of can, may. will
and shall. (► 311.4)
Could you help me for a moment? Would you come this way, please?
I think it might rain soon.	Alice should be here soon.
4	past focus on continuing situations: It was such a nice place
If we are talking about the past, we often use past tenses even for things which
are still true and situations which still exist.
Are you deaf? I asked how old you นพ,
I'm sorry we left Liverpool. Il was such a nice place.
Do you remember that nice couple น',' met in Creece? They were German,
weren't they?
grammar
past verb form with present or future meaning
Past and Perfect Tenses
Section 5
/ gol this job because I IMS a good driver.
lames applied to join the police last week, but he wasn't tall enough.
more induce! «perch	2t&
47	present perfect: basic information
This entry deals with the simple present perfect. For the present perfect
progressive, ► 50-51.
1	forms
have/has . past participle
I have broken my glasses.	Have you finished?	She hasn Ί phoned.
เท older English, some present perfect forms were made with be. riot have
(e g. Winter is come). This does not normally happen in modern English (for
exceptions, » 66. 166).
For pauivc bin» (e £ The	has bre/i ฟ้(พ). » 57.
2	other languages
เท some other languages there are verb forms which are constructed like the
English present perfect (compare English / hair worked, French j’ai travaillc.
German ich habe gearbeitel, Italian ho lavorato, Spanish he trabajado). Note that
the English present perfect is used rather differently from most of these.
3	finished events connected with the present
We use the present perfect especially to say that a finished action or event is
connected with the present in some way. If we say that something has
happened, we are thinking about the past and the present at the same time, for
example if we are giving news.
I can't go skiing because I have broken my leg.
A present perfect sentence often corresponds to a present tense sentence
expressing the same facts.
I've broken my leg -» My leg is broken now.
Some fool has let the cat in> rhe cat is in.
Utopia has invaded Fantasia. -> Utopia is at war with Fantasia.
Emily has had a baby. -» Emily now has a baby.
Our dog has died. > Our dog is dead.
Haire you read the ruble? -> Do you know the tableใ
All the wars เท history have taught US nothing -> เพ· know nothing.
The present perfect Is often used to express the idea of completion or
achievement.
At last! I've finished.'	Have you done all the housework?
We do not use the present perfect if we are not thinking about the present
(► 18.1). Compare:
I've travelled in Africa a lot. l- I know Africa.)
Some people think that Shakespeare travelled a lol in Germany.
(sot Some people think that Shakespeare has travelled . ..)	-♦
grammar · 47 present perfect: basic information
present perfect: thinking about the past and present
at the same time
I	can Ί go on holiday betause I've broken my leg.
THOUGHTS
4	time words: ever, before, recently, etc
When we talk about finished events with words that mean at some any time up
to now' (like ever, before, never, yet, recently, lately, already), we normally use the
present perfect in British Inglish. (For a note on American usage. ► 19.7.)
Have you ever seen a ghost? She’s never said 'sorry' in her life.
I 'm sure we’ve met before. lias Dan phoned yet ?
We haven't seen Heth recently
Could you dean the carT 'I’ve already done it.'
5	repetition up to now: I've written six emails ...
We can use the present perfect to say that something has happened several
times up to the present.
I've written six emails since lunchtime.
Adverbs of frequency like often, sometimes, occasionally are common with the
present perfect.
How often have you been in love in your life?
I’ve sometimes thought of moving to Australia.
6	continuation up to now: I've known her for years
To talk about actions and situations that have continued up to the present, both
the simple present perfect and the present perfect progressive are possible
(depending on the kind of verb and the exact meaning. For details, ► 51.
I've known her for years, (not I know her foe years. ► 52.1)
I've been thinking about you all day.
For pmral P.,'00 Irnu·, เท ciiuin cctorlng co the tutiMC (»» 111 lai, ami น·เพท Γη/ΙαίΛπΙ.inท11พ น»
• เ«**ทเ » 231 3.
grammar · 47 present perfect: basic information
Past and Perfect Tenses
Section 5
48	present perfect or past?
1 not thinking about the present
We use the present perfect if we are thinking about the past and present
together. We do not use the present perfect if we are not thinking about the
present. Compare:	Shakespeare has probably learnt
-	My sister has learnt French. (She can speak French now.)
Shakespeare probably learnt Italian, (not Shakixptwe has ffrobahlv httffti
Italian.}
-	We've studied enough to pass the exam. (The exam is still to come.)
We studied enough to pass the exam. (The exam is over.)
-	Anna and Daniel have got married! (news)
My parents got married in Canada.
We do not use the present perfect in story-telling.
Once upon a time a beautiful princess fell in love with a poor farmer.
(not . . . has fallen in love . . .)
thinking about the past and present together: present perfect
My sister has learnt French. (- She can speak French now.)
only thinking about the past: simple past
Shakespeare probably learnt Italian.
THOUGHTS
grammar · 48 present perfect or past?
2	finished-time words: present perfect not used
We do NO! often use the present perfect with words that refer to a completely
finished period of time, like yesterday, last week. then. when, three years ago, in
1970. This is because the present perfect focuses on the present, and words like
these focus on the past, so they contradict each other. Compare:
Have you seen i.ucy anywhere?
I	saw Lucy yesterday, (not i have seen l acy yesterday.)
-	Tom has hurt his leg; he can't walk.
Tom hurl his leg last week, (noi fam has hurt his leg last week.)
-	What have you done with the car keys? I can Ί find them.
What did you do then? (not Whaf-have-you-done-fhenT)
-	My brother has had an accident. He's in hospital.
When did the accident happen? (not When has dwmttdent happened?)
All my friends have moved to London.
Sam moved three years ago (not Sam hasmoved three years ago.)
But with words that mean ‘at some/any time up to now' (like ever, before. never,
yet, recently, already), we normally use the present perfect (► 47.4).
Have you ever been to Chicago?
I’ve seen this film before.
» so,
3	time not mentioned
We use the present perfect when we are thinking of a period of ‘time up to now',
even if we do not mention it.
Have you seen ‘Romeo and /uliet"? (- Have you ever seen it? OK Have you
seen the present production?)
You've done a lol for me. (... up to now)
On the other hand, we do not use the present perfect when we are thinking of a
particular finished time, even If we do not mention it.
Did you see ‘Romeo and luliet’? (It was on TV last night.)
My grandfather did a lot for me. (... when he was alive)
4	news and derails
We normally use the present perfect to announce news.
Have you heard? Andy has won a big prize!
But when we give more details, we usually change to a past tense.
lot has passed his eatm! He got 87%.
There has been a plane crash near Bristol Witnesses say that there was an
explosion as the aircraft was raking off,...
The Prime Minister has had talks with President Kurnani. During a three-hour
meeting they discussed the economic situation, and agreed on the need for
closer trade links between the two countries.
grammar · 48 present perfect or past?
Past and Perfect Tenses
Section 5
present perfect for news

49	present perfect or past: advanced points
1 causes and origins: Who gave you that?
We normally use the present perfect when we are thinking about past events
together with their present results (► 47.3).
I can't come to your party because I've broken my leg.
However, we usually prefer a past tense when we Identify the person, thing or
circumstances responsible for a present situation (because we are thinking about
the past cause, not the present result). Compare:
- l ook what lack's given me! (thinking about the gift)
Who gave yoน that! (thinking about the past action of giving)
Somebody has spilt coffee on the carpet.
Who split all that coffer on the carpel'
Other examples:
'Why are you crying?' 'Granny hit me. (xor... Granny has hit me.)'
I'm glad you were born.
How did you get that bruise?
That's a nice picture. Did you paint it yourself?
Some people think that 'Pericles' was not written by Shakespeare.
The Chinese invented paper. (ร*ทI lhe Chinese hair invented paper.)
grammar · 19 present perfect or past: advanced points
2	expectation and reality: You're older than I thought.
We use a pas' lense IO refer IO a belief lhai has just been shown IO be true or
false.
It’s not as big as I expected, (not ... as I have expetted)
You're older than I thought, (not ... than I have thought.)
But you promised . .. I (not But y&whttee-promúerT. ..)
I knew you would help me! (not I halt known...)
3	today, this week, etc
With definite expressions of 'time up to now' (e.g. today, this week), perfect and
past lenses are often both possible. We prefer the present perfect if we are
thinking of the whole period up to now. We prefer the simple past if we arc
thinking of a finished part of that period. Compare:
-	I haven't seen lack this week, (the whole week up to now present perfect
more natural)
I	saw lack this week, and he said... (earlier เท the week simple past more
natural)
-	Has Λnna phoned today? (meaning 'any time up to now )
Did Anna phone today? (meaning 'earlier, when the call was expected')
4	always, ever and never
เท an informal style, a simple past tense is sometimes possible with always, ever
and never when they refer to time up to now'.
I always knew I could trust you. (on Tie always known ...)
Did you ever see anything like that before' (oe Have you ever seen ... ?)
5	present perfect with past time expressions
Grammars usually say that the present perfect cannot be used together with
expressions of finished time - we can say I have Siren him or I saw him
yesterday, but not I have seen him yesterday. เท fact, such structures are unusual
but not impossible (though learners should avoid them). They often occur in
brief news Items, where space is limited and there is pressure to announce the
news and give the details in the same clause.
Here are some real examples taken from news broadcasts, newspaper articles,
advertisements, letters and conversations.
Police hate arrested more than 'JOO suspected drugs traffickers in raids
throughout the country on f-riday and Saturday.
.4 24-year-old soldier has been killed in a road accident last night.
The horse's trainer has had a winner here yesterday.
... indicating that the geological activity has taken place a very long
time ago.
Perhaps what has helped us to win eight major awards last year alone...
I have slocked the infirmary cupboard only yesterday.
I am pleased to confirm that l.loyds Bank... has opened a Home Loan
account for you on 19th May.
grammar · IS present perfect
: advanced points
Past and Perfect Tenses
Section 5
6	simple past for news
Recently, some British newspapers and online news channels have started
regularly using the simple past for smaller news announcements probably to
save space. Some authentic examples.
An unnamed businessman was shot dead by terrorists...
A woman was Jailed for six months after taking a baby boy from his mother.
Driving wind and rain forced 600 out of2,500 teenagers to abandon the
annual "Ten Tor" Irek across Dartmoor.
7	American English
เท American English the simple past is often used to give news.
Did you hear? Switzerland declared ' has declared war on Mongolia!
(BrE Have you heard? Switzerland has declared war...)
Uh. honey. I lost: I've lost the keys (BrE... I've lost the keys.)
Lucy Ju*1 called has Just called. (BrE l.ucy has Just called.)
เท American English, it is also possible to use the simple past with indefinite
past-time adverbs like already, yet, ever and before.
Did you eat alreadyf ox Have you eaten .. โ? (BrE Have you eaten already?)
I	didn’t call Bobby yet OK I haven't called ... (BrE I haven't called...)
British English is changing under American influence, so some of these uses are
becoming common in Britain as well.
8	bad rules (1): 'definite time'
Grammars sometimes say that the simple past, not the present perfect, is used
with expressions referring to definite time'. This is confusing the present
perfect เร not often used with finished time expressions, but it actually is very
common with definite time expressions. Compare:
I've lived here for exactly three years, seven months and two days (present
perfect with very definite time-reference)
Once upon a time a little girl lived with her mother in a lonely house in a dark
forest (simple past with very indefinite time-reference)
9	bad rules (2): 'finished actions'
Note also that the choice between simple present perfect and simple past does
not depend on whether we are talking about finished actions, as learners'
grammars sometimes suggest (though it can depend on whether we are talking
about finished time periods). Compare:
That cal has eaten your supper, (finished action - present perfect)
I ate the last of the eggs this morning, (finished action - simple past)
10	bad rules (3): 'recent actions'
The choice also does not depend directly on whether actions and events arc
recent. Recent events are more likely to he news', and we are more likely to be
concerned about their present results, so many present perfect sentences are in
fact about recent events. But it is possible to use the present perfect to talk about
things that happened a long time ago. Compare:
The French revolution has influenced every popular radical movement in
Furope since 1BOO. (200 year old event - present perfect)
Anna phoned five minutes ago. (very recent event - simple past)	-*
grammar
present perfect or past: advanced points
11	both possible
The difference between <he present perfect and the simple past is not always
very clear cut. It often depends on our ‘focus: arc we thinking mostly about the
present relevance of a past event, or about die past details? เท some cases both
present perfect and past are possible with little difference of meaning.
We (have) heard that you have rooms to let.
Has Mark phoned? on Did Mark phone?
I’ve given I gave your old radio to Philip.
50	present perfect progressive
1	forms
have has been r -ing
I have been thinking about you.	Hair you been waiting long?
I haven’t been studying very well recently.
2	continuing actions and situations
We use the present perfect progressive to look back over actions and situations
which started in the past and are still going on.
I've been working very hard recently.
It's been rainingall day. I’m tired of it.
Pood prices have been going up steadily all this year.
We often use the present perfect progressive to talk about people’s use of their
time up to the present.
Hi' What have you been doing with yourself T ‘I’ve been trying to write
a novel.'
That kid has been watching TV non-stop since breakfast.
present perfect progressive: actions and situations which
started in the past and are still going on
grammar · 50 present perfect progressive
Past and Perfect Tenses
Section 5
3	actions and situations that have just stopped
We also use the present perfect progressive for actions and situations which
have just stopped, but which have present results.
'You look hoi.' 'Yes. I’ve been running.'
Sorry I'm late. Have you been waiting long?
I must just go and wash. I've been gardening.
4	repeated actions
We can use the present perfect progressive not only for continuous activity, but
also for repeated activity'.
People have been phoning me all day.
I've been waking up เท the night a lot. I think I'll see the doctor.
5	time expressions: recently, lately, this week, since ..for .... etc
We often use the present perfect progressive with words that refer to a period of
time continuing up to now, like recently. lately, this week, since January, for the
last three days.
Ihe company has been losing money recently.
Jack's been walking เท Scotland all this week.
I’ve been doing a new job since January.
It's been raining for the last three days.
6	not used with finished time expressions
We cannot use the present perfect progressive with expressions that refer to a
finished period of time.
‘You look tired.' ‘Yes. I was cycling from ten this morning until Ji tv o’clock'
(not .. .^tn-kwewtychngfrrmriefi this mmningimtflfweoiloek)
7	how long?
We use the present perfect progressive, not the present progressive, to talk about
how long something has been happening.
How long have you been studying English? (not Howlongure you
I’ve been working here for two months, (not I'm working here for two
ไ
rriwrnrn. )
8	present perfect progressive and (simple) present perfect
เท some cases, we can also use the simple present perfect to talk about actions
and situations continuing up to the present. Compare:
-	How long hate you been working with her?
How long have you known her?
-	That man has been standing on the corner all day.
Tor .900 years the castle has stood on lhe hill above the village.
grammar · 50 present perfect progressive
9	a bad rule
Grammars sometimes simply say that the present perfect progressive is used 'for
actions or situations that started in the past and are still going on’. This is true,
but incomplete and unhelpful. To talk about actions and situations that started
in the past and are still going on, we normally use present tenses (everything
that is going on now started in the past!). The difference is that we use the
present perfect progressive when we are looking back over something that is
still going on - for example when we say how long it has lasted. Compare:
-	It's raining.
It's been raining all day.
-	I'm working very hard at the moment.
I've been working very hard recently.
51^ present^perfect simple or progressive?
1	non-progressive verbs
Some verbs are not used in progressive forms (» 4), even if the meaning is one
for which a progressive form is more suitable. Common examples are be, have
and know.
lack’s been ill all week, (nih MdkVtafift bring ill. . .)
She’s had a cold since Monday, (not She’s been having a cold . . .)
I've only known her for two days, (not I've only been knowing her . . .)
2	temporary or permanent
We use progressive forms mostly for shorter, temporary actions and situations.
When we talk about longer-lasting or permanent situations we often prefer the
simple present perfect. Compare:
-	I've been playing the piano all afternoon, and I'm really tired.
My grandmother has played the piano since she was a little girl.
-	/ haven't been working very well recently.
He hasn't worked for years.
-	I've been living at Emma's place for the last month.
My parents have lived in Bristol all their lives.
Progressive and simple tenses are sometimes both possible, with a slight
difference of emphasis.
It's been raining / It's rained steadily since last Saturday.
Harry has been working / has worked in the same job for thirty years.
We generally use the progressive to talk about continuous change or
development, even if this is permanent.
Scientists believe that the universe has been expanding steadily since the
beginning of time.
3	how much? how often? simple present perfect
We use the simple present perfect to say how much we have done, or how often
we have done something. Compare:
-	I’ve been planting rose bushes all afternoon.
Look at all the rose bushes I've planted! (not .. ■ /'< r'uc
grammar · 51 present perfect simple or progressive?
Past and Perfect Tenses
Section 5
-	We've been painting the house.
We've painted two rooms since lunchlime (not We ve been painting Iwo
-	I've been playing a lot of tennis recently.
I've played tennis three times this uwi
52	present perfect or present?
1	how long? present perfect
Wc use a present perfect to say how long a situation or action has continued up
to now. Compare:
It’s raining again.
It's been raining since Christmas, (noi ft » raining since Christmas)
Are you learning English?
How long have you been learning? (not Mow40Hgotey&H learning?)
-	7 hear you're working al Smiths/‘Yes. I’ve been working there for a month.'
(xor I'm working there for...)
-	I know her well.
I've known her for years, (xor I know her foe year*)
-	My brother’s a doctor.
How long has he been a doctor? I NOI Urn·· long is Ire a doctor?)
Compare also:
How long are you here for? (- until when; when are you leaving?)
How long have you been here for? (ะ. since when; when did you arrive?)
ร:ระรระะะะะ:ะะ^^'ะะะ.»^.™
2	This is the first time, etc
We use a simple present perfect after this is the first time that.... it’s the second
■.. that.... and similar structures (► 56).
This is the first time that I’ve heard her sing, (xor I his is the first time that I
It's the fifth time you've asked me the same question.
This is only the second opera I've ever seen.
53	past perfect: basic information
This entry deals with the simple past perfect, l or the past perfect progressive,
► 55.
1 forms
had · past participle
I had forgotten.	Where had she been ?	It hadn Ί ra ined for weeks.
grammar · S3 past perfect: basic information
2 meaning and use: earlier past
The basic meaning of the past perfect is ‘earlier past’. A common use is to 'go
back’ for a moment when we are already talking about the past, to make it clear
that something had already happened at the time we are talking about.
During our conversation, I realised that we had met before.
(not I realised; that we met before OR . . . have met before■)
When I arrived at the party, Lucy had already gone home.
(noi .. .	OR . . . hits (ibetidv gtme-homef
The past perfect is common after past verbs of saying and thinking, to talk about
things that had happened before the saying or thinking took place.
I told her that I had finished, (not . . . that 1 (have) finished.)
I wondered who had left the door open.
I thought 1 had sent the money a week before.
past perfect: we are already talking about the past, and want
to talk about an earlier past
When I arrived at the party, Lucy had already gone home.
EARLIER PAST	PAST	NOW
3	past perfect not used
The past perfect is normally only used as described above. The past perfect is
not used simply to say that something happened some time ago, or to give a
past reason for a present situation.
Alex Cary, who worked for my father in the 1980s, is now living in Greece.
AlejeGafyrHJutk&dwHfketLfor my fitihrv . . .)
I left a jacket to be cleaned. Is it ready yet? (not I had left a jacket. . .)
4	unreal events: if, etc
After //(► 241), wish (► 632) and would rather (► 566), the past perfect can be
used to talk about past events that did not happen.
If] had gone to university I would have studied medicine.
1 wish you had told me the truth.
I’d rather she had asked me before borrowing the car.
5	how long? past perfect, not simple past
We use a past perfect, not a simple past, to say how long something had
continued up to a past moment. A simple past perfect is used with non-
progressive verbs like be, have and know.
She told me that her father had been ill since Christmas.
(not . . . -that her father was ill since Christmas.)
I was sorry to sell my car. I had had it since College.
(not had it since College ft
grammar · 53 past perfect: basic information
Past and Perfect Tenses
Section 5
When they got married, they had known each other for IS years.
(no I... they knew each other for IS yean.)
With most other verbs, we use the past perfect progressive for this
meaning (► 55).
54	past perfect: advanced points
1 past perfect or simple past with after, as soon as, etc
We can use time conjunctions (e g. after, as soon as. when, once) to talk about
mo actions or events that happened one after the other. Usually the past perfect
is not necessary in these cases' because we are not 'going back' from the time
that we are mainly talking about, but simply moving forward from one event to
the next.
After it got dark, we came hack inside.
Λλ soon as Megan arrived, we sat down to eat.
Once it stopped raining lee started the game again.
However, we can use the past perfect with after, as soon as. etc to emphasise
that the first action is separate, independent of the second, completed before the
second started.
.She didn't feel the same after her dog had died.
As soon as he had finished his exams, he went to Paris for a month.
This use of the past perfect is especially common with when. (When has several
meanings, so we often have to show the exact lime relations by the verb form.)
Compare:
-	When I had opened the windows, I sat down and had a cap of lea. («π When
tnpened the windows.-PsMdown.. .ะ the first action was quite separate
from the second.)
When I opened the window, the cat jumped out. (More natural than When I
had opened the window,...: one action caused the other.)
-	I Shen I had answered my emails, I did some gardening.
(wr When I answered my emuds. I did some gardening )
When I wrote to her, she came at once.
2	unrealised hopes and wishes; things that did not happen
The past perfect can be used to express an unrealised hope, wish, etc. Had is
usually stressed in this case.
I HAD hoped we would leave tomorrow, hut it won't be possible.
He HAD intended to make a cake, but he ran out of time.
3	past perfect with It was the first/second... that...
We generally use a past perfect after it was the first/second... that... and
similar structures (» 56).
It was the first time that I had heard her sing.
It was the fifth time she had asked the same question.
It was only the second opera I had seen in my life.
For Ihr pm perfect -ith before (c t Hr arwN our before I had finished my lenievel » 2503
grammar
past perfect: advanced points
55	past perfect progressive
1	forms
I had been uwking. Where had die been slaying?
They hadn't been listening,
เพ doubt เ«■เท» เท word! like >!"--!* ■''พพ!* ► MT.
2	use
We use the past perfect progressive to talk about actions or situations which
had continued up to the past moment that we arc thinking about, or shortly
before it.
At that lime we had been living in the caravan /or about six months.
When I fount! Emily, I could see that she had been crying.
I went to the doctor because I had been sleeping badly.
past perfect progressive: actions or situations which had
continued up to the past moment that we are thinking about,
or shortly before it
how long? past perfect progressive, not past progressive
We use a past perfect progressive, not a past progressive, to say how long
something had been happening up to a past moment.
We’d been walking since sunrise, arut we were hungry, (not We were walking
·’»’ ·» ewn· · · · ■
When she arrived, she had been travelling for twenty hours, (not .. . she was
iww4/fwjf. < -)
grammar · 55 past perfect progressive
Past and Perfect Tenses
Section 5
4	progressive and simple: differences
Progressive forms are mostly used to talk about more temporary actions and
situations. When we talk about longer-lasting or permanent situations we prefer
simple forms. Compare:
My legs were stiff because I had been standing still for a long time.
The tree that blew down had stood therefor 300 years.
Progressive forms generally emphasise the continuation of an activity; we use
simple tenses to emphasise the idea of completion. Compare:
I had been reading science fiction, and my mind was full of strange images.
I had read all my magazines, and was beginning to get bored.
Some verbs are not normally used in progressive forms (► 4), even if the
meaning is one for which a progressive form would be more suitable.
I hadn't known her for very long when we got married, (not I hadn't been
knowing her . . .)
56	This is the first/last. ■etc
1	This is the first time, etc
We use the present perfect in sentences constructed with this/it/that is the first/
second/third/only/best/worst, etc.
This is the first time that I've heard her sing, (not This is the first time thai-I
11.1J1 Γ Imr
rrrrrr ncr	J
This is the first time I've seen a voice NOT This IS my first time to sec asee-a
volcano.)
This is the fifth time you've asked me the same question (not This is the fifth
lime you ask. . .)
That's the third cake you've eaten this morning.
It's one of the most interesting books I've ever read.
I'm flying to New York tomorrow. It'll be the first time I've travelled by plane.
When we talk about the past, we generally use the past perfect in these
structures.
It was the third time he had been in love that year.
2	tenses with This is the last..etc
Present (simple or progressive) and future tenses are both possible with This is
the last. . . and similar structures.
This is the last time I pay / I'm paying for you. (or This is the last time I'll pay
for you.)
That's the last email he gets / he's getting from me. (or That’s the last email
he'll get from me.)
This is the last thing I'm going to say to you.
grammar · 56 This is the first/last. .., etc
Section 6 Passives
INTRODUCTION
active and passive structures
-	They built this house in I486. (active)
Thu house was built in I486, (passive)
-	Most Austrians speak German, (active)
German is spoken by most Austrians, (passive)
-	A friend of ours is repairing the roof, (active)
The roof is being repaired by a friend of ours, (passive)
-	This book will change your life, (active)
Your life will be changed by this book, (passive)
When A does something to B. there are often two ways to talk about it. If we
want A (the 'doer' or 'agent') to be the subject, we use an active verb: built,
speak, is repairing, will change. If we want B (the 'receiver' of the action)
to be the subject (► 67), we use a passive vert»: was built, is spoken, is being
repaired, will be changed.
The object of an active verb corresponds to the subject of a passive verb.
OBJECT
Active: they built [this house in 1186.
Passive: this house was built เท 1186
SUBJECT
เท most cases, the subject of an active verb is not expressed in the
corresponding passive sentence. If it does have to be expressed, this usually
happens in an expression with by, the noun is called the agent' (► 53).
Ibis house was built in I486 by Sir lohn Talton.
meaning and grammar
Meaning and grammar do not always go together. Not all active verbs have
’active' meanings: for instance, if you say that somebody receives something or
suffers, you are really saying that something is done to him/her.
Some English active verbs might be translated by passive or reflexive verbs in
certain other languages: e g. My shoes are wearing out; She is sitting: Suddenly
the door opened. And some English passives might be translated by active or
reflexive verbs: c g. I was born in 1956; English is spoken here.
grammar · Section b Passives
Some verbs can be used in both active and passive forms with similar meanings:
for example to Horn' /10 be worried; IO drown / Io be drowned (► 1J8)'
Sometimes active and passive infinitives can be used with vet) similar meanings:
for example There 's a lol of work to do Ho be done (for details. - 106).
And some active verbs can have both active and passive meanings, for example
She opened the door / The door opened (► 9).
hl! mow abom rrflexne vert» ► I» to· -xà.nd passive p»l pentoples ·
ax-Ewithทุ-๘.!ฟพ^-·**<*“*«''' ""x
Do you know what's wrong with these, and why?
© I was very interesting in the lesson. ► 963
© She has put in prison for life. » 57.4
Õ Tact is lacked by your mother. ► 573
© He was shot by a rifle. ► 58
© Our house got built in 1827. ► 60
© Ute children were explained the problem. ► 61
© We were suggested a meeting place. ► 61
© I don't like to be shouted. » 62.1
© He was thrown stones at. » 62.2
© She was broken her mirror. ► 62.2
© That she was a spy was thought by nobody. ► 63.1
© It is expected to make a profit this year. ► 633
© They say his company to be in trouble. ► 64.2
© Doris was wanted to be the manager. ► 61.6
© Emily telling everyirody what to do annoyed me. » 67.4
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
57	passive structures and verb forms
58	by ♦ agent
59	passive modal structures:
It can be done tomorrow.
60	gel as passive auxiliary.
He got caught
61	verbs with two objects in
the passive
62	verbs with prepositions เท
the passive
63	II was thought lhal...
64	He is believed IO be ...
65	He was considered a genius.
66	My suitcase is packed.
structures?
grammar · Section 6 Passives
57	passive structures and verb forms
passive verb forms
We normally make passive forms of a verb by using tenses of the auxiliary be
followed by the past participle (- pp) of the verb. (For get as a passive auxiliary.
► 60.) Here is a list of ail the passive forms of an ordinary English verb.
Name
Construction	Example
simple present am/are/is * pp
present progressive am/are/is being - pp
present perfect
(simple) future
future perfect
hair, has been * pp
will be · pp
will haw been · pp
simple past
past progressive
was! were · pp
was! were being · pp
English is spoken here.
Excuse the mess; the house
is being painted
Has Emily been told'
You’ll be told soon enough.
Everything will have been done
by Tuesday.
I wasn't invited, but I went.
I felt as if I was being watched.
I knew why I had been chosen
Future progressive passives (พนI be being ' pp) and perfect progressive passives
(has been being ♦ pp) are unusual.
Examples of passive infinitives: (to) be taken; (to) have been invited.
Examples of passive ing forms: being watched; having been invited.
Note that verbs made up of more than one word (► 12-13) can have passive
forms if they are transitive.
The furniture was broken up for firewood.
She likes being looked at. I need to be taken care of
He hates being made a fool of.
2
use of tenses
Passive tenses are normally used เท the same way as active tenses. So for
example the present progressive passive is used, like the present progressive
active, to talk about things that are going on at the time of speaking (► 32).
The patters are being prepared now.
The secretary is preparing the papers now.
And the present perfect passive can be used, like the present perfect active, to
talk about finished actions with present consequences (» 47).
Λ lex has been arrestedThe police haw arrested Alex.'
verbs not used in the passive
Not all verbs can have passive forms. Passive structures are impossible with
intransitive verbs (► 7.2) like die or arrive, which cannot have objects, because
there is nothing to become the subject of a passive sentence. Some transitive
verbs, too, are seldom used เท the passive. Most of these arc 'stative verbs’
(verbs which refer to states, not actions). Examples are fit. have. lack,
resemble, suit.
They haw a nice house, (nrr NOT A nice house is had by them.)
grammar
passive structures and verb forms
Passives
Section 6
My shoes don’t fit me. (but SOI I'm not filled by my shoes.}
Sylvia resembles a Greek goddess, (but sot AGreek goddess is resembled by
Your mother lacks tael. (BUI NOT lacltshfeked by your mother.}
She นพ having a bath, (err SOI A bath teas bemg had by her.}
confusing forms
Students often confuse active and passive verb forms เท English. Typical
mistakes:
very interesting
I
She hfts palproof· for hfe
these houses build«.«</
f'/rc Uffitc to of/iCT in iOgiish
/'/tí* y	/fNy/ Z/f /All*
Mistakes like these are not surprising, because:
1.	Be is used in both passive verb forms and active progressive tenses.
2.	Past participles are used in both passive verb forms and active perfect tenses.
Compare:
He was calling, (active - past progressive)
He นพ called, (passive - simple past)
He has called, (active present perfect)
58	by + agent
เท a passive clause, we usually use by to introduce the agent - the person or
thing that does the action, or that causes what happens. (Note, however, that
agents are mentioned in only about 20 per cent of passive clauses.)
All the trouble นพ caused by your mother
These carpets are made by children who work twelve hours a day.
Some past participles can be more like adjectives than verbs (► 96): for example
shocked, worried, frightened. After these, we often use other prepositions instead
of by. (And such structures are not really passives, but examples of be »
I	was shocked at by your attitude.
IVe were worried about by her silence.
Are you frightened of spiders?
With is used when we talk about an instrument which Is used by an agent to do
an action (► 416).
He was shot (by the policeman) with a rifle.
grammar
by ' agent
59	passive modal structures: It can be
done tomorrow.
Modal ร(ณ(ะcures can be passivised.
IVe can do it tomorrow. -y Il can be done tomorrow
They may close the hospital. -> The hospital may be closed.
An interesting, racher complicated point about modal verbs is that their meaning
usually 'spreads over' a whole clause. This means that one can change a modal
structure from active to passive, for example, without affecting the meaning very
much. Compare:
-	A child could understand his theory.
His theory could be understood by a child.
You shouldn't put adverbs between the verb and the object.
Adverbs shouldn't be put between the verb and the object.
Dogs may chase cats.
cdts may get chased by dogs.
With most other verbs that are followed by infinitives, their meaning is attached
to the subject, so that a change from active to passive changes the sense of the
sentence completely. Compare:
-	Dogs like to chase cats.
Cats like to be chased by dogs, (different and - of course - untrue)
-	Dan wants to phone Anna.
Anna wants to be phoned by Dan. (not the same meaning)
60	get as passive auxiliary^He got caught.
Gel * past participle can be used to make passive structures in the same way as
be ♦ past participle This structure is mostly used เท an informal style. It is often
used to talk about events that happen by accident, unexpectedly, or outside
one’s control, and that have good or bad consequences.
I	get paid on Fridays. She's always getting invited to parties.
My watch got broken while I was playing with the children.
lie got caught by the police speeding through the town centre.
The passive with be is preferred for longer, more deliberate, planned actions.
The Emperor Charlemagne was crowned in the year 800. (It would be strange
to say Charlemagne got crowned...)
The new school will be opened by the Prime Minister on May 2Slh.
Our house was built in 1827.
61	verbs with two objects in the passive
Many verbs, such as give, send, show, lend, pay, promise, refuse, tell, offer, can be
followed by two objects, an indirect object' and a direct object’. These usually
refer to a person (indirect object) and a thing (direct object). ·|\νο structures art-
possible.
A. verb ' indirect object . direct object
She gave her sister the car.
grammar · 59 passive modal structures: Il can be done tomorrow
Passives
Section 6
I	had already shown the police officer Sam'ร photo.
B. verb · direct object · proposition · indirect object
She gate the car to her sister.
I	had already shown Sam's photo to the police officer.
Both of these structures can be made passive.
A.	indirect object becomes subject of passive verb
Iler sister was given the car.
The police officer had already been shown Sam's photo.
B.	direct object becomes subject of passive verb
The car was given to her sister.
Sam’s photo had already been shown to the police officer
The choice between the two passive structures may depend on what has been
said before, or on what needs to be put last in the sentence (► 67.2. 67.4).
Structure A (e g. Her sister was given the car) is the more common of the two.
More examples:
I’ve lust been sent a whole lot of information.
You were lent ten thousand pounds last year.
The visitors were shown a collection of old manuscripts.
They are being paid a lot of money for doing very little.
He was refused a visa because he had been in prison.
We will never be told the real truth.
How much have you been offered'
เท structure B le g. The car was given to her sister). prepositions are sometimes
dropped before indirect object pronouns.
This watch was given (to) me by my father.
Explain (► 459) and suggest (► 598) cannot be used เท structure A.
The problem was explained to the children, (wrr NOT The children mere
A meeting place was suggested to US. (•ท NOT We were suggested
a meeting place.)
Note that prepositional phrases like to the police officer’ are not called indirect
objects’ in all grammars.
62	verbs with prepositions in the passive
1 The plan has been looked at carefully.
The objects of prepositional verbs can become subjects in passive structures
We have looked at the plan carefully. -» The plan has been looked al carefully.
Nobody listens to her. 4 She is never listened to.
Somebody has paid for your meal -» Your meal has been paid for.
Note the word order. Ihe preposition cannot be dropped.
I don Ί like to be shouted at. (not I don't like to he shouted )
grammar
verbs with prepositions in the passive
2	Stones were thrown at him.
If there is already a direct object, the second object (after the preposition)
cannot become a passive subject.
They threw stones at him. > Stones were thrown at him.
(hut not Hr NV/.'	ร#(พพ#)
They stole a bicycle from him. -» A bicycle (MU stolen from him.
(in MJT Hr NW พฟ/ท พ ฟพุ^)
They poured นพter on US. -> Water was poured on US.
(ร1ท NOT tVf NW·* ffoure^l 4/v/N*/ OH I
Note (hat possessive nouns or pronouns cannot become passive subjects, either
They called Mr Archer's name. ■> Mr Archer'ร name was called.
(BITΓ NOT Mr A relief MX J/Me* j
I broke her mirror > Her mirror was broken.
(|H ท L|1T Um	)
I •ท· · ~ · I	mw vnmm nr» rrnrr W». 1
3	give, send, etc
Verbs like give, send, lend can have two objects with no preposition (e.g. They
gave him a gold watch). For the passive OÍ (his structure (e g. He was given a
gold watch, A gold watch was given to him), ► 61.

63	It wasjhought that...
1	clause objects: Nobody thought that she was a spy.
Some sentences have clauses as their objects. These cannot normally become
the subjects of passive sentences.
by f r o body )
We/ell that he was the right man for the job. (but not I hat he was-. ..
was Jell)
The newspapers say that his company is in trouble, (bui NOT That his
However, passive structures are often possible with preparatory it (► 266).
Il was thought that she was a spy.
It was felt that he was the right man for the Job.
It is said that his company ts in trouble.
2	infinitive objects: They decided to ...
A few verbs that are followed by infinitives (for example decide, agree) can also
t»e used in passive structures beginning with it.
They decided to meet at twelve. -> It was decided to meet at twelve.
li e agreed to open a new branch. ·> Il was agreed to Often a new branch.
I lowcver, most verbs cannot be used in this way.
Not II พ่ started I» -Hike a profit OR II !y Hot etpeetod Io ram today.
grammar
It was thought that..
Passives
Section 6
64	He is believed to be ...
1	I was asked to send...
Many verbs can be followed by object · infinitive (► 98).
lie (liked me to tend a stamped addressed envelope.
We chose Felicity to be the Carnival Queen.
เท most cases, these structures can be made passive.
I was asked to send a stamped addressed envelope.
Felicity was chosen to be the Carnival Queen.
We were told not to come back.
they are allowed to visit Harry once a week.
2	He is believed to be dangerous.
With verbs like think, fed. believe, know, etc, the object ' infinitive structure is
rather formal and often unusual.
They believe him to be dangerous, (more usual: They believe that he...)
However, the passive structure (e.g. He is believed to be...) is common, and
often occurs in news reports.
He is believed Io be dangerous.
Moriarty is thought to be เท Switzerland.
She is known to have been married before.
It is considered to be the finest cathedral เท Scotland.
Note that with say. the infinitive structure is only possible เท the passive.
His company is said to be in trouble.
(■in NOT They say his company Io be in trouble.)
3	hear, see, make and help
These verbs can be followed, เท active structures, by object ♦ infinitive without
to (» 91). In passive structures ro-infinitives are used. Compare:
-	I saw him come out of the house.
He uas seen to come out of the house.
-	They made him tell them everything.
He was made to tell them everything.
-	They helped him (to) get out of the country.
He was helped to gel out of the country.
4	preparatory there
With some verbs (e.g. say. think, feel, report, presume, understand), the passive
structure is possible with there as a ·preparatory subject*.
There are thought to be more than 3.000 different languages in the world.
(. It is thought that there are ...)
There was said to be disagreement between Ministers.
5	perfect, progressive and passive infinitives
A passive verb can be followed by a perfect, progressive or passive infinitive.
He is believed to have crossed the frontier last night.
I was told to be wailing outside the station at six o'clock.
The hostages are expected to be released today.
grammar *64 He is believed to
6	exceptions: wanting and liking
Verbs that refer IO wanting, liking and similar ideas cannot usually be used in
passive structures with infinitives after them.
Everybody wanted Doris Io be the manager, (sin Nor Doris «พ MWMerf Io be
the fTMrwgff.)
We like our staff to say what they think, (wi NOT Our staff are Weed io say
what they think.)
65	He was considered ล genius.
After some verbs the direct object can be followed by an object complement*
a noun or adjective which describes or classifies the object.
Queen Victoria considered him a genius
They elected Mrs Sanderson President
We all regarded Kathy as an expert.
Most people saw him as a sort of clown.
The other children called her stupid.
You've made the house beautiful.
เท passive clauses these are subject complements'; they come after the verb
He was considered a genius by Queen Victoria.
Mrs Sanderson was elected President.
He was seen as a sort of clown.
She was called stupid try the other children.
ทน· house has been made beautiful
Por more about obfret complement*. ► 10.
66	My suitcase is packed.
Some verbs refer to actions that produce a finished result. Examples are cut,
build, pack. dose. Other verbs do not: for example push, live, speak, hit, carry.
The past participles of finished-result verbs, and some of their passive tenses,
can have two meanings. They can refer to the action, or they can describe the
result (rather like adjectives). Compare:
The theatre was closed by the police on the orders of the mayor, (refers to the
action of closing)
When I got there I found that the theatre was dosed, (refers to the state of
being shut - the result of the action)
Because of this, be ' past participle can have a similar meaning to a present
perfect passive.
The vegetables are all cut up - what shall I do now? (- The vegetables have
al) been cut up .,.)
I	got caught เท the rain and my suit’s ruined. (- ... has been ruined.)
I think your ankle is broken. (->... has been broken.)
My suitcase is packed. (= — has been packed.)
grammar · 65 He was considered a genius.
Passives
Section 6
67	When do we use passive structures?________
1	interest in the action
We often choose passive structures when we want to talk about an action, but
are not so interested in saying (or not able to say) who or what does,'did it.
Passives without 'agents' (► 58) are common in academic and scientific writing
for this reason.
those pyramids were built around -too AD.
Too many books have been written about the Second World War.
lhe results have not yet been analysed.
2	putting the news at the end
We often prefer to begin a sentence with something that is already known, or
that we are already talking about, and to put the 'news’ at the end. this is
another common reason for choosing passive structures. Compare:
lack's painting my portrait, (active verb so that the ’news' - the portrait -
'Nice picture.' 'Yes, it was painted by my grandmother.' (passive verb so that
the ’news' - the painter - can go at the end)
3	keeping the same subject
เท order to keep talking about the same person or thing, it may be necessary to
switch from active to passive and back.
He waited for two flours; then he was seen by a doctor; then he Utas sent back
to the waiting room. He sat therefor another two hours by this lime he was
getting angry. Then he was taken upstairs and examined by a specialist, after
which he had to wait for another hour before he Utas allowed to go home.
(More natural than He waited for two hours; then a doctor saw him ...)
4	putting heavier expressions at the end
Longer and heavier expressions often go at the end of a clause, and this can also
be a reason for choosing a passive structure.
I was annoyed by Emily wanting to tell everybody what to do.
(More natural than Emily wanting to tell everybody what to do annoyed
me - the phrase Emily___do would make a very long subject.)
forms piss*K meaning* after need And น«inf (e g My uwreft ntfib ckantHf). ► 100 3.
รธร
grammar
When do we use passive structures?
Section 7 Modal Auxiliary Verbs
INTRODUCTION
What are modal auxiliary verbs?
The modal auxiliary verbs are will, would, shall, should, can, could, ought, may,
might and must. Their grammar is different from that of other verbs: for
example, they have no infinitives, participles or past tenses . For details, ►68.1.
Some other verbs and expressions are used in similar ways to medals: have to,
be able to, be supposed to, had better and need.
meanings
We do not usually use modal verbs to say that situations definitely exist, or that
particular events have definitely happened We use them, for example, to talk
about things which we expect, which are or are not possible, which we think art
necessary, which we want to happen, which we arc not sure about, which tend
to happen, or which have not happened. This is a complicated area of grammar
each modal verb has more than one use; on the other hand, different modals
can have very similar uses. Modal meanings fall into four groups.
1	degrees of certainty (► 69-72)
Most modal verbs can be used to express degrees of certainty about facts,
situations or events: for instance to say that something is certain, probable,
possible or Impossible.
It will rain tomorrow. She should be here soon.
2	obligation, freedom to act, etc (► 73-81)
Most modal verbs can also express various ideas relating to obligation, freedom
to act. recommended behaviour, permission, willingness and similar matters.
They arc common in requests, suggestions, invitations and instructions.
Students must register by 30 lanuary. You should see the doctor.
If you will come this way...	Could I talk to you for a moment>
Note that these meanings are usually expressed from the speaker's point of vieu
เท statements, and from the hearer's เท questions. Compare:
You must go and see Anna. (I think it IS necessary.)
Must you go and see Anna? (Do you think it is necessary?)
Modal verbs, especially can and could, arc used to say what people and things
are able to do because of their knowledge, skill, design and so on.
She can speak six languages.	My old car could do 120mph.
4	typical behaviour (► 86-87)
We can talk about what people and things typically or habitually do or did. using
can, may, will, would and used to.
Dan can really gel on your nenes. Most evenings he’ll jusl sit watching TV.
A female crocodile may lay 30-10 eggs. I used to play a lot of tennis.
grammar · Section 7 Modal Auxiliary Verbs
Do you know what’s wrong with these, and why?
Q I must to water the plants. ► 68.1
Õ It mustn't be Emily at the door she's เท Ireland. ► 69.2
o You mustn't work tomorrow if you don't want to. ► 73.4
o It can rain this afternoon. ► 71.1
Q May you go camping this summer? ► 71 3
õ I fell very hot and tired. I might be ill. ► 71.7
Õ I might read what I liked when I was a child ► 81 3
Õ Next week's exam must be easy. ► 69.9
Õ Yesterday I should clean the whole house. ► 76.2
Õ lames should get back home yesterday. Has anybody seen him? ► 70.2
Q It can rain this afternoon. ►71.1
Õ I'm not sure where Emma เร. She can be out shopping. ►71.1
Q You have better hurry up. ► 77.2
o 'The phone's ringing.' I'm going to answer it.' ► 79.1
Q 'There's the doorbell.' I go.' ► 79.1
Q I phone you tonight. ► 79.3
Õ May everybody park here? ► 81.2
Q Yesterday evening Daniel could watch TV for an hour. ► 813
Ο J could run 10km yesterday. ► 82.4
õ I can speak French at the end of this course. ► 83.1
Q He uses to smoke. ► 87.2
Q You used not to like him. used you? ► 87.3
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
68	modals: grammar, pronunciation
and contractions
69	deduction (deciding that
something is certain): must,
can't, etc
70	deduction (deciding that
something is probable): should,
ought to, etc
71	chances: may, might and could
72	may and might: some special uses
73	strong obligation: must, will
74	strong obligation: hauc (got) to
75	half (got) to and must
76	weaker obligation: should and
77	weaker obligation: had better
78	expectations: supposed to
79	willingness: will, can
«0 instructions and requests: will.
would, can, could, might, shall
81	permission: can, could, may,
might, be allowed to
82	ability: can and could
83	ability: advanced points
84	can and could with see. hear, etc
85	be able to
86	typical behaviour: can. could,
may, might, will, would
87	typical behaviour: used to -
infinitive
E
grammar · Section 7 Modal Auxiliary Verbs
68	modals: grammar, pronunciation and
contractions
Modal verbs differ from ordinary verbs เท several ways.
1	grammar
a Modal verbs have no ■ร in lhe third person singular.
she may knou> his address, (not She mays ..)
b Questions, negatives, tags and short answers are made without do.
‘Can you swimf (not Doyonfan swim)' 'Yes, I can.‘
He shouldn't be doing that, should hef (พ He^oevt^Amdd-. . .)
c After modal auxiliary verbs, we use the infinitive without to of other verbs. Ougta
is an exception, ► 70.1.
I	must water the flowers, (not I must tv water ...)
Progressive, perfect and passive infinitives are also possible (► 89).
/ may not be working tomorrow.
She was so angry she could have killed him.
the kitchen ought to be Iminted one of these days.
d Modal verbs do not have infinitives or participles (to may. rnay/ng, mayed do not
exist), and they do not normally have past forms. Other expressions are used
when necessary.
I'd like to be able to skate, (not ... mean skate.}
People really had to work hard in those days, (not People rendy-musted
work . . .)
Could, might, would and should usually have present and future reference, but
they can sometimes be used as past lenses of can, may, will and shall.
e Certain past ideas can be expressed by a modal verb followed by a perfect
infinitive (have · past participle).
You should have told me you were coming.
I think I may hate annoyed Aunt Mary.
For details of these uses, see the entries on particular modal verbs.
f There is quite often used as a preparatory subject with modal verbs, especially
when these are followed by be (► 605).
There may be rain later today.
2	pronunciation and contractions
Several modals have weak pronunciations, used when they are not stressed:
shall /Jal/, should /Jad/, can /kan/, could .'kad/, must /mast/. For more about
weak pronunciations, ► 315. Ought to is generally pronounced f’วะน/ ('oughta'J
in conversational speech; should have, could have and might hate are often
pronounced /Juda/, /koda/ and / maita/. Can't is pronounced /taunt/ เท
standard British English and /ka*nt/ in standard American English.
grammar
modals: grammar, pronunciation and contractions
Modal Auxiliary Verbs
Section
Contracted negatives arc won't, wouldn’t, shan't (BrE), shouldn’t, can't, couldn’t,
oughtn’t, mightn't (BrE) and mustn't (mostly BrE). Will and would also have
contracted affirmative forms (7/. '</). For more about contractions, » 337.
69	deduction (deciding that something is
certain): must, can't, etc
1	statements: Emily must have a problem.
Must can be used to express the deduction or conclusion that something is
certain or highly probable: it is normal or logical, there arc excellent reasons for
believing it, or it is the only possible explanation for what Is happening.
If A is bigger than พ, and B is bigger than c. then A must be bigger than c
'I'm in love.'' You must be very happy.'
Emily must have a problem - she keeps crying.
There's the doorbell. Il must be George.
Have (got) to is also possible เท this sense.
There's the doorbell. It has to be George.
Getting married next week7 You have to be joking
Only five o'clock7 It’s got to be later than that!
2	negatives: It can't be Emily.
Must is not often used to express certainty เท negative clauses. We normally use
cannot/can't to say that something เร certainly not the case, because it is
logically or practically impossible, or extremely Improbable.
If A is bigger than พ, and B is bigger than c, then c can't be bigger than A.
It can't be Emily at the door. She’s in Ireland, (not H mustn't be Emily. . .)
She’s not answering the phone. She can’t be at home.
However, mustn't เร used in question tags (► 305-306) after must, especially เท
British English.
แ must be nice to be a cat. mustn’t it7 (not ... eamutT)
And must nor is occasionally used, especially เท American English, to say that
there is evidence that something is not the case (► 69.» below).
3	need not / does not have to
Need not / needn't is used (especially in British English) to say that something is
not necessarily so; does not have to can also be used. Must not is not used in this
'Look at those tracks. That must be a dog.' 'It needn't be - it could be a fox.'
(ox... พ doesn't have to be___) (not___u mustn’t be___)
4	That must have been nice.
Wc can use must have » past participle to express certainty about the past.
'We went to Home last month.’ 'That must have been nice.'
Ά woman phoned while you were out.' ‘It must have been Kate.'
Can is used in questions and negatives.
Where can lack have put the matches? He can’t have thrown them away. -»
grammar · 69 deduction (deciding that something is certain): must, can't, etc
5	will
Will can express certainty or confidence about present or future situations,
Λ J I'm รนท· you will understand, น1e cannot wait any longer for OU' order.
Don't phone them now - they’ll be having dinner.
'There's somebody coming up the stairs.' 'That’ll be Emily.'
Tomorrow will be cloudy, with some rain.
Will have · past participle refers to the past.
Dear Sir, You will recently have received a form...
We can't go and see them now - they'll have gone to bed.
6	indirect speech
Must can he used เท past indirect speech as if it were a past tense.
I	felt there must be something wrong.
7	must and should
Should can be used as a weaker form of must (► 70). Compare:
Anna must be at home by now. (■ I'm certain she's at home.)
Anna should be at home by now. (ะ I think she's very probably at home.)
8	a British-American difference: can't and must not
เท American English, must not is often used when something is not logically
impossible, but when there is strong evidence for believing that it is not the
case. Compare:
-	He only left the office five minutes ago. He can’t be home yet. (It’s logically
impossible that he's home.)
She’s not answering the doorbell. She must not be at home. (It’s not logical!)
impossible that she’s home, hut it seems pretty certain that she isn't.)
-	The restaurant can’t be open - the door's locked.
That restaurant must not be any good - it's always empty.
เท British English, can't is normal for both meanings (though some people use
must not for the 'seems pretty certain' meaning). Compare:
She walked past without saying 'Hello'. She must not have seen you.
(AmE; some British speakers.)
She walked past without saying 'Hello'. She can't have seen you.
(most British speakers.)
Note that the contracted form mustn't is rare in AmE.
9	must: not used for predictions
Must is not often used for predictions about the future - to say what people
expect to happen. Will is used to express certainty (► 38), should or ought to
suggest that things are probable (► 70).
It will be fine tomorrow, (noi II must be fine tomorrow.)
Next week's exam should ought to be easy. (Nor Next week's exam
WWW tvoy,)
giaminar
deduction (deciding that something is certain): must.
Modal Auxiliary Verbs
Seclion 7
70	deduction (deciding that something is
_____probable): should, ought to, etc
1	present or future
Should can be used IO express lhe deduction or conclusion that something is
probable now or in the future: it is expected, normal or logical.
/'re bought three loaves - that should be enough.
I'll phone Ruth - she should be home by note.
‘We're spending lhe winter เท Miami.’ ‘That should be nice.'
Ought to (► 76.3) is used in a similar way, but is much less common.
Henry ought to be here soon - he left home at six.
The weather ought to improve after the weekend.
2	past: should have / ought to have ...
We do not normally use should » infinitive to talk about the past.
However, we can use should hate / ought to have · past participle to make
guesses or draw conclusions about things which are not certain to have
happened.
lames should have got back home yesterday. Has anybody seen himJ
(not fames should get lrack home yesterday...)
We can also use this structure to talk about actions which we expect to have
been completed by now or at a future time.
Ten o'clock. She should have arrived at her office by now. I'll try calling her.
We ought to have finished painting lhe house by lhe end of next week
3	be supposed to
We can use he supposed to to say that something is or was normal or expected.
Cats are supposed to be afraid of dogs, but ours isn't.
Hill was supposed to gel back home yesterday.
Note the pronunciation: /so’poost to/, SOT /sopouzd to/.

71	chances: may, might and could
1 You may be right; We may go climbing.
We often use may, might and could to talk about the chance (possibility) that
something will happen, or is happening.
IVe may go climbing in the Alps next summer.
7 think Labour are going lo win.' 'You may be right.'
Daniel might phone. If he does, ask him to ring later.
'Where's Emma? 7 don't know. She might be out running I suppose·'
They've agreed, but they could could change their minds
May well, might well and could well suggest stronger possibilities.
7 think it's going to rain.' ‘You may well be right - lhe sky's really black:
gramma
chances: may1 might and could
Can is not normally used to talk about the chance that something will happen or
is happening.
NOT II CUH rmnfhis afternoon
NOT Emma can be out running.
2	may, might and could: the difference
Might and could are not often used as past forms of may and can; more often
they are used to talk about the present or future. Might and could are less
definite or more hesitant than may, suggesting a smaller chance - they are used
when people think something is possible but not very likely. Compare:
1 may go to London tomorrouΛ (perhaps a 50% chance)
Joe might come with me. (perhaps a 30% chance)
3	questions: may not used
May is not normally used to ask about the chance of something happening.
Are you likely to go camping this summer? (not May you go camping. . .?)
Has Emma gone running I wonder? (not May Emma have gone running?)
But may is possible in indirect questions (for example after Do you think).
Do you think you may go camping this summer?
Might can be used in direct questions, but this is rather formal.
Might you go camping? (less natural than Do you think you may/might. ..?)
4	two negatives: may/might not and can't
There are two ways to make may/might negative: with may/might not (= It is
possible that. . . not . . .) and with can’t (= It is not possible that. . .) Compare:
-	She may be at home. (- Perhaps she is at home.)
She may not be at home. (- Perhaps she is not at home.)
She can't be at home. (= She is certainly not at home.)
-	You might win. (- Perhaps you will win.)
You might not win. (- Perhaps you won't win.)
You can't win. (= You certainly won't win.)
Couldn’t is possible with the same meaning as can't, but is less common.
5	might meaning 'would perhaps'
Might and could (but not may) can have a conditional meaning (- would
perhaps).
Don't play with knives. You might/could get hurt.
(= Perhaps you would get hurt.)
If you went to bed for an hour, you might feel better.
(=1.. perhaps you would feel better.)
6	indirect speech: might/could
Might/could is used in past indirect speech when may was used in direct speech.
Ί may go to Scotland.’ ‘What?’ ‘I said I might go to Scotland.’
7	past: might/could + infinitive not used
Might/could + infinitive is not normally used to talk about past possibility
(except in indirect speech).
I felt very hot and tired. Perhaps I was ill. (not . . . be ill./)
BUT I thought 1 might be ill.
grammar · 71 chances: may, might and could
Modal Auxiliary Verbs
Seclion 7
8	may/might/could have ..She may have mined her train.
However, (O say that it IS possible ibai something happened or was true in the
pose, we can use may/might /could have + past participle.
'Polly's very late: 'She may hate missed her train: t- It is possible that she
missed...)
'พน!t u,as that noiseT 'It might/could have been a cat:
May might hate ... can sometimes refer to the present or future.
I'll try phoning him, but he may hate gone out by now.
By the end of this year I might hate sated some money.
9	might/could have ..You might/could have killed yourself.
To say that something was possible but did not happen, we can use might/could
hate...
You were stupid to try climbing up there. You might/could hate killed
yourself.
If she hadn't been so bad-tempered, I might/could have married her.
May hate... Is now sometimes used with this meaning too; some people feel
that this is not correct.
You were stupid to try climbing up there. You may hate killed yourself
(More normal:___You might/could have killed yourself.)
Io· miffu couta hacr .. u<*d เท endow people เท! noc doing (hlngx
10	the difference between may/might/could and should/ought to
We use should and ought to to express .1 deduction that something is probable:
they suggest that we have a good reason for this belief.
May, might and could simply say that something is possible, without suggesting
that we have a good reason for thinking it is true or will happen. Compare:
-	Anna should be in the office now - it's ten o’clock.
Dan may be in the office now - I don't know what lime he starts work.
-	I've got all John's keys here. One of them ought to open the safe.
Let's ask Amy. She might know which is the right one. It’s worth a try’.
72	may and might: some special uses
1 may in wishes and hopes
May (but not might) is used เท formal expressions of wishes and hopes.
I hope that the young couple may enjoy many years of happiness together.
Let us pray that peace may soon return to our troubled land.
May often comes at the beginning of the sentence.
May you both be very happy! May God be with you.
May the INew Year bring you all your heart desires.
May she rest in peace, (prayer for a dead person)	-»
grammar
may and might: some special
2	may!might... but
May (and soniclimes might) can be used เท a discussion rather like although or
even if: IO say that something is true, but that this makes no dilierence to the
main argument. They are often followed by but.
He may be dever, but he hast! 'เ got much common sense, l- Even if he’s
clever, he ... ox Although he's clever, he ...)
It may be a comfortable car, but it uses a lol of fuel.
She might have had a lovely voice when she was younger, but___
Note that in this structure, may and might can be used to talk about things that
arc definitely true, not just possible.
You may be my boss, but that doesn't mean you're better than me.
3	may/might as well
Ulis structure is used informally to suggest that one should do something
because there is nothing better, nothing more interesting or nothing more useful
to do. there Is little difference between may and might in this case.
There’s nobody interesting to talk to. We may as well go home.
'Shall we go and see Fredr 'OK, might as weir
Note the difference between may/might as well and had belter (► 77). Compare:
We may as well cat. (- There is nothing more interesting to do.)
We’d better eat. (- We ought to eat; there is a good reason to eat.)
Might as well is also used to compare one unpleasant situation with another.
This trip isn't much fun. We might just as well be back home. (ะะ Things
wouldn’t be any different if we were at home.)
You never listen -1 might as well talk to a brick wall.
73	strong obligation: must, will
The following explanations apply particularly to British English. Americans often
use have (got) to where British people use must (► 75). However, this use of
ha tv (got) to is becoming more common in British English under American
influence. And note that must is becoming less common in both British and
American English.
1	statements: I really must stop smoking.
เท affirmative statements, we can use must tn say what is necessary, and to give
strong advice and orders to ourselves or other people.
Plants must get enough light and water if they· are to grow well.
British industry must improve its productivity.
I really must stop smoking.
You must be here before eight o'clock tomorrow.
Must is common in emphatic invitations.
You really must come and see US soon.
2	questions: Must I... ?
เท questions, we use must to ask about what the hearer thinks is necessary.
Must I clean all the rooms f
Why must you always bang the door?
grammar - 73 strong obligation: must, will
Modal Auxiliary Verbs
Section 7
3	negatives: You mustn't/can’t...
We use must not / mustn’t to say that it is wrong to do things, or to tell people
not to do things. Can't is also possible.
lhe government mustn't/can't expect people to work for no money.
You mustn’t/can’t open this parcel until Christmas Day.
4	mustn't and needn't / don't have to
Mustn't is not used to say that things are unnecessary. This idea is expressed by
needn’t (BrE), don't need to (► 532) or don’t hair to.
You needn't work tomorrow if you don't want to. (BrE) OH You don't have to
Íkill \	*f
You don't need to get a visa logo to Scotland, o. You don’t have to get a
visa___(รท! You mustn't geta visa to git to Scotland.)
5	past necessity and obligation: They had to work very hard.
Must is not normally used to talk about past obligation (except in indirect
speed» see below). This is because must is used mainly to influence people's
behaviour - for example through orders or advice - and one cannot do this in
the past. Had to is used to talk about obligation that existed in the past.
I	had to cycle three miles to school when I was a child.
My parents had to work very hard to build up their business.
Note the difference between had to · infinitive and must have * past
participle The structure with must have... is used to express certainty about
the past (► 69). Compare:
Stadia isn't in her office. She had to go home, l- It was necessary for her
to go home.)
Nadia isn't in her office. She must hair gone home, l- It seems certain that
she has gone home.)
6	orders with will: Will you be quiet!
We use will you to tell people what to do.
Will you send me die bill. please'	Come this way, will you?
Will you be quiet!
Will can be used in affirmative structures to give impersonal, military type
orders.
All staff will submit weekly progress reports.
7	indirect speech: He said I must stop.
Must can be used after a past reporting verb as if it were a past tense.
Jhe doctor said that I must slop smoking.
Obligation can also be reported with had to and would have to.
The doctor said that I had to / would hair to stop smoking.
8	must and should
Should can be used as a weaker form of must (► 76). Compare:
That carpet must be cleaned, l It is absolutely necessary.)
That carpel should be cleaned. (- It would be a good idea.)
grammar
strong obligation: must, will
74	strong obligation: have (got) to
1	meaning: obligation, certainty
Wc can use have (got) · infinitive to talk about obligation: things that it is
necessary to do. The meaning is quite similar to must; for differences, ► 75.1.
Horry, I’ve got to go now. 1)0 you often have to travel on business?
2	grammar: with or without do; got
เท this structure, have can be used like an ordinary verb (with do เท questions
and negatives), or like an auxiliary verb (without do). Got is usually added to
present tense auxiliary verb forms เท an informal style.
When do you have to be back?
When have you (got) to be back?
Have got to is not normally used to talk about repealed obligation.
I usually have Io be al work at eight, (not I've เทนally got to ...)
Progressive forms are possible to talk about temporary continued obligation.
I'm having to work very hard at the moment.
For more details of the use of do forms and gor forms of have. ► 24.
3	pronunciation of have to; gotta
Have to is often pronounced /'hzfta/.
He'll have to .'h&fOi get a new passport soon.
Note the spelling gorra, sometimes used in informal American English (for
instance เท cartoon strips) to show the conversational pronunciation of got to.
I gotta call home. A man'ร gotta do what a man's gotta do.
75	have (got) to and must
1 Where does the obligation come from?
เท statements about obligation with must the obligation most often comes from
the speaker (and in questions, from the hearer). To talk about an obligation that
comes from outside' (for instance a regulation, or an order from somebody
else), we usually prefer have to. Compare:
I must do some mon* work; I want to pass my exam.
เท my job I ha IT to work from nine to five. (More natural than ... I must
work from nine to five.}
We must go to New York soon - wc haven't seen your mother since Christmas
My wife's an interpreter: she often has to go to New York. (More natural
than . ..she must often go to New York.}
- / must stop smoking. (I want to.)
I've got to stop smoking. (Doctor’s orders.)
This is a terrible party. We really must go home.
This is a lovely party, but we've got to go home because of the children.
I've got bad toothache. I must make an appointment with the dentist.
I can't come to work tomorrow morning because I've got to see the dentist.
grammar
strong obligation: have (got)
Section 7
Modal Auxiliary Verbs
You really must go to church next Sunday you haven j been for ages.
(I am telling you to.)
Catholics have to go to church on Sundays. (Their religion tells them to.)
Must you wear dirty old jeans all the time? (Is it personally important
for you?)
1)0 you hate to wear a lie al work? (Is there a regulation?)
Hai’e to can also be used to talk about obligation coining from the speaker or
hearer, in the same way as must. I his เร normal เท American English (which
uses must less often in this sense), and is becoming very common เท British
English.
I really have to stop smoking, (on I really must...)
Do I have to clean all the rooms? (or Must !...?)
2 future obligation: will have to, have (got) to and must
Will have to is used to talk about future obligation (will must is impossible,
► 68.1); but have (got) to is preferred when arrangements for the future have
already been made. Compare:
When you leave school you'll hate to find a job.
I've got to go for a job Interview tomorrow.
(Ming to have IO is also possible.
We’re going to have to repair dun window.
Must can be used to give orders or instructions for the future.
You can borrow my car, but you mint bring it back before ten.
Will have to can be used to distance the instructions (► 311), making them
sound less like direct orders from the speaker.
You can borrow my car, but you'll have to bring it back before ten.
Will need to can he used เท the same way (► 532.1).
"» *■"’· "> “X> *<*IV «Ο. ► 74. For the IW ol fpi	teuv. ► 24.3 24»
76	weaker obligation: should and ought to
Should and ought to are very similar, and can often replace each other.
They ought to be more sensible, shouldn’t they?
Ihey are both used to talk about obligation and duty, to give and ask for advice,
and to say what we think it is right for people to do. should is much more
frequent than ought to, especially in negatives and questions.
You should ought to see 'Daughter of the Moon' - it's a great film.
You shouldn't say things like that to Cranny.
Applications should be sent before December 30th. (More polite than
Applications must be sent...)
He ought to get a medal for living with her.
เท questions, should is used to ask for advice or instructions, like a less definite
form of shall (► 80).
Should I go and see the police, do you think?
What should we do?
Should and ought to arc not used เท polite requests.
Could you move your head a bit? I can’t sec. (xoi You shouM-moif...)
grammar - 76 weaker obligation: should and ought
2	past use: should have ...
Should and ought to arc not normally used to talk about past obligation. Instead,
we can use, for example, was/were supposed to (► 78).
It was going to be a long day. I was supposed to clean the whole house.
But should-ought Io hare · past participle can be used to talk about unfulfilled
past obligations: things which weren't done, or which may or may not have beet
done.
I should have phoned Fd this morning, but I forgot.
Alice ought to have spoken to lames, but I'm not sure she did.
3	ought: forms
After ought, we use the infinitive with to before other verbs. (This makes ought
different from other modal auxiliary verbs.)
You ought to see a dentist.
To is not used in question tags.
We ought to wake Ella, oughtn't we' (not .. . oughtn't we to')
Mid position adverbiais (► 200) can go before or after ought. The position before
ought is more common in an informal style.
You always ought to count your change when you buy things.
You ought always to count your change... (more formal: rare in AmE)
เท American English, interrogative and contracted negative forms of ought to arc
rare; should is generally used instead.
He ought to be here soon, shouldn’t he'
เท some English dialects, questions and negatives are made with did (e g. She
didn't ought to do that), but this structure is not used in standard English.
77	weaker obligation: had better
1	meaning
We use had better to give strong advice, or to tell people what to do (including
ourselves).
You’d belter turn that music down before your dad gets angry.
Il's seven o'clock. I'd better put the meat in the oven.
Had better refers to the immediate future. It is more urgent than should or
ought. Compare:
Ί really ought logo and see Fred one of these days.' 'Well, you’d better do it
soon - he’s leaving for South Africa al the end of the month.'
Had better is not used เท polite requests. Compare:
Could you help me, if you've got time? (request)
You’d better help me. If you don't, there'll be trouble, (order/threat)
grammar · 77 weaker obligation: had better
Modal Auxiliary Verbs
Section 7
2	forms
Had better refers to rhe immediate future, but the form is always past (tape
better is impossible). After had better we use the infinitive without to.
It's late - you had better hurry up. (not__พ»- htter better... OR ... you had
We normally make the negative with had better not ' Infinitive.
You'd better not wake me up when you come in. (You hadn't belter wake
me... is possible in British English but very unusual.)
A negative interrogative form Hadn't... better...? is possible.
Hadn't we better tell him the truth?
Normal unemphatic short answer forms are as follows:
‘Shall I put my clothes awayT ' You'd better.'
'He says he won't tell anybody.' 'He'd better not:
Had Cd) is sometimes dropped in very informal speech.
You better go now. I better try again later.
78	expectations[supposed to ________________________
He supposed t infinitive is used to say what people have to do (or not do)
according to the rules or the law, or to say what is (not) expected to happen.
Catholics are supposed to go to church on Sundays.
We’re supposed to pay the Council Tax at the beginning of the month.
You're not supposed to park on double yellow lines.
There is often a suggestion that things do not happen as planned or expected.
This country is supposed to be a democracy.
Lucy was supposed to come to lunch. What's happened'
Questions with supposed to can suggest that there are problems.
The train's already left. What are we supposed to do now?
How am I supposed to finish all this work by ten o'clockt
That'ร a lovely picture, but what'ร it supposed to be'
Another use of supposed to is to say what is generally believed.
He's supposed to be quite rich, you know.
This stuff is supposed to kill flies. Let's try it.
Note the pronunciation: /ss'psost to/, not sa’paozd 1๙.
79	willingness: will, can
1 announcing decisions: I'll answer it.
We often use will when we tell people about a decision as we make it. for
instance if we are agreeing to do something.
OK. I'll buy the tickets. You can buy supper after the show.
The phone's ringing.' ‘I'll answer it', (not I'm going-to answer H:)
Remember to phone foe, won't you? 'Yes, I will:
Note that the simple present is not normally used to announce decisions.
I think I'll go to bed. (not I think I go to bed.)
'There's the doorbell: ‘I'll go: (not 7.. Igo)
grammar
willingness: will, can
To announce decisions that have already been made, we generally prefer going
to ... or the present progressive (► 35-36).
Well, we've agreed on a pace, and I'm going to buy it.
I’ve made my decision and I'm sticking to it.
Stressed will can express determination.
I will slop smoking' I really will!
2	refusals: I won't do it!
Will not or uon t is used to refuse, or to talk about refusals.
I don t care U'hal you say - I won Ί do แ!	rhe car won t Stan.
3	promises and threats: I'll phone you tonight.
We often use will/ 'll เท promises and threats. Note that the simple present is not
possible เท these cases.
I promise I won't smoke again. (not I prmntsrld&n^-smoke...)
I'll phone you tonight, (not I phone. ..)
I'll hit you if you do that again.	You’ll suffer for this'
Shall is also possible in British English after I and we. but it is much less
common than will.
I shall give you a teddy bear for your birthday.
เท older English, shall was often used with second- and third-person subjects in
promises and threats. This is now very unusual.
You shall hate all you wish for. He shall regret this.
4	offers: Can / carry your bag?
We often use can when we offer to do things for people
'Can I carry your bag? (ะ Would you like me to ...) 'Oh, thank you.’
Ί can babysit for you this evening if you like.' 'No, It's all right, thanks.'
Could is possible if we want an offer to sound less definite.
I could fix your bicycle for you, if that would help.
80	instructions and requests: will, would, can,
could, might, shall	___
1 instructions, requests and suggestions: will, would, can, could,
might
We can use will you ...? to tell people IO do things. Would you...? is less direct
and more polite.
Will you gel me a newspaper while you're out?
Will you be quiet, please'.	Make me a cup of coffee, will you ?
Would you open a window, please?
If you will would... can be used in polite requests.
If you’ll just wail here for a moment. I'll see if Mr Andrews is free.
If you would come this way.,.
(an and could are used to give instructions or make requests. Could is less
direct and more polite.
Can you put the children to bed?
Could you lend me £5 until tomorrow?
grammar - BO instructions and requests: will, would, can, could, might, slutI1
Section
Modal Auxiliary Verbs
Do you think you could help me for a few minuta?
Could and might are often used in suggestions.
When you ’พ· finished lhe dishes you could iron the clothes, if you like.
If you don't know what to do, you could sort out your photos,
foil might see if lohn'sfree this evening.
2	asking for instructions and decisions: shall
Questions with shall Uwe arc used (in both British and American English) to ask
for instructions or decisions, to offer services, and to make suggestions. In
American English, this is rather formal. Will is not used เท this way.
Shall I open a window? (not WtU lopeH a window?)
Shall I carry your hag?
What time shall we come and see you?
What on earth shall we do?
Shall we go out for a meal? let's go and see Lucy, shall we?
3	criticisms: You could have told me ...
Could and might can be used to criticise people for not doing things.
You could ask before you borrow my car.
You might try lo be nicer to my mother.
Could /might have.., ♦ past participle can be used in criticisms about past
behaviour
You could have told me you were getting married.
She might have warned US she was going to stay out all night.
81	permission: can, could, may, might,
be allowed to
1	asking for, giving and refusing permission: Can /...?
We use can to ask for and give permission.
Can I ask you something?’' Yes, of course you can.'
You can go now If you want to.
Cannot/carCI are used to refuse permission (often with other words to soften
the refusal).
'Can I have some more cake?’ ‘Λ'o. I'm afraid you can’t.’
We also use could to ask for permission; it is more polite or formal than can.
We do not use could to give or refuse permission (it suggests respect, so is more
natural เท asking for permission than in giving it).
’Could I ask you something?’' Yes, of course you can.’ (not ... of course you
could)
May and might are also used to ask for permission, and may to give permission.
They arc more formal than can/could, and are less common Might is very polite
and formal, and is mostly used in indirect question structures.
May I switch on the TV?
I wonder if I might half a little more cheese?
grammar - Hl permission: can, could, may, might, he allowed to
May not (but not might not) can be used to refuse permission.
‘May I smoke?’ ‘I'm sorry; you may not.’
There is an old belief that may/might are more 'correct’ than can/could in these
uses, but this does not reflect actual usage.
Must not (► 73.3) can also be used to refuse permission; it is more emphatic
than can't /may not.
2	talking about permission: Can everybody. . .?
Can is used to talk about permission that has already been given or refused,
and about things that are allowed by rules or laws. May is not normally used in
this way.
Can everybody park here? (not May	here?)
(not May everybody park, here?)
3	past permission: could is not always possible
[ท talking about the past, we use could (but not might) to say that somebody had
permission to do something at any time ('general permission'), but we do not
use could to talk about permission for one particular action in the past.
Compare:
When I was a child, I could watch TV whenever I wanted to.
Yesterday evening Daniel was allowed to watch TV for an hour.
(not . . . Darnel touldwtUth TV for an hour,)
But could not can be used to talk about one particular action.
Daniel couldn’t watch TV yesterday because he was naughty.
(The difference between could and was/were allowed to is similar to the
difference between could and was/were able to. ► 82.4.)
4	indirect speech
Can, could, may and might can however all be used to report the giving of
permission (general or particular). Can/may are used after present reporting
verbs, and could/might after past verbs.
She says we can park here. They told US we couldn’t go in yet.
The manager says we may leave our coats in the waiting room.
Mr Newson agreed that I might look round, (very formal)
5	be allowed to
Modal verbs have no infinitives or participles. When necessary, permission is
expressed in other ways: for example with forms of be allowed to.
She's always been allowed to do what she liked, (not She's always could . . .)
grammar · 81 permission: can, could, may, might, be allowed to
Modal Auxiliary Verbs
Section 7
82	ability: can and could
1	knowledge, skill, strength, etc: / can read Italian
We use can to say what people and things arc able (or unable) to do because of
their knowledge? skill, strength, nature, desigivetc.	__________น,.
/ can read Italian, but I can't speak it. These rosescan grow anywhere.
หรเ^เท์ w^ookdos.....................My™■·»··
Be eWc ro (► 85) is used with similar meanings, especially when we are talking
about people's ability.
Henry is able to lift 100 kilos.
2	possible in the situation: We can go to Paris.
We also use can to say what we arc able (or unable) to do because of the
circumstances that we arc in- what is possible in.ààà-
We can go to Paris this weekend, because I don 't have to work.
I can’t come out this evening I haw to see my brother.
There are three possibilities; wecangp Io the police, we can talk to a lawyer, c
Muaain we dor We can try asking Lucy/or help:
Anybody who wants to can join the club.
3	past: She could read when she was four.
We use could to talk about general ability in the past.
She could read when she was four.
My grandmother could sing like an angel.	____
My ter car could do l60mph. เท those days	1
It could be quite frightening if you were*alonein owlWioMhMisft
Was/were able to is also possible, especially to talk about people ร ability.
She was able to read when she was four.
4	past: could is not always possible
We use could for general ability-· - for example to say that somebody could do
something at any nme, whenever he she wanted.
When I was younger, I could run 10km in under 40 Minutes.
We do not normally use could to say that somebody did something on one
occasion. Instead, we use other expressions-	,111,,11,, .,1.m
I managed to run 10km yesterday in under an hour, (not I emddrun Htkm
How many eggs were you able to gel? (not ... could you get?) _________
After^houn'cilmbing we succeeded เท getting to the top of the mountain.
(NOT. . เพ·™พ If"" the top..)...........
I found a really nice dress in the sale, (not I eouUftnd...)
However? we UK couldn't to say that something did not happen on one
managed to find the street, but I couldn't find her house.
grammar · 82 ability-: can and could
5	other uses of could
Could น no! only past: พ»· also use it as a 'softer', less definite form of can.
‘What shall u-e do tomorrow' 'Well, we could go fishing,'
When you're in Spain, you could go and see Alex.
Could can mean ‘would Ke able to‘.
You could get a better fob if you spoke a foreign language,
Could is used in past indirect speech, when can was used in direct speech.
■Can you help me' ■ what did you say' 7 asked if you could help me:
6	could have ...
We use a special structure to talk about unrealised past ability or opportunities -
to say that somebody was able to do something, but did not do it; or that
something was possible, but did not happen.
could have · past participle
/ could have married anybody I wanted to.
I was so angry I could have killed her!
Why did you jump out of the window' You could have hurl yourself.
I could hate won the race if I hadn’t fallen.
This structure can be used to criticise people for not doing things.
You could have helped me - why did you just sit and watchi
Negative sentences suggest that somebody would not have been able to do
something even if they had wanted or tried to.
I couldn't have won, so I didn't go เท for the race.
I couldn't have enjoyed myself more - it was a perfect day.
The structure is sometimes used to talk about past events which are not certain
IO have happened (like may I might have, ► 71.8).
' Who sent those flowers? ‘I'm not sure. It could have been your mother:
This structure can also refer to present situations which were possible but which
have not been realised.
He could have been Prime Minister now if he hadn't decided to leave politics
We could have spent today al the beach, but we thought it was going to rain
so we decided not to go.
7	chances: Will it happen? / Is it happening? - can not used
We do not use can to talk about the chances (probability) that something will
actually happen, or is actually happening. Instead, we use may (►"!).
IVe may go camping this summer, (not We can go...)
' Where's Sarah? ■She may be with loe. (not She tan Ke...)'
However, could is possible in this sense.
It could rain later this evening perhaps, (but not le,an rain later. ..)
grammar
ability; can and could
Modal Auxiliary Verbs
Section
83	ability^advanced points
1	future: can or will be able
We use can IO talk about future actions which we will be able to do because of
present ability, present circumstances, present decisions, etc.
She can win the race tomorrow if she really tries.
I've bought the tent, so ur can go camping next weekend if we want to.
I haven't got lime today, but I can see you tomorrow.
Can you come to a party on Saturdayi
In other cases we prefer other structures, for example will be able to.
I'll be able to speak French at du· end of this course.
(not I can speak French ...)
One day people will be able to go to the moon for the weekend, (o· it will be
possible logo...)
2	could in the past
Could is not normally used to say that somebody did something on one occasion
in the past (► 82.4).
I managed to buy a really nice coat yesterday, (noi เ-cmdd-buy a teaUrrrne
However, could can refer to one occasion with certain verbs: see, hear, taste, feel,
smell, understand, remember and guess (► 84).
I could smell something burning.
I could understand everything she said.
And we can use could to talk about one occasion with words like hardly or only.
that have a negative sense.
She could hardly believe her eyes. I could only gel six eggs.
Could can also sometimes refer to one occasion in subordinate clauses.
I'm so glad dun you could come.
3	languages and instruments: She speaks Greek.
We often leave out can when we are talking about the ability to speak languages
or to play instruments.
She speaks Greek. / She can speak Greek.
Do/Can you play du· piano?
4	can/could always
Can'could always can mean ‘can/could ... if there is nothing better'.
ฯ don't know what to get Mark for his birthday·: 'Well, you can always giii-
him a gift card:
What are wc going to catT ‘ We could always warm up that soup:
grammar
ability: advanced points
84	can and could with see, hear, etc
1	see, hear, feel, smell, taste
When these verbs refer 10 perception (receiving information through the eyes,
ears, etc), we do not normally use progressive forms. To talk about seeing,
hearing, etc at a particular moment, we often use can see, can hear, etc
(especially เท British English).
I can see Susan coming, (not I'm seeing. ..)
Can you hear somebody coming up the stairs?
What did you pul in the slew? I can taste something /unny.
Suddenly she realised she could smell something burning.
เท American English. I see. hear, etc are common in this sense.
2	guess, tell
Can and could are often used with guess and with tell (meaning see, know).
Can/could are not normally used with know in the sense of‘find out’ (► 504.5).
I could guess what she wanted.
You can tell he’s Irish from his accent, (not You can know. ..)
3	understand, follow, remember
Can/could is often used with these Serbs too. It does not always add wry much
to the meaning.
I can't/don’t understand what she's talking about.
Do.'Can you follow what he’s saying?
I (can) remember your grandfather.
85	be able to
We use able especially in the structure be able Io · infinitive. This often has the
same meaning as can (► 82). (here is a negative form unable.
Some people arc able to / can walk on their hands.
I am unable to can’t understand what she wants.
(an is preferred เท the sense of 'know how to', and in expressions like can see,
can hear, etc (►84).
Can sou knit? (More natural than Are you able to knit?)
I can see a ship. (More natural than I am able to see a ship.)
He able to is used most often for people or other living things. Compare:
lake can lift is able to lift ISO kilos.
This crane can lift 30 tonnes. (More natural than This crane is able to lift 30
tonnes.)
He able to is used in cases (e g. future, present perfect) where can could is not
grammatically possible because it has no infinitive or participles (► 68.1).
One /lay scientists will Ire able to find a cure for cancer.
(not ... Will canfind.,.)
W hat have you been able to find out? (noI What have yott could.. .7)
I might he able to help you. (not I might can . ..)
Able is not often followed by passive infinitives.
He can’t Ire understood. (More natural than He's not aide to be understood.)
l or differences between could and was able Io, ► 82.4, 83.2.
grammar · 84 can and could with see, hear, etc
Modal Auxiliary Verbs
Section 7
86	typical behaviour: can, could, may, might,
will, would _____
1	can, could, may and might
litese verbs can be used to talk about typical behaviour and occurrences, เท the
sense of what is possible. May and might are a little more formal than am and
could, and are common in scientific and academic language.
Amy can really gel on your nerveร.
Scotland can be very warn in summer.
เท the day* of sailing ships, a voyage r°und lhe “"°rW cou,d à years.
ห"'!๒uersโmypá red or white ia colour.
เท those days, a man might be hanged for stealing a sheep.
2	will and would
ๅhese verbs can also describe typical behaviour, often in the sense of what is
habitual or regular.
Shell si! talking to herself for hours	____ ___
When you look at clouds they will often remind you of animals.
Ifsomethir tg breaks down and you kick it. it will often start working again.
Anything that can go wrong will go wrong.
Sulphuric acid will dissolve most metals.
Sometimes he would bring me little presents without tayiag ^y.
On Sundays when I was น child wc would all get up early and go jutting.
Every summer lie would go away for a month, without saying where or why.
3	criticisms: She MU fall เก love with the wrong people.
Stressed will and would can be used tocnlidse people’s behaviour.
She WILL fall in love with the wrong people.
Well, if you wtu keep telling people what you think of them
He was a nice boy. but he WOULD talk about himself all the rime
Would can be used to criticise a single past action, with the suggestion I hat ร
typical of you/him. etc’.	______..... ... __1
You WOULD tell Emily about lhe parly - / didn t want to invite her.
grammar . แ6 typical behaviour
, could, may. might, will, would
87 typical behaviour: used to -^infinitive 
1	meaning
We use used to + infinitive to talk about past habits and states which are now
finished.
I used to smoke, but now I’ve stopped, (not Tu»as^4sefTt^-smoke-. . .)
That casino used to be a cinema.
past habits and states which are now finished
I used to smoke, but now I've stopped.
2	only past
Used to . . . has no present form (and no progressive, perfect, infinitive or -ing
forms). To talk about present habits and states, we usually just use the simple
present tense (► 31).
He smokes, (not He uses-tG-sm&kef Her brother still collects stamps.
3	questions and negatives
When questions and negatives are written, they often have did . . . used instead
of did . . . use. Many people consider this incorrect.
What did people use(d) to do in the evenings before TV?
I didn't use(d) to like opera, but now I do.
The contraction usedn't is also possible, especially in British English.
I usedn't to like opera.
But the most common negative is never used . . .
/ never used to like opera.
In a formal style, questions and negatives without do are possible, but these are
not very common, and are rare in American English.
I used not to like opera, but now I do. (or I used to not like opera . . .) (BrE)
Used you to play football at school? (BrE)
These forms are not used in tags.
You used not to like him, did you? (not . . . used you?)
4	when used to ... is not used
Used to refers to things that happened at an earlier stage of one's life and are
now finished: there is an idea that circumstances have changed. The structure is
not used simply to say what happened at a particular past time, or how long it
took, or how many times it happened.
1 worked very hard last month, (not	live.™.ty™eyears
I lived in Chester for three years, (not / used เท lift· tn ( heeler I<tf <hf ๙·· years.)
grammar · 87 typical behaviour: used to + infinitive
Modal Auxiliary Verbs
Section 7
I	went to France seven times last year, (not / used to go to France seven times
ktsiyear.)
5	word order
Mid-position adverbiais (► 200) can go before or after used. The position before
used is more common in an informal style.
I always used to be afraid of dogs, (informal)
I used always to be afraid of dogs, (formal, and rare in AmE)	(N 01. J w011
6	pronunciation
Note the pronunciation of used /juist/ and use /ju:s/ in this structure.
7	used + infinitive and be used to . . jng
Used + infinitive has a quite different meaning from be used to . . .ing (► 615).
Compare:
I didn't use to drive a big car. (- Once I didn't drive a big car, but now I do.)
(not I wasn't used to drive a big car.)
I wasn't used to driving a big car. (- Driving a big car was a new and difficult
experience - I hadn't done it before.)
8	used to and would
Used to and would can both refer to repeated actions and events in the past.
When she was old, she used to / would sit in the corner talking to herself
for hours.
Sometimes he used to / would bring me little presents without saying why.
But only used to can refer to past states. Compare:
When we were children we used to / would go skating every winter.
I used to have an old Rolls-Royce, (but not / would havouH old Rcdls-Royee )
And we use used to, not would, to talk about regular and important habitual
behaviour.	-
Robert used to play a lot of football, (not Robertwouia pwty \ a?) old Rolls Roycc ·)
I used to smoke. (พ! Fwotdd smolw.)
grammar · 87 typical behaviour: used to + infinitive
Section 8 Infinitives, -ing forms and
Past Participles
INTRODUCTION
This Section, and Sections 9-10, deal with verb forms like (to) write (infinitive),
speaking ( ing form) and seen (past participle). These forms do not themselves
have any time reference (unlike lor example writes or spoke), and grammarians
call them non finite'. However, they can be used together with auxiliary verbs
to form tenses: e g. will write, is speaking, has seen (► 15). They also have
various other uses which are explained in Sections 8-10.
■ing forms have two grammatical names. They are often called ‘gerunds' when
they arc used in similar ways to nouns, as subjects or objects. Gerunds may
correspond to infinitives in some other languages.
I enjoy skiing.
They are called 'present participles' when they are used more like verbs or
adjectives:
She ran out laughing.
faster than a speeding bullet
The names 'present participle' and past participle' are misleading, because
these forms do not have any particular time reference.
The dividing line between participles and adjectives is not always clear, ► 96.
All of these verb forms can begin clauses (► Section 10).
I'd like to look at those papers again (infinitive clause)
She ran out laughing like a hyena, (participle clause)
Cooked in a stow oven, it will taste delicious, (participle clause)
For the sake of simplicity, 'infinitive* and ‘participle’ are used for Infinitive and
participle clauses เท the following explanations unless the longer term is needed.
grammar · Section 8 Infinitives. -ing forms and Past Participles
Do you know what's wrong with these, and why?
Q Try IO not b<- late. ► 89.5
õ I wanted RO home. ► 89.6
õ I must to go now. * 91.1
Õ He shouting gets on my nerves. ► 94.3
Õ Thank you for your waiting. » 94 3
Õ We’re all excited about his arriving. ► 94.6
Q 1 was very interesting in the lesson. ► 96.3
Õ Look at all those stopped cars at the crossroads. ► 96.4
Õ The questioned people gave very different opinions. ' 96.6
Q He’s a speaking-French Canadian. ► 96.5
Õ Britain's trade position has been very weakened by inflation ► 96.8
Ó He's very known in the art world. ► 96.8
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
88	infinitives: introduction
89	infinitives: forms
90	use of perfect infinitives: glad Io
91	infinitives without to: I zou> you
come in.
92	infinitive as subject or
complement
93	ing forms: introduction
94	ing form as subject, object or
complement
95	infinitive or -ing form?
96	participles: -ing and -erf forms
used like adjectives
grammar
Section 8 Infinitives, ing forms and Past Participles
88	infinitives: introduction
Infinitives have many functions. An infinitive can be used, for example, after do
or a modal auxiliary verb as pan of a verb phrase.
Do you think รhe's ready7	IVe must get some more light bulbs.
An infinitive can also be used, alone or with other words:
•	as the subject or complement OÍ a clause (► 92)
To watch him eating really gets on my nerves.
The main thing is to relax. It's nice to talk to you.
•	as the object or complement of a verb, adjective or noun (► 97 9». 101-102)
I	don't want to talk. I'm anxious to contact your brother.
You have the right to remain silent.
•	to express a person’s purpose (► 112)
He came to London to look for work.
k>>' full	of It* น»ห of ๙«ท» •ห· Ihr foBowtag wtl-xn
89	infinitives: forms
Infinitives are most often used with to (e.g. logo, to start). For infinitives without
fo. ► 91. Besides simple infinitives, there are also progressive infinitives (e.g. (to)
be writing), perfect infinitives (e.g. (to) have written), and passive infinitives
(e.g. (to) be written).
1	progressive infinitive: (to) be .. .ing
like other progressive forms (» 3), progressive infinitives suggest that situations
are / were / will be continuing around the time that we are talking about.
It’s nice to be sitting here with you.
I	noticed that he seemed to be smoking a lot.
This time tomorrow I’ll be lying on the beach, (future progressive lense: ► 41)
Why's she so late7 She can't still be working
2	perfect infinitive: (to) have + past participle
Perfect infinitives can have the same kind of meaning as perfect tenses (► k) or
past tenses (» 44 15).
It's nice to have finished work for the day.
(ะ It’s nice that I have finished ...)
I'm sorry not Io have come on Thursday, (m ... that I didn't come . ..)
We often use perfect infinitives to talk about 'unreal' past events: things that did
not happen, or that may not have happened (► 90).
3	passive infinitive: (to) be + past participle
Passive infinitives have the same kind of meaning as other passive forms (► 57).
There's a lot of work to be done. She ought to be told about it.
That window must be repaired before tonight.
Sometimes active and passive infinitives can have similar meanings, especially
There‘ร a lot of work to do / fo be done
grammar
infinitives: introduction
Infinitives, -ing forms and Past Participles
Section 8
4	combinations: to have been sitting; could have been killed
Perfect progressive and perfect passive infinitives are common
I'd like tn have been fitting there when the walked in.
They were lucky - they could hate been killed
Progressive passive Infinitives are possible but unusual.
■ What would you like to be doing right now? I'd like to be being massaged '
Progressive perfect passive infinitives (e.g. It must hate been being built at the
time) are very unusual.
5	negative forms: Try not to be late.
Negative infinitives are normally made by putting not before the infinitive.
Try not to be late, (not usiwtiv Tty to not be late. OR Try to don t be kite.)
You livre silly not to have locked your car.
He’s very busy. I’m afraid he can’t be disturbed.
6	to
Note that the infinitive marker ro (as in He wanted to go) is not a preposition.
.'Mier the preposition to we use ing forms (► 104.2).
l or the use of ro instead of a whole infinitive (e.g. I'd like to), ► 280.
7	split infinitive: to really understand
A 'split infinitive' is a structure in which to is separated from the rest of the
infinitive by an adverb.
I'd tiki· to really understand philosophy.
He begem to slowly get up off the floor.
Split infinitive structures are quite common in English, especially in an informal
style. There is an old rule which says that split infinitives are incorrect. This is
not true, but people who believe in the rule try to avoid split infinitives by
putting the adverb in another position.
He began slowly to get up off the floor.
90
use of perfect infinitives: glad to have left
1	perfect or past meaning
Perfect infinitives (ro have gone, to have left, etc) can have the same kind of
meaning as perfect or past tenses.
I'm glad to have left school at last. (ะ I'm glad that I have left...)
She was sorry to haiv missed lames. (ะ... that she had missed lames.)
We hope to have finished the job by nett Saturday. (ะ... that we will have
finished ...)
2	perfect infinitive for 'unreal' past
After some verbs (e.g. mean, be, would like), perfect infinitives can refer to
'unreal* past situations that are the opposite of what really happened.
I meant to have telephoned, but I forgot, (os / meant to telephone...)
He was to have been the new ambassador, hut he fell ill.
I would like Io have seen Harry‘ร face when Nadia walked in.
grammar · SO use of perfect infinitives: glad to have left
With would like, would prefer and one or two other verb», a double perfect
infinitive is sometimes used in informal speech; the extra perfect infinitive does
not change the meaning.
I would have liked to have seen Harry's face.
3	modals: He could have killed himself.
After the modal verbs could, might, ought, should, would and needn't (BrE),
perfect infinitives are also often used to refer to unreal situations.
Did you see him fall? He could hair killed himself (He did not kill himself.)
You should have called - I was gelling worried. (The person did not call.)
I would have gone Io university if my parents had had more money.
She needn't have sent me flowers. (BrE) (She did send flowers.)
Modal verbs with perfect infinitives can also refer to situations that arc not
unreal, hut uncertain.
She could should ought to/may will must have arrived by now.
Snr morr detj ะX Mi tbr rnlrfe* foe thr different modal vnbs
91	infinitives without to: I saw you come in.
We usually use to with infinitives (e g. I want to know). But we use the infinitive
without to (sometimes called the bare infinitive') เท some cases.
1	after modal auxiliary verbs
After the modal auxiliary verbs will, shall, would, should, can. could, may, mighi
and must, we use the infinitive without to.
I must go now. (noi I must to go-noW.)	Can you help me?
Do you think she might be joking?	I would rather go alone.
We also use the infinitive without IO after had better (► 77), and sometimes after
dare and need (► 431, 532).
You'd belter see what she wants. I daren't go out al night. (BrE)
She needn't do the washing up.
2	after let, make, hear, etc
Certain verbs expressing perception and causation are followed by object ♦
infinitive without to. They include let, make, see. hear, feel, watch and notice.
She lets her children stay up very late, (soI she lets her thihlren Io stay. ..
OH She lets he· cMdrvn staying. .)
I made them give me the money back.	I didn Ί see you come in.
We both heard him say that he was leaving.	Did you feel lhe earth mote?
Help can also be used in this way (► 483).
Could you help me (to) unload the car?
This structure is also possible with have (► 109) and know (► 504).
Have Mrs Hansen come in. please, (especially AinE)
I've never known him (to) pay for a drink.
เท passive versions of these structures the infinitive with to is used
He was made to pay back lhe money.
She was heard to say dull she disagreed.
fat mb» ihM «I» fcilkmwl b| I*j«i . ΐο-ΙηΑιΜΚν. ► 1"
grammar · 91 infinitives without to: I saw you come in.
Infinitives, -ing forms and Past Participles
Section 8
3	after why (not)
We can introduce questions and suggestions with why (not) ♦ infinitive
without lo. For more details, ► 630.
Why pay more at other shops? We have the lowest prices.
Why stand up if you can sit down? Why sit down if you can lie down?
You're lookinfl tired. Why not take a break?
4	after and, or, except, but, than, as and like
When two infinitive structures are joined by and, or. except, but. than, as or like.
the second is often without to.
I'd like to lie down and sleep.
Do you want to hair lunch now or wait till laterΐ
W'e had nothing to do except look at the sea.
I'm ready to do anything hut work on a farm.
Il's easier to do it yourself than explain to somebody else how to do it.
It's as easy to smile as frown.
I hair to feed the animals as well as look after the children.
Why don't you do something useful like clean the kitchenT
Rather than is usually followed by an infinitive without to.
Rather than wait any more, I decided lo go home by taxi.
5	after do
Expressions like All I did was. What I do is. etc can be followed by an infinitive
without to.
Alt I did was (to) give him a little push.
What a firedoor does is (to) delay the spread of a fire.
The only thing we can do is (to) accept.
92	infinitive as subject or complement
1	subject: To practise is important. / It's important to practise.
An infinitive (or a clause beginning with an infinitive) can be the subject
of a sentence.
To practise regularly is important.
To wait for people who were late made him angry.
เท modern English, this is unusual, and especially unusual in an informal style.
We more often use a structure with it as a preparatory subject (► 266).
It's important to practise regularly.
It made him angry lo wait for people who were late.
We can also use an -ing structure at the beginning of a sentence as the subject,
instead of an infinitive (clause) (► <M).
Selling insurance is a boring job. (More natural than To sell insurance ■..)
2	complement: Your task is to get across the river.
An Infinitive (clause) can be used after be as a subject complement.
Your task is to gel across the river without being seen.
My ambition was to retire al thirty
grammar
Infinitive as subject or complement
Sentences like these can also lie constructed with preparatory it (» 268).
It is your task to gel across the river without being seen.
It was my ambition to retire at thirty.
93	-ing forms: introduction
1	'participles and 'gerunds'
We can use ing forms (e.g. smoking, walking) not only as verbs, but also like
adjectives or nouns. Compare:
You're smoking loo much these days, (verb: part of present progressive)
There was a smoking cigarette end เท the ashtray, (adjective-like: description
of cigarette end)
Smoking is bad for you. (noun like: subject of sentence)
When big forms are used verbally or adjectivally, they are often called 'present
participles'. (This is not a very suitable name, because these forms can refer to
the past, present or future.) When they are used more like nouns, they are often
called 'gerunds'
Before nouns, both noun like ing forms (gerunds) and adjective like ing forms
(participles) can be used. The two structures do not have quite the same kind of
meaning. Compare:
-	a waiting room ( a room for waiting. Waiting is a gerund, used rather like a
noun. Compare a guest room.)
a waiting train (- a train that is waiting. Waiting is a participle, used rather
like an adjective. Compare an early train.)
a sleeping pill (sleeping is a gerund)
a sleeping child (sleeping is a participle)
-	working conditions (gerund)
working men and women (participle)
2	perfect, passive and negative -ing forms
Note the structure of perfect, passive and negative ing forms.
Having slept for twelve hours, I felt marvellous, (perfect)
She loves being looked at. (passive)
Not knowing what to do. I went home, (negative)
Site’s angry about not having been invited (negative perfect passive)
3	’participles’ and 'gerunds': an unclear difference
The distinction between 'participles’ and gerunds' is not always clear-cut, and it
can sometimes be difficult to decide which term to use. For this reason, some
grammarians prefer to avoid the terms 'participle' and 'gerund'. For a detailed
discussion of this point, see Section 17.54 of A Comprehensive Grammar of the
English Language, by Quirk. Greenbaum, Leech and Svartvik (l-ongman, IMS)
เท Practical English Usage the expression -Ng form' is used except when there K
a good reason to use one of the other terms.
For iprllinR at Mirfomn. » XU. 347.
grammar · 93 -ing forms: introduction
Infinitives, -ing forms and Past Participles
Section 8
94	-ing form as subject, object or complement
1	Smoking is bad for you.
An -ing form (gerund) can be used, just like a noun, as the subject or
complement of a verb.
Smoking is bad for you. (subject)
My favourite activity is trading, (complement)
Infinitives (eg. To smoke is bad for you) are possible in these cases, but are
formal and uncommon.
■ing forms can also be used as objects after certain verbs (► 100).
I hate packing, (object)
2	-ing form with its own object
The ing form subject, complement or object is used like a noun, but it is still a
verb and can have its own object.
Smoking cigarettes is bad for you.	My favourite activity is reading thrillers.
3	the opening of Parliament; my smoking
We can often use determiners (for example the. my, this) with ing forms.
the opening of Parliament	Does my smoking annoy you7
I hate all this useless arguing
Possessive ’ร forms are also possible.
lack’s going to sleep during the uedding was rather embarrassing
She was angry al Tina's trying to lie to her.
Subject pronouns are not possible.
His shouting gets on my nerves. (»n NOT He shouting ..)
Note that possessives and pronouns are not used before ing forms if it is
already clear who is being talked about.
I hank you for waiting, (not I hank you for your waiting.)
When an -ing form is used with an article, it cannot usually have a direct object.
Instead, we can use an «/ structure.
the smoking of cigarettes (not the smoking cigarettes)
No is often used with an -ing form to say that something is not allowed, or is
impossible. This often happens in notices and after there is.
NO SMOKING NO PARKING NO WAITING
Sorry - there's no smoking in the waiting room
She's made up her mind: there's no arguing with her.
4	object forms: Do you mind me smoking?
เท an informal style it is more common to use object forms (like me. lack)
instead of possessives (my. lack's) with ing forms, especially when these come
after a verb or preposition.
Do you mind me smoking7
She was angry at Lina lying to her.
After some verbs (e g. see, hear, watch, feel) possessives are not normally used
with ing forms, in formal or informal language.
I saw him getting out of the car. (not I saw his gelling ...)
grammar
■ing form as subject, object or complement
5	It's nice being with you.
We can น*e it a* a preparatory subject or object for an -ing form (► 268-269).
It's nice being with you
I thought it pointless starting before eight o'clock.
I'his is common with any/no good, any/no use and (not) worth (► 631).
It's no good talking to him - he never listens.
Is it any use expecting them to be on time?
It's no use his him apologising - I will never forgive him.
I didn Ί think it worth complaining about the meal
6	nouns and -ing forms
When there is a noun which has a similar meaning to an -ing form, the noun is
usually preferred.
We're all excited about his arrival, (not .. about his arriving )
95	infinitive or -ing form?
Infinitives and ing forms are often used in similar ways. For instance, they can
follow certain verte, adjectives or nouns (► Section 9). Compare:
- He agreed to wait.
He suggested waiting, (not He-suggestedlowuil.)
She's ready to listen.
She's good at listening, (not She‘ร good Io listen.)
the idea of talking (not the idea r» talk)
Unfortunately, there is no easy way to decide which verte, adjectives and nouns
are followed by ing forms, and which arc followed by infinitives. It is best to
check in a good dictionary.
Expressions with -ing forms can be used both as subjects in sentences, or as
complements after be. Infinitives are less common, especially in informal
English. Compare:
Smoking cigarettes can kill you. (More natural than To smoke cigarettes can
kill you.)
My favourite activity is reading thrillers. (More natural than My favourite
activity· is to read thrillers.)
A bad rule
Modems' grammars sometimes say that infinitives are used when the reference
is forward in time, and ing forms in other cases (as in I expected to see Megan;
I enjoyed meeting her parents). Unfortunately, this is not a reliable rule: it's true
when it’s true, but there arc too many exceptions. (Compare I anticipated seeing
her brother, I was sorry not to meet him.)
grammar · 95 infinitive or -ing form?
Infinitives, -ing forms and Past Participles
Section 8
96	participles: -ing and -ed forms used
like adjectives ________
surprised to see you.
parts of verb tenses.
When ing forms are used เท similar ways to adjectives, they are called present
participles'. Forms like broken, sung. opened, started arc called past participles
But note that both forms can be used for the past, present or future.
We were nearly hit by falling rocks.
We haven't got a single working computer in the office.
The house is going to be full of screaming children.
I was taken to hospital with a broken arm.
These cakes are beautifully cooked Daniel will I
(The same terms are used when these forms are used
► Section I).
2	active and passive
When ing forms are used like adjectives, they have similar meanings to
active verbs.
falling leaves t- leaves that fall)
a meat eating animal (- an animal that eats meat)
Most past participles have passive meanings when they are used like adjectives.
a broken heart t- a heart that has been broken)
The house looked abandoned as if it had been abandoned.)
z participles and adjectives: intere$ted and interesting, etc
Some adjectives look like present or past participles (and the difference between
adjectives and participles is not always clear). They are discussed here for
convenience. These adjectives, too. may have an acdvc/passive contrasr For
example, interesting, boring, exciting and confusing have active meanings: they
describe things that interest people, bore them and so on. Interested, bored, etc
have passive meanings: they show how people are made to feel. Compare.
-	The lessen น«ร really interesting
I was very interested in the lesson, (not / MW tvry	in the lew* I
-	It was a terribly boring party.
I did nt enjoy the party because I was bored (not .. heroine I MW )
-	Granny takes the kids to exciting places.	r ..
The kids get excited when Granny comes, (not .. .-We kids gel exciting ...)
-	He's a very confusing writer.
She explained everything, but I was still very confused
(not · ·
4 active past participles: a fallen leaf; advanced students
Some past participles can be used as adjectives with active meanings before
a fallen leaft- a leaf that has fallen)
advanced students	a	retired genera/
developed countries	a collapsed building
increased activity	a grown up daughter
vanished civilisations
grammar . 96 participles: Ing and ed forms used like adjectives
an escaped prisoner
faded colours
swollen ankles
Most of these can be used after be.
She is retired now.	This class is the most advanced
My family are all grown up.	My wrist is swollen.
Those curtains are badly faded
Some others are used after be, but not before nouns.
Why are all those cars stopped at the crossroads' (mil NOT ... -etsiopped-ear) I
I hope you're fully recovered from your operation.
We're camped in the field across the stream.
I’ll be finished in a few minutes.	Those days are gone now.
Sal and stood arc often used like this in informal speech in British English.
When I saw her she was sat on the ground crying.
Why is that man stood in the doorway?
A few past participles are used with active meanings in expressions with
adverbiais but not otherwise.
a much-travelled man recently-arrived immigrants
The train just arrived at platform six is the delayed 13.15 from Hereford.
5	compound structures: English-speaking Canadians
Participles used as adjectives can have objects. Note the word order.
English speaking Canadians, (not speaking-English Canadians.)
a fox-hunting man	Is that watch selfwinding’
Other compound structures with participles are also common before nouns.
quick growing trees	government-inspired rumours
home- made cake	the above-mentioned point
a recently-built house
6	after nouns: the people questioned
We often use participles after nouns in order to define or identify the nouns, in
the same way as we use identifying relative clauses (► 254).
We couldn 't agree on any of the problems discussed. (ะ... the problems that
were discussed.) (not ... the dtíeussecTproblems:)
The people questioned gave very different opinions. (- The people who were
ίοπρύ J /	Tf fit*	I
I watched the match because I knew some of the people playing.
\ Vltt	1 ti/ztumu ik'alilJi* I
I got the only ticket left (พ! ...the only left ticket.)
Ihose is often used with a participle to mean the ones who are,'were’.
Most of those questioned refused to answer.
Those selected will begin training on Monday.
7	differences of meaning
A few participles change (heir meaning according to their position. Compare:
-	a concerned expression (ะ a worried expression)
the people concerned (ะ the people who are/were affected)
an involved explanation (ะ a complicated explanation)
the people involved (ะ the same as the people concerned)
-	an adopted child I a child who is brought up by people who are not his/her
biological parents)
the solution adopted (ะ the solution that is/was chosen)
grammar
participles: -ing and -ed forms used like adjectives
Infinitives, -ing forms and Past Participles
Section 8
8	much admired; very tightened
When a past participle is part of a passive Serb, we can put much or very much
before it, but not very.
He's (very) much admired by his students, (not ... very admired . . .)
Hr Hain'ร trade position has been (very) much weakened by inflation.
(noi t svy ft k Cfft τ/	J
When a past participle is used as an adjective, we usually prefer very. This is
common with words referring to mental states, feelings and reactions.
a very frightened animal (not a math frightened animal)
a very shocked expression	The children were very bored.
She looked very surprised.
Common exceptions:
That'ร Alice, unless Tm (very) much mistaken (not .. ittd™ I'm very
mistaken )
He's well known เท the art world, (not .. . very known ...)
With amused, very and (very) much are both possible.
I was very amused much amused very much amused by Miranda's
performance.
9	frightened by / frightened of
Hy is used after passive verbs to Introduce the agent (the person or thing that
does the action, ► 58),
Most of the damage was caused by your sister.
After past participles that are used like adjectives, we prefer other prepositions.
Compare:
-	She was frightened by a mouse that ran into the room.
(Frightened is pan of a passive verb referring to an action.)
She’s always been terribly frightened of dying.
(Frightened is an adjective referring to a state of mind.)
-	The kids were so excited by the music that they kept screaming
toe's excited about the possibility of going to the States.
-	I K'HI annoyed by the way she spoke to me.
I'm annoyed with you.
-	The burglar was surprised by the family coming home unexpectedly.
I’m surprised at by your attitude.
He was badly shocked by his fall.
We were shocked at by the prices in Ixmdon.
Other examples:
His whereabouts are known to the police.
The hills are covered เท snow. The room was filled with thick smoke.
10	special past participle forms: drunken laughter
A few older forms of past participles are still used as adjectives before nouns in
certain expressions.
drunken laughter singing etc a sunken wreck/ship, etc
a shrunken head	rotten fruit/vegetables, etc
grammar
participles: -ing and -ed forms used like adjectives
Section 9 Infinitives, -ing forms and
Past Participles after
Nouns, Verbs, etc
INTRODUCTION
verb + verb
Infinitive structures can be used after many verbs; structures with -ing forms CM
be used after many others.
I want to stop now. (not / wont stopping now.}
We enjoyed visiting Edinburgh, (not เพ· enjoyed to W»M Edinburgh.)
Some verbs can also be followed by object ♦ infinitive or object · ing form.
I expected him to say something.
jack didn't hear me calling him.
After some verbs, more than one of these structures is possible, sometimes with
a difference of meaning.
I don't remember seeing her before.
Hemember to buy coffee.
After some verbs (e.g. get, have, hear), structures with past participles and
passive meanings are also possible.
IVe had our car broken into.
I've just seen a man arrested
structures after nouns, adjectives and prepositions
Many nouns and adjectives can also be followed by structures with infinitives,
and many by preposition » ing.
the need to invest
an excuse for leaving
happy to see you
worried about getting old
Unfortunately, there is no good way of knowing which verbs, nouns and
adjectives are followed by which kind of structure. The more important cases are
dealt with in tills Section; if in doubt, check in a good dictionary.
Note that prepositions are always followed by -ing forms.
She left without saying goodbye, (not ... without to say goodbye.)
grammar · Section 9 Infinitives, ing forms and Past Participles after Nouns, Verbs, etc
Do you know what's wrong with these, and why?
G I enjoy IO sail. ► 97
G We don't expect that you stay. ► 98
Ο I suggested her to go home. ► 98
G He's finished to repair the car. ► 100.1
G Cricket is not very interesting to watch it. ► 101.-I
G Iron is easy to rust. · 101.4
G The thought to fail never entered his head. ► 103.1
G Always check the oil before to start the car. ► 104.)
G I look forward to hear from you. ► 104.2
Ο I forgot buying the soap. ► 105.1
G I wouldn't advise to take the car. ► 105.4
G I slowly began understanding how she felt ► 105.10
G Responsible managers never stop to question their decisions. ► 105.12
G Susan was nowhere to find. ► 106.2
G 1 made her crying. ► 107.1
G I can’t make work the washing machine. ►107.1
G I can make myself understand in Japanese. ► 107.2
G The rain made wet the grass. ► 107.3
G You have made me be a happy man. ► 107.3
G I must have repaired my watch. ► 109.2
G I saw Emily's crossing the road. ► 110.2
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
97	infinitives after verbs:
It's beginning to rain.
98	verb · object « infinitive:
I want you to listen.
99	try and.... go and.... etc
too -Ing forms after verbs:
I enjoy travelling.
101	infinitives after adjectives:
102	infinitives after nouns and
pronouns: my decision to leave
103	ing forms after nouns and
adjectives: tired o/ listening
104	ing forms after prepositions:
without breaking eggs
105	infinitives or ing forms: both
possible with difierent uses
106	active and passive infinitive with
similar meaning
107	causative structures with make
108	causative and similar structures
with get
109	causative and similar structures
with have
110	hear. see. etc · object '
verb form
grammar · Section 9 Infinitives, -ing forms and Past Participles after Nouns, Verbs, etc
97	infinitives after verbs: It's beginning to rain.
After many non-auxihary verbs, we can use the infinitives of other verbs.
It’s beginning Io rain.
I don't want to see you again.
She seems to be crying.
I expect to have finished by tomorrow evening.
The car needs to be cleaned.
Common verbs that can be followed by infinitives (for more detailed entries on
some of these, sec the Index):
afford	begin care	fail forget	intend learn	prefer prepare	Start
appear	choose	go on	like	pretend	swear
arrange	consent	happen	tow	propose	trouble
ask	continue	hate	manage	promise	try
attempt	dare	help	mean	refuse	leant
(can't) bear	decide	hesitate	neglect	regret	wish
beg	expect	hope	offer	remember	
Some of these verbs can be followed by object · infinitive (c.g. I want her to hr
happy), f or details, ► W. A few verbs are followed by verb ♦ for · object +
Infinitive (e.g. I arranged for her to have violin lessons). For details
of these, ► 113.7.
After some verbs we can use not only an infinitive but also an -Ing form
(sometimes with a difference of meaning). For details, ► 105.
After some verbs, it is not possible to use an infinitive. Many of these can be
followed by ing forms (► แห)).
I enjoy sailing (not I enjoy to sad.)
2 ร ?
perfwi inflow Iv·* à' ml. ร «เ ,07 ha.. - loflnlrn* (c 11 florr to *n «»·). · ?4.
br · infinitive (or tou tut to 1 tart tomorrow). » 42.
iMonnailon About the structure* thM are poitiblc Mtch แ (Mf htula tert*, m A good diet locai \
98	verb + object + infinitive: / want you
to listen.
Many verbs are followed by object * infinitive.
I want you to listen.
With some verbs (e.g. u/ant. allow), a that clause is impossible.
She didn’t want me logo. (v<n She didn't want that I go.)
They don't allow people to smoke, (vol They d'rtf I «How that people smoke 1)
I didn't ask you to pay for the meal, (not I didn't ask that you pay for
grammar · 97 infinitives after verbs: It's beginning to rain
Infinitives, -ing forms and Past Participles after Nouns, Verbs, etc
Section 9
Some common verbs (hat can lx- followed by object ♦ infinitive:
allow
ask
(can't) bear
command
compel
encourage
expect
forbid
get (also ► 108)
help (also ► 483)
instruct
intend
invite
leave
like
love
mean
need
oblige
order
permit
recommend
remind
request
teach
tell
tempt
trouble
leant
wish (also ► 632)
Let, make, see, hear, feel, natch, notice, have, and sometimes know and help, arc
followed by object * infinitive without to (► 91).
Why won’t you let me explain?	I heard her open the door and go out.
Some verbs cannot be followed by object » infinitive; for example suggest.
I suggested that she should go home, (not เ suggested her to go home.)
Many of the verbs listed above can also be followed by other structures such as
an ing form or a r/mr clause. For complete information, see a good dictionary.
รัรัรั

object ♦ to hr ♦ complement iftef verb* of chinking and fr
99	try and..go and.... etc
1	try/be sure / wait and...
We often use and__instead of to after try / be sure. This is informal.
Try and ear something - you’ll feel belter if you do.
I'll try and phone you tomorrow morning.
He sure and ask Unde loe about his garden.
Note also the common expression Wait and see.
‘What'sfor lunchr Wait and see.·
We only use this structure with the simple base forms try / be sure / wait. It is
not possible, for example, with tries, trying, was sure or waited. Compare:
I try and keep a straight face when he talks, but I can't help smiling
She tries to keep a straight face... (not She tries and keeps ...)
Try and eat something.
I tried to eat something (not I tried ami ale something.)
พ.' waited to see what would happen, (not We waited and saw,..)
2	come!go, etc and...
Come and.... go and.... run and____ hurry up and____ stay and... arc
often used informally.
Come and hate a drink. Stay and have dinner. Hurry up and open the door.
With these verbs, the structure is not only used with the base form.
He often comes and spends the evening with us.
She stayed and played with the children.
She thought of going and getting him.	-*
grammar
try and.... go and..., etc
3	American English
In informal American English, and is sometimes dropped after lhe base forms9
and come.
Let ■ร go tee If Anne’s home	(io jump in the river.	Come sit on my lap
100	-ing forms after verbs: / enjoy travelling.
1	verbs that can be followed by -ing forms
After some verbs we can use an -ing form (gerund), but not normally
an infinitive.
/ enjoy travelling, (χοτ / enjoy to fraveL)
He's finished repairing the car. (not He's finished IO repair...)
She's given up smoking, (not .. . given up Io smoke)
The doctor suggested taking a long rest, (not Ihedoelor suggested to lake ...)
Some common verbs that are normally followed by -ing forms
admit	dislike	up	practise
appreciate	endure	(can't) help	put off
avoid	enjoy	imagine	resent
hurst out (crying/ escape		involve	resist
laughing)	excuse	keep (on)	risk
consider	face	leave off	(can't) stand
contemplate	fancy	mention	suggest
delay	feel like	mind	understand
deny	finish	miss	
detest	forgive	postpone	
Some verbs can be	followed by both -ing forms and infinitives		(► 100.1 bek
Unfortunately, there is no easy way to decide which structures are possible after
a particular verb. It is best to check in a good dictionary,
2 verb + object + -ing form: I dislike people telling me ...
Some of the verbs listed above, and some others, can be followed by
object * -ing form.
I dislike people telling me what to think.
I can Ί imagine him working in an office.
Nobody can stop him doing what he wants to.
He spends all his time gardening.
I caught the next-door children stealing my apples.
We found a dead mouse lying on the kitchen fioor.
Slop (in an informal style) and prevent are often followed by object * from ♦
Try to slop prevent them (from) finding out
Note that after many verbs we can use possessive * -ing form rather than
object · ing form, especially in a formal style. (► 94.3 for details.)
grammar · too ing forms after verbs: I enjoy travelling
Infinitives, -ing forms and Past Participles after Nouns, Verbs, etc
Section 9
3	-ing form with passive meaning: Your hair needs cutting.
After deserve, need and require, the -ing form has ล passive sense. This structure
is more common in British than American English.
I don't think his article deserves reading (ะ... deserves to be read.)
Your hair needs culling. (ะ... needs to be cut.)
เท informal British English, want can also be used like this.
The car wants servicing. (ะ... needs to be serviced.)
4	-ing form or infinitive
After some verbs, either an -ing form or an infinitive can be used. These include:
advise	forbid	hear	prefer	start
allow	forget	intend	propose	stop
can’t bear	go	like	refçrei	lry ,
begin	go on	love	remember	watch
continue	hate	permit	see	
some cases	(here is a difference of meaning: ►		105, no.	
101	infinitives after adjectives: pleased to
see you
1	reactions and feelings: pleased to see you
Infinitives are often used after adjectives describing reactions and feelings.
I'm pleased to see you. We're happy to he here. She's anxious to go home,
lack was surprised to gel Anna's message.
I was shocked to see how ill he น«ร.
Most people are afraid to hear the truth about themselves.
Not all adjectives of this kind are followed by infinitives Some are followed by
preposition »- -ing form (► 103), or by àr clauses (► 192). Some adjectives
(e g. afraid, jure) can be followed by either an infinitive or an -ing form, often
with a difference of meaning: for details, ► 105.13-105.16.
for Uruclw·· with/o' (r r ร*»'· auiomfor th, Mdrrn l/เ pi hunt). · IIX
2	Other adjectives: certain to win
Besides adjectives referring to reactions and feelings, many other adjectives can
be followed by infinitives. Examples: right, wrong, stupid, certain (► 105.15),
welcome, careful, due, fit, able (► B5), likely (► 516), lucky.
We were right to start early.	Re careful not to wake the children.
I was stupid to believe him. It's very likely to rain.
She's certain to win.	You were lucky not Io be killed.
You're welcome to stay as long as you like.
For structure mth preparatory น (<· K It 11 Importa*! to fpt rnaufft slrrpL ► 2ΛΚ.
3	superlatives, etc: the oldest athlete to win ...
Superlatives can be followed by an infinitive structure, (he meaning is similar to
an identifying relative clause (► 234).	-4
grammar - 101 infinitives after adjectives: pleased to see you
He ร the oldest athlete ever to win an Olympic gold medal. (ะ... who lias
ever won ...)
This structure is also common with first, second, third, etc, next, last and only.
Who was the first person to climb Everest without oxygen'
lhe next to arrive was Mrs Patterson.
She's the only scientist to have won three Nobel prizes.
This structure is only possible when the superlative has a subject relationship
with the infinitive.
Is this the first time that you have stayed here? (not .. che-ftrsHime-f&rymrie
Stoy here. Time is not the subject of stay.)
4	easy to please
Some adjectives can be used with infinitives in a special structure, เท which the
subject of the clause is really the object of lhe infinitive. Examples are easy, hard,
difficult, impossible, good, ready, and adjectives after enough and too.
He's easy to please, l To please him is easy. OH It is easy to please him.)
Japanese is difficult for Europeans to learn. ( It is difficult for Europeans to
learn Japanese.)
His theory is impossible to understand. (ะ II Is Impossible to understand his
theory.)
Are these berries good to eat?	The apples were ripe enough to pick.
The report is ready for you to check.	The box was too heavy to lift.
The structure often ends with a preposition (► 209,5).
She's nice to talk to. He's very easy to gel on with.
It's not a bad place IO live in.
There is no object pronoun after the infinitive or preposition in these cases.
Cricket is nol very interesting to watch, (not < ritkt-itrnoieeryinfertsfmgi'i
watekit)
Gtp’c fn tiili til (VÍYT	»	to txxl 1·	J1..M ไ
When the adjective is before a noun, the infinitive is usually after the noun.
It’s a good wine to keep, (not ft's a good to keep wine.)
Easy, difficult and impossible cannot be used in this structure when the subject
of the clause is the subject of the following verb.
She has difficulty learning maths (not พัพ is difficult tolearwatotíts.)
Iron rusts easily, (not Iron is easy rust)
This material cant possibly catch fire, (not I hrs material ท impossible Io
catch fire.)
Rm more about enough roo - J lectio . Inflnlil.r - 450. (.10.
Rm tn . adfctlhe . Inflniine (eg. Would you hr IO hind <» to http ทน'I » 581.8.
X" InlorrniiUxi about lhe unxturn dial are priMiNe Willi Λ prrtiéuhr .•ง)«เทe. see 0 Rood dictionary.
102	infinitives after nouns and pronouns:
my decision to leave
1 nouns related to verbs: no wish to change
We can use infinitives after some nouns which are related to verbs that can be
followed by infinitives (e.g. wish, decide, need).
grammar ·
102
infinitives after nouns and pronouns:
my decision
to leave
Infinitives, -ing forms and Past Participles after Nouns, Verbs,
Section 9
I have no wish Io change. (•ะ I do not wish (0 change.)
I told her about my decision to leave. (= I told hei that I had decided
to leave.)
is there any need to ask JasmineI (= Do we need to ask Jasmine?)
N'oi all nouns can be followed by infinitives in this way.
I hate the thought of getting old. (wr ... the thought Io get old )
And note that not all related verbs and nouns are followed by the same
structures. Compare:
-	I hope to arrive.
There’s no hope of arriving.
-	She prefers to live alone.
I understand her preference for living alone.
I do not intend to return.
I hair no intention of returning.
Unfortunately, there is no easy way to decide which structures are possible after
a particular noun. It is best to check เท a good dictionary.
2	nouns related to adjectives: You were a fool to agree.
We can also use infinitives after some nouns which are related to adjectives,
or which have an adjectival sense.
You were afoot to agree, l- You were foolish to agree.)
What a nuisance to have to go! l- flow annoying to have to go!)
It's a pleasure to see you again. ( It's pleasant to see you again.)
3	purpose: a key to open the door
Art infinitive can be used after a noun, or an indefinite pronoun like something.
to explain the purpose of a particular thing: what it does, or what somebody
docs with it. 1 he noun or pronoun can be like the subject of the infinitive.
Hair you got a key lo open this doofl (The key will open the door.)
It was a war to end all wars. I’d like something to stop my toothache.
The noun or pronoun can also be like the object of the infinitive.
I need some more books lo read. (I will read the books.)
Is there any milk to put on the corn/lakes?
Did you tell her which bus lo take'! Is there anything lo drink'
If the noun or pronoun is the object of the infinitive, we do not add an object
pronoun after the infinitive.
I gave her a paper lo read. (Nor.. a paper to read it)
He needs a place to live เท. (not .. . a place to live in It.)
Some:any/nowhere can also be followed by infinitives.
The kids want somewhere to practise their music.
4	enough, too much, etc
Quantifiers like enough, too much.'many/little, few, plenty, etc are often followed
by noun * infinitive.
There was enough light lo see U'haf I was doing.
There's loo much snow (for us) lo be able lo drive.
We’ve got plenty of time to sec the British Museum.
Enough is often dropped before room and time.
There's hardly (enough) room lo breathe เท here.
Do you think we ll have (enough) time to do some shoppingI
grammar · 102 infinitives after nouns and pronouns: my decision to
5	infinitive with preposition: a friend to play with
A noun can be followed by Infinitive · preposition
Emily needs a friend to play with.	Jhey're looking for a room to meet in
เท a very formal style, another structure is possible: noun ♦ preposition ·
whom/which · Infinitive.
Emily needs a friend with whom to play.
They're looking for a room in which to meet
Ibis is not possible when there Is no preposition. One cannot say, for example,
6	the life to come, etc
In expressions like the life to come ( life after death), the world Io come, his utft
to be l- his future wife), the infinitive has a future meaning, and is similar to a
relative clause with he (« the life/world that is to come. etc).
|M»ivr inIMM· (» g lhm > uM to Iw	» !«
for - oti|e<( · Infimtlvr (rg.il iSr-r any nerd for U1 to >MyO. · HIS.

103	-ing forms after nouns and adjectives:
tired of listening
1	the idea of getting old; tired of listening
Some nouns and adjectives can be followed by -ing forms. A preposition IS
normally used to connect the noun/adjcctive to the ing form. Nouns/adjectives
that are followed by -ing forms cannot usually be followed by infinitives
(► 105.11, 105.13 105.16 for some exceptions with adjectives).
I hate the idea of getting old. (not ... the idea Io get old.)
The thought of failing never entered his head, (not lhe thought tofad...)
I'm tired of listening to this, (not I'm tired to listen ...)
She's very good at solving problems, (not ... good to solve...)
Unfortunately, there is no easy way to decide which nouns and adjectives can I*
followed by -ing forms. It is best to check in a good dictionary.
2	purpose: a machine for cutting
Eor ♦ ing form can be used after a noun, or after an indefinite pronoun such as
something or anything, to explain the purpose of an object or material what it
is for.
A strimmer is a machine for cutting grass and weeds.
Have you got any stufffor cleaning silver?
I need something for killing flies.
This structure is mostly used to talk in general about types of object and
material. When we talk about somebody’s purpose in using a particular object,
we are more likely to use an infinitive (► 168.2).
I must find something to kill that fly.
grammar · 103 -Ing forms after nouns and adjectives: tired õf listening
Infinitives, -ing forms and Past Participles after Nouns, Verbs, etc
Section 9
3	-ing form or infinitive
After a (csv nouns and adjectives, we can use either an -ing form or an infinitive.
Normally there is little or no difference of meaning (► 105.13-105.16 for some
exceptions with adjectives).
We haw a good chance o/ making - to make a profit.
I'm proud of having won / to have won.
104	-ing forms after prepositions: without
breaking eggs ___________
1	after all prepositions
When we put a verb after a preposition, we normally use an ing form (gerund),
not an infinitive.
You ain't make an omelette without breaking eggs, (not ... without to
bfetik I^çt I
Always check the oil before starting the car. (not ... before to start the car.)
Wt got the job finished by working sixteen hours a day.
He's talking about moving to the country.
I like to cycle to work instead of driving (sot... instead น· drive...)
2	to as a preposition: / look forward to .. .ing
To is actually two different words. It can be an infinitive marker, used to show
that the next word is an Infinitive (e g. to swim, to laugh). It can also be a
preposition, followed for example by a noun (e g. She's gone to the park, I look
forward to Christmas).
When to is a preposition, it can be followed by the ing form of a verb, but not
normally by the infinitive. Common expressions in which this happens are look
forward to. object to, be used to. prefer (doing one thing to doing another),
gel round to, เท addition to.
เท the following examples, note how the preposition to can be followed by either
a noun or an tng form.
-	I look forward to your next email
I look forward to hearing from you. (not ...น· hear from you.)
-	Do you object to Sunday workI
Do you object to working on Sundays?
-	I'm not used to London traffic.
I’m not used to driving in London.
-	I prefer the seaside to the mountains.
I prefer swimming to walking.
-	I’ll get round to the bills sooner or later.
I'll get round to Ilaying the bills sooner or later.
A few verbs and adjectives arc used with to before nouns, but are followed by
the infinitives of verbs. Examples are agree, consent, entitled, inclined, prone.
She agreed to our plan / She agreed to do what เพ wanted.
He's inclined to anger. / He's inclined to lose his temper.
Accustomed can be followed by to ♦ ing form or an infinitive (► 105.11).	■*
grammar · 104 ing forms after prepositions: without breaking eggs
3 object + infinitive after for: for her to arrive
Note that some verbs are followed by for ♦ object * infinitive. An -ing form is
not usually possible in these cases.
We're still waiting for her to arrive, (not ... waning for her arriving,)
Can you arrange for US to get tickets? (.NOT.. .for our getting tickets?)
lor the tMlnentc bcnwcn ■นrd M . taltnldve Jiul hr utrd เท · iflf farm ► fl?.
For -togfarm ■ท·r conjunction· (c It tstirn plannmg a lap 1» แร»
105	infinitives or -ing forms: both possible with
different uses
Some verbs and adjectives can be followed by either ing forms or infinitives
(► 100.4).
I started playing / ro play the violin when I was to.
She was proud of having to have won
With some of these verbs and adjectives, there is a difference of meaning.
1	remember and forget
Remember/forget ♦ -ing form looks back at the past - at things that one did.
Forget.. .ing is used mostly เท the phrase I'll never forget.. ing and
expressions with similar meanings.
I still remember buying my first bicycle.
I 'll never forget meeting the Queen.
Remember,forget » infinitive looks forward in time - at things that one still hi
or still had to do at the moment of remembering or forgetting.
you must remember to fetch Mr Lewis from the station tomorrow.
I forgot to buy the soap.
2	go on
(io on t -ing form means ‘continue’.
•She went on talking about her illness until u>e all went to sleep.
Go on · Infinitive refers to a change of activity.
She Slopped talking about that and went on to describe her other problems.
3	regret
Regret ' -ing form looks back at the past - at something that one is sorry that
one did.
I regret leaving school at 16 - It was a big mistake.
Regret · infinitive is used mostly in announcements of bad news.
We regret to inform passengers that the hl. so train is one hour late.
พ·· regret to say that we are unable to help you.
grammar · 105 Infinitives or -ing forms: both possible with different
Infinitives, -ing forms and Past Participles after Nouns, Verbs,
Section 9
4	advise, allow, permit and forbid
เท active clauses after these verbs, we use an -/ng form if there is no object.
If there is an object we normally use an infinitive. Compare:
-	I wouldn’t advise taking the car - there's nowhere to park.
I wouldn't advise you to lake the car...
We don 't allow permit smoking in the lecture room.
We don't allow permit people to smoke เท the lecture room.
I he headmistress has forbidden singing in the corridors.
The headmistress has forbidden children to sing...
Note the corresponding passive structures.
Smoking is not allowed, permitted in the lecture room.
People are not allowed, permitted to smoke เท the lecture room.
Singing is forbidden.
Children are forbidden to sing.
-	tarty reservation is advised.
Passengers are advised to reserve early.
5	see, watch and hear
After these verbs, the difference between object · ing form and object ·
infinitive is like the difference between progressive and simple tenses. With
■ing forms the verbs suggest that one pays attention to events or actions that are
already going on; infinitives usually refer to complete events'actions which are
seen'heard from beginning to end. (Note that these verbs are followed by the
infinitivo without to.) Compare:
-	I looked out of the window and saw Emily crossing the road.
I saw Emily cross the road and disappear into the bank.
-	As I passed his house I heard him practising the piano.
I once heard Brendel play all the Beethoven concertos.
To talk about doing something to see what will happen, we use try < ing.
I tried sending her flowers, writing her letters, giving her presents, but she still
wouldn't speak to me.
To talk about making an effort to do something difficult, we can use either
try i infinitive or try - ing.
I tried to change the wheel, hut my hands were loo cold. (<m I tried changing
the wheel...)
7	mean
Mean in the sense of ‘involve’, have as a result’ (► 526) can be followed by an
■ing form.
If you want to pass the exam, it will mean studying hard.
เท the sense of'intend', mean is followed by an infinitive.
I don't think she means to get married for the moment.
8	learn and teach
These verbs (and others with similar meanings) are followed by ing forms
mostly when we are referring to lessons or subjects of study.
She goes to college twice a week to team coding.
Mr Garland teaches skiing in the winter.
grammar · 105 infinitives or -ing forms: both possible with different uses
Infinitives are preferred when we talk about the result of the study - about
successfully learning a skill.
Site learned Io read German at school, but she learned to speak it
ill Germany.
I taught myself to code.
9	like, love, hate and prefer
After these four verbs, both infinitives and ing forms can often be used without
a great difference of meaning.
I hale working to work at weekends.
I don't get up on Sundays. I prefer staying / to stay in bed.
Like + infinitive เร used to talk about choices and habits. Compare:
I like climbing to climb mountains. (Like - 'enjoy': both forms possible)
Mien I pour tea I like to put the milk in first. (Like· 'choose': Infinitive
more natural)
Hate · infinitive can be used to introduce unwelcome news.
I hate to tell you this, but we're going to miss the train.
After would like, would prefer, would hate and would love, infinitives are most
often used
I’d like to tell you something, (not I'd like telling you something.)
‘Can I give you a liftr 'No thanks. I'd prefer to walk:
(VAY	/	)
· ■ · · J/r% 1% > πιιιπιίΚ. /
Compare:
Do you like dancingI l- l>o you enjoy dancing?)
Would you like to dance? (= Do you want to dance now?)
10	begin and start
begin and start can be followed by infinitives or -ing forms. Usually there is no
important difference.
She began playing to play the guitar when she was six.
He started talking to talk about golf and everybody went out of the room.
After progressive forms of begin and start, infinitives are preferred.
I'm beginning to learn karate, (not I'm beginning learning karate.)
Infinitives are also preferred with understand, realise and know.
I slowly began to understand how she felt, (not .. began under standing ..)
He started to realise that if you wanted to eat you had to work.
11	attempt, intend, continue, can't bear, be accustomed to, be
committed to
After these words and expressions we can generally use either an ing form or an
infinitive without much difference of meaning.
I intend telling to tell her what I think.
I'm not accustomed to giving give personal Information about myself
to strangers.
grammar · 105 infinitives or ing forms: both possible with different use*
Section 9
Infinitives, -ing forms and Past Participles after Nouns, Verbs, etc
12	-ing form or infinitive of purpose: stop
Some verbs that are followed by ing forms can also be followed by an infinitive
of purpose (► 112). A common example is stop. Compare:
I stopped running, (not .. . I sifippcd-Ur+aft)
I stopped to rest. (ะ... in order to rest.)
13	afraid
Io talk about fear of things that happen accidentally, we prefer afraid of · -ing.
I don't like to drive fast because I'm afraid of crashing.
'Why are you so quietT ‘I'm afraid of waking the children.'
เท other cases we can use afraid of * -ing or afraid · infinitive with no
difference of meaning.
I'm not afraid of telling / to tell her the truth.
14	sorry
Sorry fori about · -ing is used to refer to past things that one regrets.
(Thar'clauses are also very common in an informal style.)
I'm sorry for about losing my temper this morning. (o« I'm sorry that I lost
my temper.)
Sorry · perfect infinitive (more formal) can be used with the same meaning.
I’m sorry to have woken you up. (o* I'm sorry that I woke you up.)
Sorry ' infinitive is used to apologise for current situations - things that one is
doing or going to do, or that one has just done.
Sorry to disturb you - could I speak to you for a moment?
I'm sorry to tell you that you failed the exam.
Sorry to keep you waiting - we can start now.
15	certain and sure
Certain!sure of · -ing are used to refer to the feelings of the person one is
talking about.
Before the game she felt certain of winning, but after a few minutes she
realised II พนรท Ί going to be so easy.
You seem very sure of passing the exam. I hope you're right.
Certain!sure » infinitive refer to the speaker's or writer’s own feelings.
The repairs arc certain to cost more than you think, (not The repairs are
terluH of costing...)
Kroft ova's sure to win the other girl hasn't got a chance. (ะ Ί am sure she
will win )
16	interested
To talk about reactions to things one learns, interested « infinitive is commonly
used.
I was Interested to read in the paper that scientists hate found out how to talk
to whales.
I'm interested to see that Mice and lake arc going out together
I shall be interested to see how long it lasts.
To talk about a wish to find out something, both Interested in ♦ ing and
interested « infinitive are common.
I'm interested in finding out to find out what she did with all that money. -»
grammar . 103 infinitives or ing forms: both possible with different uses
Aren't you interested เท knowing to know whether I’m pregnant?
To talk about a wish to do something, we นพ interested in with an ing form.
I'm interested เท working in Switzerland. Do you know anybody who could
help mef (noi I'm interested to work in Swdterland ..)
106	active and passive infinitive with
similar meaning
1	obligation
We can use noun t infinitive to talk about obligation things that people have
to do. Active and passive infinitives are often both possible.
There's a lot of work to do to lie done
Give me the names of the people to contact to be contacted.
The people to interview / to be interviewed are in the next room.
We prefer active infinitives if we are thinking more about the person who will do
the action.
I’ve got work to do. (not / พ gtrí work IO be done.)
They've sent Megan a form to complete.
We use passive infinitives if we are thinking more about the action, or the
person, thing that the action is done to.
The carpets to be cleaned arc in the garage, (not The carpets Io dean ...)
dis desk is covered with forms to be filled in.
After be, we normally use passive infinitives.
These sheets are to be washed, (not These sheets are io wash.)
This form is to be filled in เท ink. (not Thhform^s to fill เท...)
The cleaning is to be finished by midday, (not ... is to finish ..)
2	to be seenlfound/congratulated, etc
Note the expressions anywhere,· nowhere to be seen:found.
He wasn't anywhere to bi· seen. (NOT .. .^nywhere^o^eei)
Susan was nowhere to he found, (not ... nowhere io find.)
We also use passive infinitives IO express value judgements with verbs like
congratulate, encourage, avoid.
You are to be congratulated, (not ... 40 congratulate.)
This behaviour is to he encouraged.
But note the common expression to blame, meaning 'responsible’ (for some
unfortunate event).
Nobody was to blame for the accident.
3	nothing to do and nothing to be done1 etc
Note the difference between nothing to do and nothing to be done.
I'm bored - there's nothing to do. (“ There are no entertainments.)
There's nothing to be done - we'll have to buy a new one. (- There's no way
of putting it right.)
LZL
grammar · 106 active and passive infinitive with similar meaning
Infinitives, -ing forms and Past Participles after Nouns, Verbs, etc
Section 9
107	causative structures with make
1	object + infinitive
After make + object, we use the infinitive without w (» 91).
I made her cry. (not / modi* her (•ทุ*. OH I ทHtdedwr crying.)
Note that the infinitive must follow the object.
I can't make the washing machine work, (not / (MH f make work I hr
washing machine.)
In passive structures the infinitive with to is used.
She was made to repeat the whole story.
2	make oneself understood1 etc
In a few cases make can be followed by myself, yourself, etc, and a past
participle. The structure is common with understood and heard.
I don't speak good Japanese, but I can make myself understood.
(not . . ■ make myself understand.)
She had to shout to make herself heard.
3	with object + object complement: make people welcome, etc
We can talk about an effect or change with make + object + adjective/noun
(► 10).
She made everybody welcome.
The rain made the grass wet. (not The rain made wet the grass.)
We do not use make ... be in this Struf^2y„TOM have made me be a happy man.)
You have made me a happy man. (\< H You hats· made mr he a happy man )
For other structures with make and the difference between make and do, ► 435.
108	causative and similar structures with get______
1	causative: Don't get him talking.
Get + object + . . .ing means 'make somebody/something start . . .ing’.
Don't get him talking about his illnesses.
Once we got the heater going the car started to warm up.
2	causative: Get Penny to help us.
Get + object + infinitive means ‘make somebody/something do something' or
'persuade somebody/something to do something': there is often an idea of
difficulty.
I can't get that child to go to bed. Get Penny to help US if you can.
See if you can get the car to start.
For have + object + infinitive (meaning 'order/instruct somebody to do something'), ►109.1.	-j
grammar · 108 causative and similar structures with get
3	causative: get something done
Get ♦ object » past participle can mean 'cause something to be done by
somebody else'. The past participle has a passive meaning.
I must get my watch repaired (- I want my watch to be repaired.)
I'm going to get my hair cut this afternoon.
Have is used in a similar structure. ► 109.2.
4	experience: We got our roof blown off.
Get' object past participle can sometimes be used เท the sense of
‘experience'.
Ift got our roof blown off in the storm last week.
litis idea is more often expressed with have (e.g. IMr had our roof blown off).
► 109.4
5	Get the children dressed.
We can also use get ·» object * past participle to talk about completing work or.
something.
It will take me another hour to get the washing done.
After you've got the children dressed, can you make the beds?
109	causative and similar structures with have
Have can be followed by object » infinitive (without to), object ♦ ing, anti
object ♦ past participle.
1	causative, have somebody dofdoing something
Have ’ object · infinitive can mean 'cause somebody to do something'. Ihis is
mostly used in American English, to talk about giving instructions or orders.
I'm ready to see Mr Smith. Have him come in. please.
The manager had everybody fill out a form.
The structure with an ing form can mean ‘cause somebody to be doing
something’ (BrE and AmE).
He had US laughing all through the meal.
For gel · object . infinitive (meaning ‘persuade somebody, something to do
something·). ► 108.2.
2	causative: have something done
Have ♦ object · past participle can mean ‘cause something to be done by
somebody else'. Ihe past participle has a passive meaning.
I must have my watch repaired. (= I want my watch to be repaired.)
I'm going to have my hair cut this afternoon. (- I want my hair to be cut.)
If you don Ί gel out of my house I'll have you arrested
Get is used in a similar structure, ► 108.3.
3	experience: have something happenlhappening
เท the structure have + object ♦ infinitive/___ing, have can mean 'experience'.
I had a very strange thing happen to me when I was fourteen.
We had a lax inspector come to the office yesterday.
grammar · 109 causative and similar structures with
Section 9
Infinitives, -ing forms and Past Participles after Nouns, Verbs, etc
It's lovely to have children playing in the garden again.
I	looked up and found we had water dripping through the ceiling.
Note the difference between the infinitive in the first two examples (for things
that happened), and the ing form in the last two (for things that are/wcre
happening). This is like the difference between simple and progressive
tenses (► 3.2).
4	experience: We had our roof blown off.
Have . object * past participle can also be used in the sense of 'experience'.
Again, the past participle has a passive meaning.
We had our roof blown off เท the storm.
I had my car stolen last week.
5	I won't have ...
I won't have ♦ object · verb form can mean I won't allow ..
I won't have you telling me what to do.
I won't have my house turned into a hotel.
110	hearLsee, etc + object + verb form
1 I heard him go/going.
Hear, see, watch, notice and similar verbs of perception can be followed by
object ' infinitive (without to) or object + ing form.
I heard him go down the stairs. OR I heard him going down the stairs.
(frOT / hi/H ttVflí (lotion /\ltiin )
There is often a difference of meaning. After these verbs, an infinitive suggests
that wc hear or sec the whole of an action or event; an -ing form suggests that
we hear or see something in progress, going on. Compare:
I saw her cross the road. (ะ I saw her cross it from one side to the other.)
I saw her crossing the road. (= I saw her in the middle, on her way across.)
I once heard him give a talk on lapanese politics.
As I walked past his room I heard him talking on the phone.
-	Watch me jump over the stream.
I like to watch people walking in the street.
-	/ heard the bomb explode. (not Uteard-fhe-bomb exploding.)
I saw the book lying on the table, (not I tow the booh Me...)
Λ progressive form can suggest repetition.
I saw her throwing stones al the other children.
■After can รท·.'hear (which refer to actions and events that are in progress. ► H4),
only the ing structure is used.
I could see lack getting on the bus. (not I eotdd-see lack get. ..)
These structures can be used after passive forms of hear and see. เท this case, the
infinitive has to.
He was never heard to say 'thank you' in his life. (not Me was never
lustice must not only be done; it must be seen to be done.
She was seen walking away from the accident.
Passive forms of watch and notice are not used in this way.	-»
grammar - 110
object · verb form
2	possessive* not used
After these verbs, possessive* cannot be used with -ing forms.
I saw Chloe talking to Mia. (not	Miking to Mia )
3	I heard my name repeated.
เท this structure, the past participle has a passive meaning.
I heard my name repeated several times. (= My name was repeated.)
Hate you ever seen a television thrown through a window?
The idea of 'action or event in progress' can be given by a progressive form
(being ' past participle).
As I watched the tree being cut down ...
I woke up to hear the bedroom door being opened slowly.
4	Look at him eating!
Look at can be followed by object · -ing form, and เท American English also by
object . infinitive.
Look at him eating!	Inok al him eat! (AmE)
rw mot» about -r<๖เ that can be foUo-ed tn both inffniUve·. and -ιηχ (οπήν. . IOS.
Ftx the difference between hnv and Hum. ► Ml.	for we. loot and 1«พ»!, » 575.
grammar · 110 hear, see, etc , object ' verb form
Section 10 Infinitives, -/ng forms
and Past Participles:
Other Uses
INTRODUCTION
Infinitives, -ing forms and participles can all begin clauses.
I'd like to look al those papers again (infinitive clause)
She ran out laughing like a hyena (participle clause)
Cooked เท a slou> oven, it will taste delicious, (participle clause)
[his Section deals with a few more complex structures of this kind.
Do you know what's wrong with these, and why?
Ο I can't understand why to do it. ► >11.1
Õ How to tell her? ► 111.2
Q Looking out of our window, the mountains were marvellous. > 115.4
Õ I'm going to Austria for learning German. ► II2.1
Õ It's probable for her to be in a bad temper. ► 113.4
õ I need for you to help me. ► 113.7
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
111	infinitives after question words:	113 for — to...
who to....etc	1)4 infinitives: other uses
112	infinitive of purpose: I sat down	115 participle clauses
grammar · Section 10 Infinitives. -Ing forms and Past Participles: Other Uses
111	infinitives after question words:
who to .. .1 etc ___________	____________
1	indirect questions: Tell US what to do.
เท indirect speech (► 262.2), we can use an infinitive after the question words
who, what, where, etc (but not usually why). This structure expresses ideas such
as obligation and possibility.
I wonder who io invite. (- ... who I should invite.)
Tell us what to do.
Can you show me how to Ret to the station? (ะ... how I can get to
the station?)
I don’t know where to put the car.
Tell me when to pay.
I can't decide whether to answer her email.
(«π NOT I can't understand why to do u.)
2	direct questions: What shall we do?
We do not usually begin a direct question with How to...?, What to ...?, etc.
After question words, we often use shall and should.
How shall I tell her? (noi How to led her?)
What shall we do? (not Mu.t io do?)
Who should I pay? (not Who io pay?)
3	titles: What to do if fire breaks out.
How to.... What to..., etc are often found as titles for instructions, information
leaflets, books, etc. (Note: these are not questions.)
HOW IO IMPROVE YOUR PRONUNCIATION
WHAT IO DO If HRI URIAHS OUT
hof queutom beginning Why (not) ♦ taAnkhv ► Λ»
112	infinitive of purpose: I sat down to rest.
1 I sat down to rest.
We often use an infinitive to talk about a person's purpose - why he or she does
something.
I sat down to rest, (not I sal down for-resting ’ for fo rest.)
He went abroad to forget.	I'm going to Austria to learn German.
To switch on. press red button.
grammar «III infinitives after question words: who to..
Infinitives, ing forms and Past Participles: Other Uses
Section 10
2	in order to; so as to
We can also use เท order to... (more formal) or so as to...
He got up early in order to have time to pack.
I twitched him in order to know more about him.
I moved to a new flat so as to be near my work.
เท order to / so as to are normal before negative Infinitives.
I'm going to leave now, so as not to be late. (More natural than I'm going to
leave now. not to be late.)
A /or structure (► 113) can be used to talk about a purpose that involves action
by somebody else.
I left the door unlocked for Harriet to get in.
113	for.. .to...________________________	______________
1	infinitive with its own subject
The structure for + noun pronoun ♦ infinitive i$ very common เท English.
It is used when an infinitive needs its own subject. Compare:
-	Anna will be happy to help you. (Anna will help.)
Anna will be happy for the children to help you. (The children will help.)
-	My idea was to learn Russian.
My idea was for her to learn Russian.
-	To ask loe would be a big mistake.
For you to ask loe would be a big mistake, (not You to ask loe would be...)
Note that the subject of the infinitive is the object of the preposition for. Object
forms of pronouns are used.
Anna will be happy for them to help you. (not ...for they to help you,)
2	use
The structure is often used when we are referring to possibility, necessity or
frequency, when we are expressing wishes, suggestions or plans for the future,
and when we are giving personal reactions to situations, like other infinitive
structures, it is used especially after adjectives, nouns and verbs; it can also act
as the subject of a clause. It often has the same meaning as a àt clause, but is
generally less formal and often more natural. Compare;
It's important for the meeting to start on time.
It's important Hull the meeting should start on lime.
3	after adjectives: anxious for US to see ...
The structure for I object - infinitive can be used after certain adjectives which
express wishes and other personal feelings about the importance or value of
future events (e g. anxious, eager, delighted, willing, reluctant).
adjective · for » object * infinitive
She's anxious for US to see her work.
I'm eager for the party to be a success.
Robert says he'd be delighted for Emily to come and stay.
grammar · 113
..IO...
4	It's impossible for... to...
/-Or-structurcs with preparaton· It (► 268) are common with many adjectives
expressing possibility, necessity, importance, urgency, frequency and value
judgements.
น . verb · adjective · for · object · infinitive
verb · it · adjective · for ♦ object . infinitive
It's Impossible for the job to be finished เท time.
Would it be easy for you to phone me tomorrow?
It's important for the meeting to start at eight.
It seems unnecessary for him to start wort this week.
I consider it essential for the school to be well heated.
Is It usual for foxes to come so dose Io the town?
I thought it strange for her to be out so late.
It’s not good for the oil tank to be so dose to the house.
Other common adjectives that are used in this way include vital, necessary,
pointless, unimportant, common, normal, unusual, rare, right, wrong. Note that
likely and probable are not used like this.
She's likely to arrive this evening, (not IMUufyfer-her to arrive this et-emng)
It's probable that she'll be เท a bad temper, on She’ll probably be...
(not Ils probable forher Io be. ..)
5	after nouns: It's a good idea for US to...
The structure can also he used after nouns เท expressions with meanings similar
to the adjectives listed above. Examples are: time, a good had idea, plan, aim.
need, request, mistake, shame.
Il's lime for everybody to go to bed.
It's a good idea for US to I raid in separate cars.
I here's a plan for lack to spend a year เท lapan.
Our aim is for students to learn as quickly as possible.
It was a big mistake for them not Io keep john as manager.
It was a real shame for them not to พเท after all their work.
6	something for me to do
Something anything nothing and similar words are often followed by
for · object - infinitive.
Have you got something for me to do?
I here's nothing for the cats to eat.
Is there anybody for louise to play with เท the village?
I must find somewhere for him to practise the piano.
grammar · 113
Infinitives, -ing forms and Past Participles: Other Uses
Section 10
7	after verbs: ask for... to...
f or structures are not normally used as objects after verbs.
I need you to help me. (noi / need foe you io help me.)
However, verbs which are normally followed by for (eg. ask. hope, wail, look,
pay, arrange) can often be used with for * object · infinitive.
Anna asked for the designs to be really by Friday.
I	can 't wail for them to finish talking.
Can you arrange for the gold to be delivered on Monday1 (not .. ■ foe the gold
1^.·^..	1
,Γ,Λ	I
A few other verbs can be used like this, e.g. suit and take (time).
Men will it suit you for US to call?
II	took twenty minutes for the smoke to clear.
เท informal American English, like. hate. mean, intend and some other verbs
with similar meanings can be used with a for-structure. This is not usually
possible in British English.
/ would like for you to stay as long as you want
She hates for people to feel sad.
Did you mean for lack to take the carl
8	after too and enough
A /or structure is often used after loo and enough.
This is much too heavy for you to lift.
There are too many people here for me to talk to all of them.
Do you think il"s warm enough for the snow to mcllf
I	explained enough for her to understand what was happening.
9	as subject
The /or structure can be the subject of a clause.
For us to fail now would he a disaster.
For her to lose the election would make me very happy.
However, it is more common for a structure with preparatory it to be used
(► 11X4 above).
It would make me very happy for her to lose the election.
10	for there to be
The infinitive of there is (there to be) can be used after for.
I'm anxious for there to be plenty of time for discussion.
It’s important for there to be a fire escape al the back of the building.
11	khat-clauses
Instead of for » object * infinitive, a àr clause with should or a subjunctive
(► 232) is often possible, especially when we want to express wishes,
recommendations, suggestions and plans for the future. A àr clause is usually
more formal than a /or-structure.
II	is important that there should be a fire escape.
I'm anxious that the party should be a success.
His idea is that we should travel in separate cars.
It is essential that the meeting start at eight.
grammar · 113 for... to...
114	infinitives: other uses
ใ I arrived home to find...
Infinitive dauses can be used to say what somebody found out or learnt at the
end of a journey or task
I arrived home to find that the house had been broken into.
The idea of surprise or disappointment can be emphasised by using only.
At last ur got to Amy's place, only to discover that she was away.
He spent four years studying, only to learn that there were no jobs
2	To hear her talk, you'd think ...
The infinitives of see and hear can be used to explain the reason for a false
impression. The infinitive structure is usually followed by you’d think or a
similar expression.
To see them, you'd think they were married- Hut they only met yesterday.
To see him walk down the street, you'd never know he was blind.
To hear her talk, you’d think she was made of money.
3	to be honest
Some infinitive phrases arc used to show the speaker’s altitude or purpose
in speaking.
To be honest. I think you're making a mistake·.
To tell the truth1 I'm not sure what Io do now.
To sum up, I think we all accept lohn's proposal.
To put it another way, we're spending more than we're earning
115	participle clauses
ใ structures
Participles can combine with other words into participle clauses with active or
passive meanings.
There's a woman crying her eyes out over there.
Most of the people invited to the reception were old friends.
Not knowing what to do, / telephoned the police.
Served with milk and sugar, it makes a delicious breakfast.
Who's the old man sitting เท the corner?
Rejected by society, he decided to become a monk.
grammar· 114 infinitives: other
Section 10
Infinitives, -ing forms and Past Participles: Other Uses
2	after nouns: the people invited to the party
Participle! clauses can Im· used after nouns and pronouns.
We can offer you a job cleaning cars.
Ihere's Neville, eating as usual.
เท came the first runner, closely followed by the second.
I found him silting at a table covered with patters
Participle clauses used like this are 'reduced relative clauses' (► 237.11).
Who's the girl dancing with your brother. th,- Air! who is dancing ...)
Anyone touching that wire will get a shock. (ะ Anyone who touches ...)
Half of the people invited to the party didn't turn up. (ร... who were
invited...)
Perfect participles are not often used in this way.
Do you know anybody who's lost a cat f (soI Do low know anybody having
3	adverbial clauses: Putting down my paper, I...
Participle clauses can also he used เท similar ways to full adverbial clauses,
expressing condition, reason, time relations, result, etc. (11,is can only happen,
of course, when the idea of condition, reason, etc is so clear that no conjunction
is needed to signal it.) Adverbial participle clauses are usually rather formal.
Used economically, one can will last for six weeks. ( If it is used ...)
Having failed my medical exams. I took up teaching. (ร As I had failed ...)
Pulling down my newspaper, I walked over to the window. ( After I had put
down my newspaper,...)
It rained for two weeks on end, completely ruining our trip. (ะ·...so that it
completely ruined our trip.)
Note that ing clauses can be made with verbs like be, have, wish and know,
which are not normally used in progressive tenses (► I). เท these cases, the
participle clause usually expresses reason or cause.
being unable to help in any other way, I gave her some money.
Not wishing to continue my studies. I decided to become a dress designer.
Knowing her pretty well, I realised something was wrong
4	misrelated participles: Looking out of the window,
the mountains ...
Normally the subject of an adverbial participle clause is the same as the subject
of the main clause in a sentence.
.พุ»· wife had a talk with Sophie, explaining the problem. (My wife is the
subject of explaining.)
It is often considered incorrect to make sentences with misrelated participles
(often called 'dangling participles'), where an adverb clause has a different
subject from the main clause.
looking out of the window of our hotel room, the mountains were cat ered
with snow, ( litis could sound as if the mountains were looking out of
the window.)
Wrapped in red and gold gift paper. I delivered the parcel to my girlfriend. -»
grammar - IIS participle clauses
However, sentences like these are common and often seem quite natural,
particularly when the main clause has preparatory il or there as a subject.
Being French, it's surprising that she's such a terrible cook.
Having so little time, there was not much that I could do.
Misrelated participles arc normal in some fixed expressions referring to the
speaker s attitude. Examples:
Generally speaking, men can run faster than women.
Broadly speaking, dogs arc more faithful than cats.
Bulging from his expression, he's in a bad mood.
Considering everything, il wasn't a bad year.
Supposing there was a war. what would you do?
Taking everything into consideration, they ought to get another chance.
5	participle clauses with their own subjects
A participle clause can have its own subject, this happens most often in a rather
formal style.
Nobody having any more to say, the meeting was closed.
All the money having been spent, we started looking for work.
A little girl walked past, her doll dragging behind her on the pavement.
Hands held high, the dancers circle Io the right.
The subject is often introduced by with when the clause expresses
accompanying circumstances.
A car roared past with smoke pouring from the exhaust.
With Daniel working in Birmingham, and l.ucy travelling most of the week,
the house seems pretty empty.
6	participle clauses after conjunctions and prepositions
ing clauses can be used after many conjunctions and prepositions. They are
common with after, before, since, when, while, on, without, instead of, เท spile of
and as.
After talking to you I always feel better.
After having annoyed everybody he went home.
Switch off printer before replacing roller.
She's been quite different since coming back from America.
Mien telephoning from abroad, dial 1865, not 01865.
On being introduced, British people often shake hands.
They left without saying goodbye.
She struck me as being a very nervy kind of person.
Clauses with past participles are possible (mostly เท a formal style) after if, when,
while, once and until.
If asked Io look after luggage for someone else, inform police at once.
When opened. consume within three days.
Once deprived of oxygen, the brain dies.
If aw in oven until cooked to a light brown colour.
grammar · 115 participle clauses
Infinitives, -ing forms and Past Participles: Other Uses
Section 10
7	object complements
The structure object » participle (clause) is used after verbs of sensation
(e.g. see. hear, feel, waich, notice, smell) and some other verbs (e.g. find, get,
hair, make).
I saw a small girl standing เท the goldfish pond.
Have you ever heard a nightingale singing'
I found her drinking my whisky.
Well have to gel the car repaired before Tuesday.
Do you think you can get the radio working?
We'll soon have you walking again.
I can make myself understood pretty well in English.
grammar· 115 participle clauses
Section 11 Nouns and Noun Phrases;
Agreement
INTRODUCTION
Nouns are words like house, team. idea, arrival, confusion, Canada. Together
(usually) with other words such as determiners or adjectives, they form noun
phrases, which act as subjects, objects and complements in sentences.
Our house was miles from anywhere.
Anna’s had a great idea.
Ihe discussion left US in considerable confusion.
Names of people, places, events, etc. (e.g. Alice, Canada, Christmas) are called
proper nouns: they are grammatically different from other (common) nouns in
some ways - for instance, they may not have articles (► 136.6).
countable/uncountable
English makes a distinction between countable and uncountable (or mass)
nouns. Countable nouns (e.g. horse, microphone) are typically words for classes
of separable things that can be counted; uncountable nouns (e.g. water, oxygen]
are typically words for mass-like materials, substances, etc that can't be
separated into countable units. Countable nouns can be singular or plural
(e.g. horse, horses)·, uncountable nouns are generally singular in form; and there
are other grammatical differences between the two groups.
rhe countable uncountable distinction is partly to do with the way things really
are: clearly horses and microphones are separate objects, water and oxygen
aren't. But it is also partly to do with the way things are seen. Wool can be seen
as a mass or as separate strands: English chooses to make wool uncountable.
Aggression and attack express similar Ideas, but the first is generally uncountable
and the second countable.
possessive
Besides singular and plural forms, nouns can also have possessive forms
(e.g. horse's, microphones').
agreement
1.	Singular noun-phrase subjects are generally used with a special present tense
verb form (e.g works, goes). For information about noun-verb agreement in
some special cases, ► 128-130.
2.	Some determiners (e.g an. each, many, much) are only used with certain
kinds of noun: singular, plural or uncountable. ► Sections 12-13 for details.
nouns in combination
English can put two or more nouns together in three ways:
•	possessive noun . noun (e.g. the doctor's secretary)
•	noun · noun (e.g. garden furniture)
•	noun · preposition ♦ noun (e.g the head of the department).
grammar · Section 11 Nouns and Noun Phrases; Agreement
This is a very complicated area of English grammar. General guidelines are given
in entries 124-127, du!, unfortunately, there is no easy way to be quite sure
which structure is used to express a particular compound idea. The most
common expressions will be learnt by experience; เท case of doubt a good
dictionary will often show which form is correct or most natural.
Do you know what's wrong with these, and why?
Q The children were climbing like monkies. ► 116.1
o A new disease is affecting much cattle. ► 117.7
o A number of people has replied to my advertisement. ► 128.2
Õ Half of them lives เท Scotland. » 128.2
o Where are those five pounds ! lent you? ► 129.1
Õ Tell the children to blow their nose. ► 131.1
Õ Did you have a good travel? ► 119.3
Õ Let me give you an advice. · 119.3
o Good evening. Here are the news. ► 117.3
o Is there a parking near here? ► 119.3
Õ We’re having a terrible weather. ► 119.1
o You speak an excellent English. ► 120.4
Q I’m doing an interesting work. ► 119.3
o We were shown the childrens' room. » 123.1
Q How did the cat get onto the house's roof? ► 124.3
o I eat an awful lot of chocolate milk. » 125.1
o My sister works in a shoes shop. ► 125.2
o All the staff were showing tiredness signs. ► 126.1
Q Can you change a hundred euros note? ► 125.3
Õ Please stop kicking the table’s leg. ► 127.3
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
116	spelling of plurals
117	irregular and special plurals
118	pronunciation of plurals
119	countable and uncountable
nouns: basic information
120	countable and uncountable
nouns: advanced points
121	piece and group words: a b/«<fe
of grass; a bunch of flowers
122	noun - complement: What can
follow a noun?
123	possess,ves: noun * 'ร (forms)
124	nouns เท combination:
my father's house
125	nouns in combination:
milk chocolate
126	classifying expressions: noun ·
noun or preposition structure?
127	classifying expressions with 5!
a child’ร toy, cow's milk
128	singular expressions with
plural verbs
129	plural expressions with
singular verbs
130	mixed singular and plural:
other structures
131	distributive plural: Tell them to
bring raincoats.
132	turning verbs into nouns:
a cough, a taste
grammar · Section 11 Nouns and Noun Phrases; Agreement
116	spelling of plurals
The plural of most nouns is made by just adding -i to the singular. But there are
some special cases.
1	plural of nouns ending in consonant + y
If the singular ends in consonant * y (for example by, -dy1 -ry, -ty). the plural it
normally made by changing y to i and adding es.
Singular	Plural
... consonant + y	... consonant	les
baby	babies
ferry	ferries
party	parties
If the singular ends เท vowel · y (e.g. day, boy. guy. donkey), the plural is made
by adding ร (days1 boys, guys, donkey's).
Proper names ending in consonant * y usually have plurals in -ys.
1)0 you know the Kennedy's? (not ... the Kennedies?) I hate Februarys
2	plural of nouns ending in -sh, -ch, ร, -X or -z
If the singular ends เท sh, ch. ■ร, -X or -z, the plural is made by adding es.
Exceptions: words ending in ch pronounced k; (e.g. stomach/stomachs,
monarch/monarchs).
Singular	Plural
.. - ch/sh/sJxJz	... ches/shes/ses/xes/zes
church crash bus	churches crashes buses boxes
Nouns ending เท a single -z have plurals in zzes: quiz!quizzes, fez!fezzes.
3	plural of nouns ending in -o
Most nouns ending เท o have plurals เท •ร. Examples:
Singular	Plural	Singular	Plural
avocado	aincados	photo	photos
commando	commandos	piano	pianos
concerto	concertos	radio	radios
euro	euros	solo	solas
kilo	kilos	soprano	sopranos
grammar · 116 spelling of plurals
Nouns and Noun Phrases; Agreement
Section 1 I
Some nouns ending เท o have plurals เท «. rhe most common:
Singular	Plural	Singular	Plural
echo	echoes	tomato	tomatoes
hero	heroes	torpedo	torpedoes
potato	potatoes	veto	wtoes
The following nouns can have plurals in 5 OI		■ -es -es Is more common.	
Singular	Plural	Singular	Plural
buffalo	buffalo(e)s	motto	motto(e)s
cargo	cargo(e)s	tornado	tornado(e)s
mosquito	mosquito(e)s	volcano	volcano(e)s
117	irregular and special plurals
1	irregular plurals in -ve$
The following nouns ending in -fie) have plurals in -Ifes.
Singular	Plural calves	Singular self	Plural selves
el/	elves	sheaf	sheaves
half	halves	shelf	shelves
knife	knives	thief	thieves
leaf	leaves	wife	wives
life	lives	wolf	wolves
loaf	loaves		
Dwarf, hoof, scarf and wharf Ci		เท have plurals in either -fs or	■ves. Hooves, scarves
and wharves are more common than the plurals เท -Ji-
Other words ending เท -f(e) have regular plurals, for example roofs. beliefs, safes.
2 Other irregular plurals
Singular	Plural	Singular	Plural
child	children	ox	oxen
foot	feel	penny	pence
goose	geese	person	people
louse	lice	tooth	teeth
man	men	woman	women
mouse	mice		
The regular plural pennies can be used to talk about separate penny coins (and
one cent coins in the USA); pence is used to talk about prices and sums of
money. Some British people now use pence as a singular (e g. That’ll be three
pounds and one pence, please).
Persons is sometimes used as a plural of person เท official language. There is also
a singular noun people (plural peoples) meaning 'nation'.	-*
grammar » 117 irregular and special plurals
3	plural same as singular
Some words ending เท ■ร do not change in the plural. Common examples:
Singular
barracks
crossroads
headquarters
means
Plural
Singular
series
รเฟะ
works
Plural
l- factory)
Note that some singular uncountable nouns end in -1. These have no plurals.
Examples are news, billiards, draughts (and some other names of games ending
เท ■ร), measles (and some other illnesses).
is the {NOT I it fl' a fi‘ lilt* j
Most words ending เท -ICS (e g. mathematics, physics, athletics) are normally
singular uncountable and have no plural use.
Too much mathematics Is usually taught in schools, (not Too many
mathematics are...)
Some words ending in ics (e g. politics, statistics) can also have plural uses.
Politics is a complicated business. («ท What are your politics?)
Statistics is useful in language testing (but The unemployment statistics are
disturbing)
Other nouns which do not change เท the plural are craft (meaning ‘vehicle’),
aircraft, hovercraft, spacecraft, Chinese, lapanese (and other nationality nouns
ending in -e.se). sheep, deer, fish, and the names of some other living creatures,
especially those that are hunted or used for food. Fish has a rare plural fishes,
but the normal plural is fish.
Dozen, hundred, thousand, million, stone (ะ 14 pounds) and foot (- 12 inches)
have plurals without , in some kinds of expressions. For details, ► 322.14.
Dice (used in board games) is originally the plural of an old noun die. เท modern
English it is used as both singular and plural.
Data is originally the plural of datum, which is not now used. เท modern English
data can be used either as an uncountable noun (this data is...) or as a plural
(these data are...), with no difference of meaning. The uncountable use is more
common in modern English.
Media is original!, the plural of medium. The plural expression the media
(meaning 'radio, TV, newspapers, the internet...') is now quite often used as an
uncountable noun with a singular verb.
4	foreign plurals
Some words which come from foreign languages have special plurals. Examples:
Singular	Plural
analysis	analyses (Latin)
appendix	appendices (Ullin)
bacterium	bacteria (Latin)
basis	bases (Greek)
cactus	cacti (taiin) Oft cactuses (less common)
corpus	corpora (Latin)
grammar · 117 irregular and special plurals
Section 11
Nouns and Noun Phrases; Agreement
Singular crisis criterion	Plural Clises (Greek) criteria (Greek) diagnoses (Greek) formulae (l-atin) 0· formulas fungi (Latin) OK funguses hypotheses (Greek)
kibbutz nucleus oasis phenomenon radius stimulus vertebra	kibbutzim (Hebrew) nuclei (Latin) oases (Greek) phenomena (Greek) radii (Latin) stimuli (Latin) vertebrae (Latin)
Note that some foreign plurals (e.g. agenda, spaghetti) arc singular in English
plurals in 'ร
Λη apostrophe (') can be used before the -J เท lhe plurals of letters of the
alphabet, and sometimes เท the plurals of dates and abbreviations.
She wrote 'necessary' with two c’s.
I loved the 1990's. (the 1990s is more common)
PC's are getting cheaper. (PCs is more common)
It is not correct to use ■'ร เท other plurals, e.g. jean's.
compound nouns
เท noun * adverb combinations, the plural -J เร usually added to the noun.
Singular passer· by runner-up	Plural passers-by runners-up
file plural of mother-in-law and similar words Is generally mothers in-law. etc.
but some people use mother in-laws, etc. I11C plural of court martial l- military
court or military trial) เร either courts martial (more formal) or court martials
(less formal).
เท noun > noun combinations, the first noun is usually singular in form even if
the meaning เร plural (e.g. shoe shop), « here are some exceptions. (► 125.4).
7	plurals with no singular forms
Cattle is a plural word used to talk collectively about bulls, cows and calves; it
has no singular, and cannot be used for counting individual animals (one cannot
say, for instance, three cattle).
At one time many cattle suffered from a disease called BSE.
f kl/sv	)
Police, staff and crew are generally used in the same way.
The police are looking for a fair-haired man in his twenties.
(not the police is looking... OK A police ..)
The staff are on strike, tun A member of staff said ...(.ฯor A staff...)
However, numbers are sometimes used before these three words (e.g. four staff,
six crew).
grammar · 117 irregular and special plurals
The expressions the British, the Dutch, the English, the French, the Irish,
the Spanish and the Welsh (► 188.2) are also plural, with no singular forms.
In I5til the Dutch declared their independence from Spain, (wr A Dutchman
came into the shop. SOI ADuleh...)
Trousers, jeans, pyjamas (Ami·, pajamas), /xmls, lights, shorts, scales, scissors,
glasses, spectacles (meaning ‘glasses'), goggles, binoculars, pliers, and the names
of many similar objects that consist of two parts arc plural, and have no singular
forms. ( Ihe equivalent words เท some other languages are singular.)
Your jeans arc too tight. (.SOT Yoorfeants-...)
Where are my glasses? ‘ They're on your nose.’
To talk about individual items, we can use a pair of (► 121.3).
Hate you got a pair of nail scissors?
Other common words which are normally plural and don't have singular forms
Include:
arms (- guns, etc), clothes (► 423), congratulations, contents, customs (at a
frontier), earning?, funds ( money), goods, groceries, leftovers, lodgings, manners
! social behaviour), lhe Middle Ages (a period in history), oats (but corn, wheat
barley and rye are singular uncountable), odds (= chances), odds-a nd-ends,
outskirts, premises ( building), proceeds, refreshments, regards, remains, savings,
supplies, surroundings, thanks, troops, valuables, wages.
Congratulations on your new job. (no I Congratulation . ..)
She Hires on the outskirts of Cambridge, (soโ... the outskirl.,.)
Fill ร wtasr 1*1'.: mum Mi· ษ·ห! >.',>> ΜI vni.lt Vttb· .nd pmntiHiM (4i>d lhe oppoMK). » tin IM
118	pronunciation of plurals^
1	nouns ending in ร/, 7 and other sibilants
After one of the sibilant sounds ร/, hI, ft, :y, lift and dz. the plural ending -es
is pronounced IL .
buses /'bAStz/	crashes 'krxftzl	watches 'vvol/tL
quizzes kwtztz/	garages 'g;tro:stz/	bridges "brtdjiz/
2	nouns ending in other unvoiced sounds
After any other unvoiced sound ( 'p, ill, พ, ill or /V), the plural ending -(e)s
is pronounced ร/.
cups ksps/	cloths klnGs/	books /boks/
beliefs brli:f$/	plates plcits/
3	nouns ending in other voiced sounds
After vowels, and all voiced consonants except ill, ly and idy, the plural ending
(e)s is pronounced IzJ.
days detz	clothes klaoôz	legs legz
boys b.stz/	ends endz	dreams .'dri:mz
trees tri’.zJ knives naivz/	hills htlz/	songs sot)L
grammar - 118 pronunciation of plurals
Nouns and Noun Phrases; Agreement
Section I 1
plurals with irregular pronunciation
Plural
houses "haoztz/
baths bo:Ss. OK bo:dz>
mouths /mauds/ OK /maudz/
paths ’po:Os' OK /pu:dz/
roofs /ณะ(ร/ OR ru:vz/
truths t ณ:0ร? OR /tru:òz/
wreaths rt:Os OH /n:dz/
youths ju:0s? OR ju:dz?
Singular
house hans.
bath bu:ft'
mouth maoO
path pu:S
truth Aru:0/
wreath ri:(K
youth /ju:O'
Third person singular forms le g catches, wants, runs) and possessive forms le g
George's, Mart’s. Joe's) follow the same pronunciation rules as regular plurals.
119 countable and uncountable nouns:
basic information
1 the difference
Countable nouns are the names of separate objects, people, ideas, etc. which
can be counted. We can use number* and the article a/an with countable
nouns; they have plurals.
a cat a newspaper three cats two newspapers
Uncountable (or mass) nouns are the names of materials, liquids, abstract
qualities, collections and other things which we see as masses without dear
boundaries, and not as separate objects. Some examples:
oil oxygen	waler	Mel granite
	clothing	cutlery
crockery	equipment	furniture
jewellery	luggage	machine/γ
underwear	weather	
We cannot use numbers with uncountable nouns, and most are singular with no
plurals. We do not normally use a/an with uncountable nouns, though there are
some exceptions (* 120.4).
_______________
clear water (not a clear พนพ·,-two-elea·พน fe>s)
pure wool (so: น pare wool. เพ» pure wools)
bad weather (not a bad weather, three bad weallrers)
Some determiners can only be used with countable nouns (e g. many, few);
others can only be used with uncountablcs (e g much, little). Compare:
How many hours do you work?	How much money do you earnr
Note that very many nouns are not simply countable or uncountable: they have
countable or uncountable uses (► 119.4-119.7 below).
grammar
119 countable and uncountable nouns: basic information
2	problems
Usually it is easy IO sec whether a noun is countable or uncountable. Obviously
house is normally a countable noun, and water is not. But it is not always so
clear: compare a journey (countable) and travel (uncountable); a glass
(countable) and glass (uncountable); vegetables (countable) and fruit
(uncountable), rhe following rules will help, but to know exactly how a
particular noun can be used, it is necessary to check in a good dictionary.
3	travel and a journey·, a piece of advice
Travel and journey have very similar meanings, but travel is normally
uncountable (it means ‘travelling in general', and we do not talk about
‘a travel ), while journey is countable (a journey is one particular movement
from one place to another) and can have a plural: journeys.
I like travel, but it's often tiring. Did you have a good journey?
Often we can make an uncountable word countable by putting a piece of or a
similar expression in front of it.
He never listens to advice.	Can I give you a piece of advice?
Here are some other examples of general-particular pairs. (Note that some
words that arc uncountable in English have countable equivalents in other
languages.)
Uncountable
accommodation
bread
chess
chewing gum
equipment
furniture
information
knowledge
lightning
luck
money
news
poetry
progress
publicity
rubbish
slang
thunder
traffic
vocabulary
work
Countable
a place to live (sot an accommodation)
a piece/item of baggage: a case'trunk/bag
a piece’slice loaf of bread; a loaf: a roll
a game of chess
a piece of chewing gum (not aehewmggttm)
a piece of equipment: a tool, etc
a piece/ article of furniture: a table, chair, etc
a piece of information
a fact
a flash of lightning
a piece’ bit/stroke of luck
a piece/item of luggage: a case'trunk/bag
a note, a coin: a sum of money
a piece of news
a poem
น step forward; an advance
an advertisement
a piece of research: a study; an experiment
a piece of rubbish
(I slang word/expression
a clap of thunder
cars, etc
a word; an expression
a piece of work; a job
grammar · 119 countable and uncountable nouns: basic information
Nouns and Noun Phrases; Agreement
Section
Note that some English uncountable nouns or -Ing forms may be borrowed into
other languages and turned into countable nouns. This happens, for instance,
with parking, in English it means the activity of parking เท general; French uses
un parking to mean a car park', rhe same has happened with training and
planning (used in several other languages, but not usually in English, to mean
‘training session/course' and 'planning operation meeting' respectively).
4 materials; glass, paper, etc
Words for materials are uncountable, but we can often use the same word as a
countable noun to refer to something made of the material. Compare:
-	I'd like some typing paper.
I'm going out to buy a paper ( a newspaper)
-	lhe window's made of unbreakable glass.
Would you like a glass of waterf
Nouns for materials, liquids, etc can be countable when they are used to talk
about different types.
Not alt washing powders are kind to your hands.
We hair a selection of fine wines at very good prices.
The same thing happens when we talk about ordering drinks. Compare:
Have you got any coffee'
Could I hair two coffees' (- cups of coffee)
ร fruit, rice, wheat, spaghetti, hair, vegetables, peas, grapes
Many things (e g. rice, grapes) can be seen either as a collection of separate
elements or as a mass. Some names for things of this kind are uncountable,
while others are countable (usually plural). Ibings that come in small grains
(e g. sand, rice) are usually uncountable; collections made of larger grain like
things (e g. peas, grapes) are more often countable. But the difference is not very
systematic: compare gravel and pebbles. Note that some words of this kind
(e g. grapes) may be countable in English and uncountable in certain other
languages.
Uncountable: fruit, rice, spaghetti, macaroni (and other pasta foods), sugar, salt,
corn, wheal, barley, rye, maize, gravel.
Countable: vegetable(s), bean(s). pea(s), grape(s), lentil(s), pebblefs).
bruit is wry’ expensive, but vegetables are cheap.
Is the spaghetti ready1	t hese grapes are sour.
Hair is normally uncountable in English.
His hair is Mack.
But one strand of hair is a hair (countable).
So why has he got two blonde hairs on his jacket'
For words that are used to talk about one ‘piece1 of uncountable collections
(eg. a grain of corn, a blade of grass), ► 121.
6 abstract nouns: time, life, experience, etc
Many abstract nouns can have both uncountable and countable uses, often
corresponding to more general and more ‘particular* meanings. Compare:
-	Don Ί hurry - there's plenty of time.
Haw a good time.
There are times when I just want to stop work.	-»
grammar · 119 countable and uncountable nouns: basic information
-	life is complicated.
He's had a really difficult life
-	She hasn't got enough experience for the job.
I	had some strange experiences last week.
II	’ร hard to feel pity for people like that.
H's a pity it's raining
-	Your plan needs more thought.
I had some frightening thoughts in the night.
I need to practise conversation.
Megan and I had a very interesting conversation.

7	illnesses
The names of illnesses are usually singular uncountable เท English, including
those ending in ■ร.
If you've already had measles, you can't get it again.
There is a lot of flu around at the moment
Ihe words for some minor ailments are countable: e g. a cold, a sore throat,
a headache. However, toothache, earache, stomach ache and backache arc
usually uncountable เท British English. เท American English, these words are
generally countable if they refer to particular attacks of pain. Compare:
I've got toothache. (BrÉ) I have a toothache. (AmE)
Rm more inlmnucton on Itx Ute of »nld« »>ih axinubic ana oiKouniablr noun». » 137.
120	countable and uncountable nouns:
advanced points______________________ _________________
1	20 square metres of wall
Singular countable nouns are sometimes used as uncountables (e g. with much,
enough, plenty of or a lot of) in order to express the idea of amount.
There's enough paint for 20 square metres of wall.
I 've got too much nose and not enough chin.
If you buy one of these, you get plenty of car for your money.
2	not much difference
Some countable abstract nouns can be used uncountably after little, much and
other determiners. Common examples are difference, point, reason, idea, change,
difficulty, chance and question.
There's not much difference between 'begin' and 'start'.
I don't see much point in arguing about it.
We have little reason to expect prices to fall.
I haven't got much idea of her plans.
There isn't any change เท his condition.
grammar · 120 countable and uncountable nouns: advanced points
Nouns and Noun Phrases; Agreement
Section 11
They had Utile difficulty เท stealing the painting.
1)0 you think we hair much chance of catching the train?
There’s some question of our getting a new Managing Director.
Note the expression have difficulty (in).. .ing.
I hair difficulty (in) remembering faces. (พ I I have difficulties . ..)
3	in all weathers·, on your travels
A few uncountable nouns have plural uses in fixed expressions.
He goes running in all weathers.
Did you meet anybody exciting on your travels?
Gulliver's Travels (novel by Jonathan Swift)
4	a/an with uncountable nouns: a first-class knowledge
With certain uncountable nouns especially nouns referring to human
emotions and mental activity - we often use α/αη when we are limiting their
meaning in some way.
We need a secretary with a first-class knowledge of German.
(not .. . พ·/h firtt fkttt knowledge of German I
She has always had a deep distrust of strangers.
That child shows a surprising understanding of adult behaviour.
My parents wanted me to have a good education.
(not .. .to have good education )
I need a good sleep.
Note that these nouns cannot normally be used เท the plural, and that most
uncountable nouns cannot be used with a/an at all, even when they have an
adjective.
My father enjoys eery good health, (not ... a very good health)
We'rt having terrible weather, (not ... a terrible-weather.)
He streaks excellent English, (not ...an euederu English )
It's interesting work, (not ... an interesting work.)
His speech did serious damage to his chances of election, (not .. .a serious
5 plural uncountable;: the groceries; the customs
Some uncountable nouns arc plural. They have no singular forms with the same
meaning, and cannot normally be used with numbers.
I've bought the groceries. (Bin NOT ... a grocery. OH . .. three groceries )
The Dover customs have found a large shipment of cocaine.
iliin นฑ Iltat	kit 1
Many thanks for your help, (mn NOT Much thank ..)
grammar . 120 countable and uncountable nouns: advanced points
121	piece- and group-words: a blade of grass',
a bunch of flowers
1	uncountable nouns: pieces
To talk about a limited quantity of something we can use a word for a piece or
unit, together with of, before an uncountable noun. The most general words of
this kind are piece and bit. Hit (informal) suggests a small quantity.
น piece bit of cake/ bread some pieces, bits of paper wood
a piece/bit of news/information
Other words arc less general, and are used before particular nouns. Some
common examples:
a bar of chocolate, soap	a lump of sugar coal
a blade of grass	a slice of bread/cake/meat
a drop of water/oil/vinegar	a speck of dust
a grain of sand/ salt/ rice/corn/dust/truth	a sheet of paper/metal, phi
an Hem of information/news/clothing! furniture a stick of dynamiter chalk
น length of material	a strip of cloth/tape/la nd
a loaf of bread
2	not a ... of...
Some words for small pieces can be used in a negative structure meaning
no... at all’.
There's not a grain of truth in what he says.
There hasn’t been a breath of air all day.
We haven’t got a scrap /bite (offood) to eat.
He came downstairs without a stitch of clothing on.
3	pair
Pair is used for many things that normally go in twos, and with plural nouns
that refer to some two-part objects (► 11,7).
a pair of shoes'bools/socks/earrings	a pair of glasses/binoculars
a pair of trousers/Jeans/shorts/pyjamas' leggings/tights (fírF.)/pantyhose (AmE)
a pair of scissors/piicrs'tweears
4	plural nouns: collections
Special words arc used before certain plural nouns to talk about groups or
collections.
a bunch offlowers	a croud of people	น flock of sheep'birds
a herd of cattle goats a pack of cards (AmE a deck of cards)
Set is used before many uncountable and plural nouns referring to groups which
contain a fixed number of things.
a set of napkins/dishes/cutlery (AmE flatware/silverware}/
spanners (AmE wrenches)


grammar · 121 piece and group words, a blade of grass-, a bunch of flowers
Nouns and Noun Phrases; Agreement
Section
122	noun + complement: What can follow
a noun?
í? 7 JI
Many nouns, especially abstract nouns, can be followed by ‘complement·' -
other words and expressions that ‘complete' their meaning. Ihesc complements
can be prepositional phrases, infinitive expressions or clauses (with or without
prepositions).
Luke's criticism of the plan made him very unpopular.
I hate the thought of leaving you.
Does she understand the need to keep everything secret?
I admire your belief that you are always right.
There's still the question of whether we’re going to pay her.
Many nouns can be followed by more than one land of complement.
lie didn't give any reason for the changes.
You'IV no reason to get angry.
The main reason why I don't believe her is this:___
Not all nouns can be followed by all kinds of complement.
-	the idea of marriage
the idea that I might get married
(lurr NOT the idea to gel married)
-	freedom to choose
freedom of choice
vnr intavluM
Note that a related noun and verb may have different kinds of complement.
I have no intention of resigning
I do not intend to resign.
Nouns (possessive or not) can also act as modifiers of following nouns.
my father's company	garden furniture
For details of noun · noun structures, ► 123-126.
Unfortunately, there is no easy way to decide which structures are possible after
a particular noun. It is best to check in a good dictionary.
more Information «trout form, «tier noon,. · lai For infliUmr, «tier noun» » 102.
pccpouiwn, before «burn » 210
relative <lau«, after noun* (e.R the people u*o tur nett door). ► Section 21
123	possessives: noun + 'ร (forms)
Forms like lollท'ร, parents', children's are generally called possessive , although
they express other ideas as well as possession.
1	spelling
singular noun - 'ร	my father's car
plural noun · '	my parents’ house
irregular plural · ’ร the children’s room, men's clothes, women's rights.
an old people’s home
grammar · 123 possessives: noun « 'ร (forms)
We sometimes just add an apostrophe () Io a singular noun ending in ■ร,
especially in liierary and classical references.
Socrates’ ideai Dickens' novels
Bui 'ร is more common.
Mr Lewis’s dog
We can add 'ร or ' to a whole phrase.
the man next door's wife Henry the Eighth’s six wives
the Smiths’ new house
Note the difference between, for example:
toe and Anna’s children (one lot of children: Joe and Anna are their parents)
toe’s and Anna's children (two separate lots of children: Joe's and Anna's)
2	pronunciation
The ending 'ร is pronounced just like a plural ending (► 118).
doctor’s /'d ok I az/	lack's!djarks/	Madge's Tm&dyjJ
dog's idOQZ/	Alice’s Z'xhsiz/	lames's /’dseimziz/
president's / prezidants/
The apostrophe in a word like parents' does not change the pronunciation at all.
But with singular classical (ancient Greek and Roman) names ending in ร'. we
often pronounce a possessive ’ร even when it is not written.
Socrates' 'snkrati:ziz. ideas.
124	nouns in combination: my father's house
1	possessive 'ร and other determiners
A possessive 5 structure acts as a determiner (► Section 12) in a noun phrase.
Compare:
a car this car his car lack’s car
Λ noun cannot normally have an article or other determiner with it as well as a
possessive word (► 143.3). Definite articles arc usually dropped when
possessives arc used.
the car dull is lack's - lack’s car (not the lack's car ox lack's the car)
But a possessive word may of course have its own article.
the car that is the boss's - the boss's car
When we want to use a noun with a!an or this!that, etc as well as a possessive,
we usually use the of mine, etc construction (► 177).
She's a cousin of lack's, (not ... a lack's cousin.)
t saw that stupid boyfriend of Angie’s yesterday, (not ... that Angie's
2	meanings of the 'ร structure
We use the 'ร structure most often to talk about possessions, relationships and
physical characteristics, especially when the first noun refers to a person or
animal, or to a country, organisation or other group of living creatures.
That's my father's house, (not .. Ihedumseof myfalher)
Emily's brother is a lawyer, (not the brother of Emily...)
I don't like Alice's friends much. Dan's eyá arc like yours.
grammar · 124 nouns in combination: my father's house
Nouns and Noun Phrases; Agreement
Section 11
There'ร something wrong with the cat's ear.
Saltland'ร climate น getting warmer.
What do you think of the company's management?
We also use the structure to talk about things that people, etc produce.
I didn Ί believe the girl ’ร story.	Have you read /ack ’ร email?
What are Norway's main exports?
The government's decision lias extremely unwise.
With some words for people's actions, we can use cither 'ร or a structure with of.
the Queen’s arruai OB the arrival of the Queen
the committee’s second meeting on the second meeting of the committee
Λη o/structure is preferred when the ’possessing' expression is very long.
Compare:
my sister's husband
the husband of the woman who sent you those papers
3	'ร not used: the name of the street
With nouns which are not the names of people, animals, countries, etc, 'ร is less
common, and a structure with a preposition (usually of) is more normal.
the name of the street (sor the streets name)
the back of the room (sor the room's back)
the roof of the house I sor the house'ร roof)
the top of the page (sor the page's fop)
However, both structures are possible in some expressions.
the earth’s gravity OR the gravity of the earth
the plan’s importance OR the importance of the plan
the concerto's final movement OR the fined movement of the concerto
the train’s arrival OR the arrival of the train
the world’s oldest mountains OR the oldest mountains เท the world
(sor.. . oftheworld). » 206.7
Unfortunately, it is not possible to give useful general rules in this area: the
choice of structure often depends on the particular expression.
4	like a subject
Note that the 'ร structure often corresponds to a sentence in which the first noun
is the subject of have or some other Serb.
Zoe’s brother (loe has a brother)	the dog's tail (the dog has a tail)
America's gold reserves (America has gold reserves)
the manager's decision (the manager made a decision)
Harris's novel (Harris wrote a novel)
เท a few cases, the first noun may correspond to the object of a verb.
the prisoner's release (they released the prisoner)
5	measurement of time: a day's journey
rhe 'ร structure (or the plural with ร') is often used to say how long things last.
a day's Journey twenty minutes’ delay
Noun ♦ noun structures are also possible in expressions with numbers
(► 125.3).
a three-hour journey a twenty -minute delay	-*
grammar · 124 nouns in combination: my father's house
6	other expressions of time: yesterday's news
We can also use lhe 'ร structure to talk about particular moments and events.
yesterday's news last Sunday’s match tomorrow's weather
7	worth
Note lhe use of the ’ร structure before worth.
a pound's worth of walnuts	three dollars’ worth of popcorn
tot the > «rwtun· in (Dcnpound noun, (c I a Λ«น·, houtf. (ทน-·, mi«J. » 126
8	possessive without a noun
We can use a possessive without a following noun, if the meaning is clear.
' Whose is that? Daniel's:
We often talk about shops, companies, churches and people’s houses in this
way. l he apostrophe is often dropped in the names of shops and companies.
I bought it at Smiths. She got married at St loseph 'ร.
We had a nice rime al lack and Susan'ร hut night.
เท modern English, expressions like the doctor, the dentist, lhe hairdresser,
the butcher are often used without 'ร.
Alice is at the dentisl('s).
125	nouns in combination: milk chocolate
1	milk chocolate·, chocolate milk
Many common ideas in English are expressed by noun + noun compounds.
เท this structure, the first noun modifies or describes the second, a little like an
adjective. Compare:
-	milk chocolate (a kind of chocolate)
chocolate milk (a kind of milk)
a horse race (a kind of race)
a race horse (a kind of horse)
-	a garden flower (a kind of flower)
a flower garden (a kind of garden)
Noun · noun expressions are often related to structures where the second noun
becomes a subject.
an oil well (the well produces oil)
a sheepdog (the dog looks after sheep)
a Hirrningharn man (the man comes from Birmingham)
the airport bus (the bus goes to the airport)
2	the first noun is singular: a shoe shop
Note that the first noun is usually singular in form, even if it has a plural
meaning. (Eor exceptions, ► 125.4.)
a shoe shop (= a shop that sells shoes) a horse race (- a race for horse
a toothbrush (ะ a brush for teeth)	coat pockets (- pockets in coatsl
a ticket office (b an office that sells tickets)
grammar - 125 nouns เท combination: milk chocolate
Nouns and Noun Phrases; Agreement
Section 11
3 measurement: a five-litre can
Noun ♦ noun IS used in measurements, with a number before the first noun.
The number is usually joined to the first noun by a hyphen (-)· Note that the
first noun is normally singular in form เท these cases.
a five-litre can (not tt-fiee-hfrem-an)
a ten pound note (not men-pounds note)
a hundred-dollar bill	a six-pound chicken	a three mile walk
a five-day course	a two person tent	ten two-hour lessons
The number one is often left out.
a (one /pint mug
In fractions, tire plural ■ร is not usually dropped.
a two-thirds share (not a two-third share)
Exception: three quarters (น three quarter length coat)
exceptions: first noun plural - a clothes shop
Some nouns arc plural in this structure, especially in British English. These
include nouns which have no singular form (like clothes), nouns which arc not
used เท the singular with the same meaning (like customs), and some nouns
which are more often used in the plural than in the singular (like savings).
เท some cases, e g. antiqueis), drug(s), usage is divided, and both singular and
plural forms are found. เท general, plurals are becoming more common in this
structure. Examples:
a clothes shop
a glasses case
a customs oil'll
arms control
a savings account
the accounts department
the sales department
the outpatients department (of a hospital)
a drinks cabinet
น goods train (British English)
fl greeting(ร) card
an antique(s) dealer’shop
the drug(s) problem
the arrival(s) hall (at an airport)
Note also that singular nouns ending เท ICS can be used before other nouns.
athletics training an economics degree
We use the plurals wen and women to modify plural nouns when they have a
subject’ meaning; man and woman arc used to express an ’object’ meaning.
Compare:
- men drivers ( men who drive)
women pilots (- women who fly planes)
man eaters (ะ lions, tigers or other animals that eat people)
woman haters ( people who hate women)
5	articles
Articles belonging to the first (modifying) noun arc dropped in noun · noun
combinations.
army officers (- officers in the army)
a รนท hat (= a hat that protects you against the รนท)
ammar - 125 nouns in combination: milk chocolate
6	more than two nouns
Mori' than two nouns can be pul together. A group OÍ two nouns can modify a
third noun, these can modify a fourth, and so on.
oil production costs road accident research centre
This kind of structure is very common in newspaper headlines (► 292) because
HIRNTTIIRE FACTORY ΡΛ Y CUT PROTEST
7	pronunciation
Most noun * noun combinations have the main stress on the first noun
a bicycle factory a fruit drink str boots coffee beans
However, there are quite a number of exceptions.
a garden chair a fruit 'pie
The difference between noun modifiers and adjectival modifiers is sometimes
shown by stress. Compare:
fl Herman teacher (noun modifier fl person who leaches German)
ท German 'teacher (adjective modifier: fl teacher who is German)
To be sure of the stress on a particular combination, it is necessary to check in U
good dictionary. Note that there are occasional British-American differences.
For (hr Ilrniinc ๙ roxl »nd Mitel mum. » ,70.
8	spelling
Some short common noun + noun combinations are generally written together
like single words.
bathroom toothbrush seaside
Other combinations are generally written separately (e.g. furniture shop, railway
station). Sometimes usage varies (e.g. lampshade or lamp shade), but except
with very short common combinations like bathroom, it is usually acceptable to
write the two words separately. Noun * noun combinations often used to be
written with hyphens (e.g. spectacle-case), but this is now unusual.
bor nvxr information about the spelling ci different kinds of compounds ► M2.
Tor informMkwi abxxit the moM common current spelling of partkoUr noun . noun ciprcwlon* see b
Rood dctMXwy
9	other structures
Not all compound ideas can be expressed by a noun * noun structure.
Sometimes it IS necessary to use a structure with of or another preposition;
sometimes a structure with po»ewive 'ร is used.
a feeling of disappointment (sor t disapp&imme -I I feeling)
letters from home (sot home4etiers)
cow’s milk (sor cow milk)
For เท™·· dtà » IM
grammar · 125 nouns in combination: milk chocolate
Nouns and Noun Phrases; Agreement
Section 11
126 classifying expressions: noun + noun or
preposition structure?
1	classifying expressions: a sheepdog
The noun + noun structure is mostly used to make ‘classifying’ expressions,
which name a particular kind of thing.
mountain plants (a special group of plants)
mineral water (a sort of water)
a sheepdog (a particular kind of dog)
We use noun + noun especially to talk about things that belong to common
well-known classes (so that the two nouns really describe a single idea). In other
cases we prefer a preposition structure. Compare:
the postman, the milkman (well-known kinds of people who may call
regularly at a British home)
a man from the health department (not a regular kind of visitor)
More examples:
-	He was reading a history book, (a common cla moon book)
He was reading a book about the moon, (not n-moon-book)
-	She was sitting at a corner table in the restaurant. (Restaurants often have
corner tables.)
Who’s the girl in the corner? (not Who’s the cornet gift?)
-	What does that road sign say?
She was showing signs of tiredness, (not . . . tnetlnesA I
2	containers: a matchbox; a box of matches
Noun + noun is used for particular kinds of container.
a matchbox a paint tin a coffee cup
But we use the preposition structure (with of) to talk about a container together
with its contents.
a box of matches	a tin of paint a cup of coffee
3	units, selections and collections: piece, group, etc
We also prefer the o/-structure with words that refer to units, selections and
collections, like piece, slice, lump (of sugar), bunch (of flowers), blade (of grass),
pack (of cards), herd, flock, group and so on.
a piece of paper (not a paper piece)
a bunch of flowers (not a flower bunch)
4	'made of': a silk dress; silken skin
Noun + noun is normally used to say what things are made of.
a silk dress a stone bridge an iron rod a gold ring
In older English, the o/-structure was more common in this case (e.g. a dress
of silk, a bridge of stone), and it is still used in some metaphorical expressions.
He rules his family with a rod of iron.
The flowers were like a carpet of gold.	->
grammar · 126 classifying expressions: noun + noun or preposition structure?
A few pairs of nouns and adjectives (e.g. gold, golden) are used as modifiers with
different meanings. Generally the noun simply names the material something is
made of. while the adjective has a more metaphorical meaning. Compare:
a gold uialch	golden memories
silk stockings silken skin
a lead pipe a leaden sky (grey and depressing)
a stone roof a stony silence
But wooden and woollen just mean made of wood wool'.
127	classifying expressions with 'ร: a child's toy;
cow's milk
1	noun + 'ร + noun; children's clothes; a bird's nest
เท some classifying expressions we use a structure with possessive ’ร.
Tins is common when we are talking about things that are used by a person or
animal: the first noun refers to the user.
children 'ร clothes a man ‘ร sweater
women's magazines a bird's nest
Generally, either both nouns are singular or both are plural.
a child's toy children's clothes
tun a women'ร magazine
Not all used by' expressions have possessive 'ร.
baby clothes a birdcage
British and American usage sometimes differ. Compare:
a baby's bottle (BrE) a baby bottle (AmE)
a baby's pram (BrE) a baby carriage (AmE)
a doll’ร house (BrE)	a doll house (AmE)
2	noun + 'ร + noun: cow's milk; a hen's egg
Ihe 'ร structure is often used for products from living animals.
cow's milk	lamb's wool	a hen's egg
sheep's wool	a bird’s egg	(■ท camel hair, horsehair)
When the animal is killed to provide something, we usually use noun ' noun.
calf skin chamois leather fox fur
chicken soup a lamb chop tortoise shell
3	parts: a man's leg; a table leg
We use the 'ร structure to talk about pans of people’s and animals' bodies.
a man's leg an elephant's trunk a sheep's heart
But to talk about pans of non-living things, we usually use the noun ‘ noun
structure.
a table leg (not a table's leg) a car door (.SOT USUALLY a car's door)
grammar · 127 classifying expressions with 'ร·. a child's toy; cow's milk
Nouns and Noun Phrases; Agreement
Section
4	pronunciation
Classifying expressions with possessive 'ร most often have the main stress on the
first noun. Compare:
- a doll's house (a kind of house)
my brother's house (not a kind of house)
goat's milk (a kind of milk)
the goat's 'tall (not a kind of tail)
Here, too, there are exceptions.
a child's bicycle (a kind of bicycle)
128	singular expressions with plural verbs
1 groups of people: The team is/are...
เท British English, singular words like family, team, government, which refer to
groups of people, can have either singular or plural verbs and pronouns.
The team is/are going to lose.
Plural forms are common when the group is seen as a collection of people doing
personal things like deciding, hoping or wanting Singular forms are more
common when the group is seen as an impersonal unit. Compare:
-	My family have decided to move to York. They’re going in April.
The average family has .1.6 members. It is smaller than ฆ) years ago.
-	My company are wonderful. They do all they can for me.
My company was founded in the IHlh century.
We prefer who as a relative pronoun with plural forms, and which with singular
forms. Compare:
The committee, who are hoping to announce important changes, ...
The committee, which is elected at the annual meeting,...
When a group noun is used with a singular determiner (e.g. a/an, each, every,
this, that), singular verbs and pronouns are normal. Compare:
The team are full of enthusiasm.
Λ team which is full of enthusiasm has a belter chance of winning.
(More natural than A team who are full...)
Sometimes singular and plural forms are mixed.
The group gave its first concert in June and they are now planning a tour.
Examples of group nouns which can be used with both singular and plural verbs
in British English:
bank	company	government	public
the HRC.	England (the	Jury	school
choir	football team)	ministry	
class	family	orchestra	ream
club committee	firm	party	union
เท American English singular verbs arc normal with most of these nouns in all
cases (though family can have a plural verb). Plural pronouns can be used.
The team is in Detroit this weekend. They expect to win.
grammar · 128 singular expressions with plural verbs
2	A number of people have ...
Many singular quantify ing expressions (► 172) can be used with plural nouns
and pronouns; plural verbs are normally used in this case.
A number of people have tried to find the treasure, but they have all failed.
(More natural (han A number of people has tried...)
A group of us arc going to take a boat through the Dutch canals.
A couple of my friends plan to open a travel agency, (no I A ■ temple <rf my
.4 lot of social problems arc caused by unemployment, (not A lol of social
The majority of criminals are non violent.
Some of these people are relations and the rest are old friends.
Half of his students don't understand a word he says, (koi Htdfofhh
Fof àUàr «»<1 pXiral noum Jth -ràmv ► I» 10.
129	plural expres^onswith jingular verbs
1	amounts and quantities: that five pounds
When we talk about amounts and quantities we usually use singular
determiners, verbs and pronouns, even if the noun is plural.
Where is that five pounds I lent you? (not When tire those five pounds .. .?>
Twenty miles is a Iong way to walk.
'We've only got five cans of juice left.' That isn't enough:
More than II inches of snow has fallen on the city this winter.
2	calculations
Singular verbs arc often possible after plural number subjects in spoken
calculations.
Two and two is/are four.
Ten times five is fifty, (on Ten fives are fifty.)
For more about spoken calculation*. » 322 21 322 22.
3	more than one
More than one is generally used with a singular noun and verb.
More than one person is going to have to find a new job.
4	one of...
Expressions beginning one of normally have a plural noun and a singular verb.
One of my friends is gelling married, (not Qrwoffnyfrtendwe-. ..)
MOpilM .nd ph··! v«b. m rriamr .นof .. » 110 I
grammar» 129 plural expressions with singular verbs
Nouns and Noun Phrases; Agreement
Seclion
5	and
Some expressions joined by and have singular determiners, verbs and pronouns
(► 130.4). This happens when the two nouns are used together so often that we
think of them as a single idea.
This gin and tonic iin’l very strong is iti
Your toast and honey is on the table.
6	countries and organisations: The United States is...
Plural names of countries usually have singular verbs and pronouns.
The United Slates is anxious to improve แร image in latin America.
Plural names of organisations may also have singular verbs and pronouns.
Consolidated Fruitgrowers has )usl taken over Universal Foodstores.
130	mixed singular and plural: other structures
เท some complex structures, the same verb seems to belong with two different
expressions, one singular and the other plural. And some noun phrases mix
singular and plural elements.
1	one of the few women who have climbed Everest
After expressions like one of the... (► 544), singular and plural Serbs arc both
used in relative clauses beginning who1 which or that.
She's one of the few women who have lias climbed Everest.
This is one of those books that are is read by everybody.
Strictly speaking, a plural verb is correct (to agree with the few women who or
those books that). However, singular verbs are also very common in these
structures. More examples:
One of the things that really make, makes me angry is people who don't
answer emails.
We've got one of those Japanese cars that never break breaks down.
2	A serious problem is wasps.
เท English a Serb normally agrees with the subject of a sentence, not with a
following complement.
”--------1---------------1---1
lhe biggest timewaster is meetings.
(NOT I he biggest HmrwMrr are meetings.)
V c
A serious problem in our garden is wasps.
(not a serious problem... are wasps)
However, if the subject is a long way from the verb, people sometimes make the
verb agree with a complement.	*<
grammar · 130 mixed singular and plural: other structures
ร
The most interesting thing on radio and television last
V	c
weekend, without any doubt, was were the tennis championships.
This often happens. loo, when lhe subject is a relative whiน·clause, especially
when the complement is long.
What I am most interested เท it/are your immediate personal reactions.
SV	c
What we need is/are a few bright young engineers.
I plural >v<tn after Inrcrrugatnr ฝนrind น·!น. ► 130ร.
3	singular subject, plural continuation, plural verb
When a singular subject is modified by a following plural expression, people
sometimes use a plural verb. This is not usually considered correct.
Nobody empi his best friends Me him. (More correct: Nobody... likes him.
A	Artrnr/rrfftr of í/MfV kirijÇttíigci tire rwt evwi ทุ* jot this fob
(More correct: A good knowledge... is...)
For lingular or plural after tindff J. wtl<1. พ(|» etc. ► -.92
4 co-ordinated subjects: A and s, A or B. A as well as 6, etc
When two singular subjects are joined by and, the verb is normally plural.
Alice and Joseph are going to be late.
But note that some phrases with and are treated like single ideas, and used with
singular verbs (► 129.5).
Racon and eggs is a popular British breakfast.
When two subjects are joined by as well as, together with or a similar expression,
lhe verb is usually singular if the first subject IS singular.
7he Prime Minister, as well as several Cabinet Ministers, believes in a tough
financial policy.
lhe Managing Director, together with his heads of department, is preparing a
new budget.
When two subjects are joined by or. lhe verb Is usually singular if the second
subject is singular, and plural if it is plural. Compare:
there'ร no room - either tun chairs or a table has got IO be moved.
There'ร no room - either a table or two chairs have got to be moved.
When two singular subjects are joined by neither... nor, the verb is normally
singular in a formal style, but can เท- plural in an informal style.
Neither she nor her husband has arrived, (formal)
Neither she nor her husband have arrived, (informal)
grammar · 130 mixed Singular and plural: other structures
Nouns and Noun Phrases; Agreement
Section I I
5	who and what
เท a who or what question. If the answer is the subject of a clause, the verb with
who or what is usually singular, even when the answer Is plural.
' Who is working tomorrowT 'lake, Lucy and Shareena (arc working
tomorrow).' (More natural than Who are working tomorrow?)
Who M at the party? (More natural than Who were at the party?)
•What lives in those little holesr ‘Rabbits (do), (noJ What live...)'
With verbs like be. where the answer to a who or what question is the
complement of a clause, the Serb with who or what can be plural.
’Who are your closest friendsใ’ ‘(My closest friends are) Naomi and Bridget.'
'What are your politics?’ ‘(My politics arc) extreme left wing.'
Relative tehat clauses are normally the subject of a singular verb.
What she needs is friends. (More natural than What she needs are friends.)
However, plural verbs are often used before longer plural complements,
especially if what is a long way from the verb.
What we need most of all are some really new ideas.
6	here's, there's and where's
เท an informal style, here's, there's and where's are common with plural nouns.
Here's your keys. There's some children at the door.
พhere's thou· hooks I lent you?
7	another, a/an + adjective
Plural expressions of quantity can be used with another (► 550) and with
a/an » adjective.
I want to stay for another three weeks.
We'll need an extra ten pounds.
He's been waiting for น good two hours.
She spent a happy ten minutes looking through the photos.
I've had a very busy three days.
Note also the expression a good many!few ♦ plural (informal).
I've lain awake a good many nights worrying about you.
I bet that house could tell a good few stories.
8	kind, sort and type
เท an informal style, we sometimes mix singular and plural forms when we use
demonstratives with kind, sort or type. For details, ► 502,
I don 7 like those kind of boots
9	every (frequency)
Every (which is normally used with singular nouns) can be used before plural
expressions in measurements of frequency.
I go to Ireland every six weeks.
10	fractions
Fractions between 1 and 2 are normally used With plural nouns (► 322.2).
It weighs one and a half tons (noi . ..	« half Ion )
t he tallest plants grow to about 1.75 feet
grammar - 130 mixed singular and plural: other structures
131	distributive plural: Tell them to
bring raincoats.
ใ people doing the same thing
To talk about several people each doing the same thing, English usually prefers a
plural noun for the repeated idea.
Tell the kids to bring raincoats to school tomorrow. (More natural than
Tell lite kids to bring a raincoat...)
plural forms are almost always used in this ease if there are possessive*.
Tell the children to blow liteir noses. (Nor.. Io Mow their nose.)
Six people last their lives in the accident.
Uncountable nouns cannot of course be used in the plural.
They were all anxious to increase their knowledge, (not ... fhetf-knowledges. I
2	repeated events
เท descriptions of repeated single events, singular and plural nouns are both
possible. When no details are given, plural nouns are more natural.
I often get headaches (More natural than I often get a headache.)
She sometimes goes for rides over the hills.
When details of the time or situation are given, nouns are often singular.
I often gel a headache when I've been working on the computer.
She often goes for a ride over the hills before supper.
Singular nouns may also be used to avoid misunderstanding.
I	sometimes throw a stone into the river and wish for good luck, (clearer than
I sometimes throw stones... - only one stone is thrown each time)
To refer to the time of repeated events, both singular and plural expressions are
often possible with little difference of meaning.
We usually go and see my mother on Saturdays).
He's not at his best in the mornlngfs).
3	generalisations and rules
เท generalisations and rules, singular and plural nouns are both possible.
We use a Ilast participle เท a perfect verb form. («* We use past participles in
perfect verb forms.)
All documents must be accompanied by a translation of the original
(uh All documents must be accompanied by translations of the originals.)
Mixtures of singular and plural are possible.
Subjects agree with their verb
Children may resemble both their father and their mother in different ways.
This often happens with fixed singular expressions like at the biginning.
Discourse markers often come al the beginning of sentences.
grammar - 131 distributive plural: Tell them to bring raincoats
Nouns and Noun Phrases; Agreement
Section
132	turning verbs into nouns: a cough, a taste
1	using nouns for actions
It is very common to refer to an action by using a noun instead of a verb. Nouns
of this kind often have the same form as the related verbs. The structure is
especially common in an informal sty le.
There นพ ต loud crash	Did / hear a cough'
I need ต rest.	Would you like a taste'
What about a drink' Come on - one more try!
2	common structures
Nouns of this kind are often introduced by general purpose' Serbs such as have,
take, give, make, go for.
ru have a think and let you know what I decide: (informal BrE)
Let’s have a talk about your plans.
Let your sister have a go on the swing. (BrE)
lust lake a look at yourself
Hike to have: take a bath before I go to bed.
If it won't start, let's give it a push.
I don't know the answer, but I'm going to make a guess.
Go for... is common with nouns for physical activity" (► 475).
I try to go for a run every day.	Let 's go for a walk.
We can use ing forms in a similar way after do (► 435.3).
She does a bit of painting but she doesn't like to show people.
These structures are very common when we talk about casual, unplanned or
unsystematic recreational activity.
Let's have a swim (More natural than Let's swim.)
grammar - 132 turning verbs into nouns:
taste
Section 12 Determiners:
a/an and the; my, your, etc;
this, that, etc
INTRODUCTION
What are determiners?
Determiners are words that come at the beginning of noun phrases, before any
adjectives. They mostly show which or how much/many we ate talking about.
the manager	a nice day	my fat old cal
this house	some problems	either arm
every week	enough oil	several young students
They fall into two mam groups from a grammatical point of view.
1	Articles (a/an and the), possessive* (my. your, etc) and demonstratives (this,
that. etc).
These help IO show which members or which pan of a class or category we are
talking about. Possessives and demonstratives are called 'adjectives’ in older
grammars and dictionaries, but they are quite different from adjectives.
2	Quantifiers te g. all, some. each. much. most, several) and one or two others.
These mostly show how much or how many we arc talking about.
The first group are covered in this Section, and the others in Section >3.
articles
Article use is one of the most difficult points in English grammar, particularly foi
learners whose languages do not have article systems. Articles are difficult for
several reasons:
•	The two articles (and the use of no article or ‘zero article') express several
different meanings, and it is not always possible to draw clear lines
between them.
•	lhese meanings are relatively abstract and not easy to explain.
•	languages which have articles (e.g. French. Swedish. Portuguese) do not
always use them in the same way as their English equivalents, especially
when talking about things in general (► 140).
•	Sometimes article use is more a matter of vocabulary than grammar: we
happen to use the in one expression, and a or no article in another similar
expression, for no very good reason.
on the radio on TV
I've got backache. (BrE) Tve got a headache.
We look a wrong turning and went to the wrong address
However, much article use is regular; and the explanations เท the following
entries should help a good deal. Also, article mistakes do not usually matter very
much for practical purposes: they rarely cause misunderstandings.
possessives: terminology
There arc problems of terminology with possessives. My, your, etc (► 143) are
sometimes called ‘possessive adjectives', while mine, yours, etc (► 176) are
grammar · Section 12 Determiners: a/an and the; my. your, etc; this, that, etc
7ไ? . J .TOUn' .iact 00,11 •พ» of possessive are
noun phrase
Jal*'” m.o,e comPlex noun phrase the speaker ■ร
e,c àà “ detcrrntnm In noun
1**c "* "®*■·ΜβηΛη» used instead of noun phrase*. None
rnrifliilu 11.,>'O"'1 ·**”*“* **°in' ๙.**·'*'· «he important thing is to use
possessive* correal), not to worn about what the) are .ailed.
Do you know what's wrong with these, and why?
o Give it to
111.6
135.2
2 'OU shouldn't go out without coat. ► 137.4
2 Annie is engineer. ► 137. 3 c
2 1 used my shoe as hammer. » 137.3 c
2 My uncle used to be a MP. » 137.7
2 The life is complicated. ► 140.1
Q The most birds can fly. ► 140.1
o It's not always easy to fit in with the society. ► 140.
บ She's very interested เท the nature. ► 140 I
2 พ1.11R ,he ,oad "e MW a "heel of a car.
2 He's a wrong man for me. - 141.6
2 1ไ::^^^0๓·: p,oble™ -- becoming serious. ► 142 3
ft	21 the anwunt of the money collected e 142.7
2 .พ^appointed him the Head Librarian. ► 142.12
บ What lovely dress! ► 142.14
o What a nonsense! » 142.14
2 ^'»'broke the arm climbing . 142.16
ft '0 walking in Himalayas . 142.1»
2 5he studied at the Oxford University » 142.1»
บ Granny’s lost the her keys again. » 143.3
2 ^Í,^>r‘°ld.íc.ch‘ídíc'' ’θ °p*n 'heir book. ► 143 4
ft rli 1'^.'.’’'’·· ,hc.e>es «à<l and the hands เท the pockets. » 143 5
ft , ^'" a f°°d mood Its just had it s breakfast . 143.6
J don I know what I'm doing in that country. ► 1413
► H ,7U ever hca,d ,rom àls Sco,,isb boy you used to go out with?
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
‘33 articles: introduction
134	articles: basic information (A)
135	articles: basic information (B)
136	more about the
137	more about atari
13» no article with plural and
uncountable nouns
139 the difference between some!any
and no article
110 talking in general
1 11 the. difficult cases
I 12 special rules and exceptions
143	possessive determiners:
my, your, etc
144	this and that
I 15 this, that and if. things that have
just been mentioned
grammar . Section 12 Determiners: a/an and
your, etc; this, that,
133	articles: introduction	___
1	What are articles?
Articles are small words that are often used at the beginning of noun phrases,
(here are two: the (the definite article) and a: an (the indefinite article). They
belong to a group of words called 'determiners'.
2	What are articles used for?
Articles can show whether we are talking about identifiable things, which
are known both to the speaker,'writer and listener/hearer ('definite’),
or not ('indefinite').
3	How much do articles matter?
The correct use of the articles is one of the most difficult points in English
grammar. Fortunately, most article mistakes do not matter too much. Even if we
leave all the articles out of a sentence, it can usually be understood.
Please can you lend me pound of butter till end of week?
However, it is better to use the articles correctly if possible. Entries 134 112 give
the most important rules and exceptions.
4	speakers of Western European languages
Most languages of Western European origin, and one or two others, have article
systems quite like English. However, there are some differences เท the way
articles arc used in English and these other languages. 'Ihc most important
differences are explained in 134. Students should go to 134 first if they speak one
of the following languages perfectly or very well: French, German, Dutch,
Danish, Swedish, Norwegian, Icelandic, Spanish, Catalan, Italian, Portuguese,
Greek, Romanian. There เร more detailed information on difficult points
in 136 142.
5	speakers of other languages
If a student's language is one (e.g. Russian or lapanese) that is not listed
in 133.4, he or she may have more difficulty with the correct use of articles.
The most important rules arc explained in 135, and students should read this
first. There is more detailed information on difficult points in 136-142.
134	articles: basic information (A)
(This entry is for students who speak a language that has articles: e.g. French.
German. Swedish, Norwegian, Spanish, Italian, Greek. If you speak a language
without articles - for example Russian or Japanese read entry 135.)
Articles are often used in similar ways in English and other languages, but there
arc some differences. The most important are as follows.
1 talking in general: Life is complicated.
เท English, when we are talking about people or things in general, we do not
usually use the with uncountable or plural nouns.
grammar · 133 articles: Introduction
Determineis: à/an and the; my, your, etc, this, that, etc
Life is complicated, (not fhedifetíeomplieeded.)
My sister loves hones, (not ... the horses.)
2	talking about jobs, types, etc: She's a dentist
เท English we normally pul a/an with a singular noun that is used for classifying
- saying what job somebody has, what class, group or type somebody or
something belongs to, what we use something for, etc.
She's a dentist, (not She's dentist.)
I'm looking forward to being a grandmother
I used my shoe as a hammer.
For more detailed information about articles, ► 136-142.
Section 12
135	articles: basic information (B)
(This entry is for students who speak languages (e g. Russian or Japanese) that
do not have articles like English a!an and the. Students who speak languages
which have articles (e g. German or Portuguese) should read entry 134.)
1	two basic rules
•	To say 'You know which I mean’, we put the before a noun.
I've been to the doctor. (You know which one: my doctor.)
I late you fed the dogs? (You know which ones I mean.)
Could you โ''" ,he ,l (You can Me ,h« «>' that I want.)
•	When we can't say You know which I mean', we:
- put a/αη before a singular countable noun (► 137).
There 'ร a rat เท the kitchen!	I need an envelope
■ put no article with a plural or uncountable noun?
She's afraid of rals. I need help.
2 four common mistakes to avoid
• Don't use a/an with plural or uncountable nouns.
lack collects stamps (not ... λ stamps.)
Our garden needs water. <NOI... Λ waler.)
grammar · 135 articles: basic Information (B)
•	Don't use the to talk about things เท general. The does not mean 'all'.
(For exceptions. ► 140.2.)
Elephants can swim very well, (noi The elephants can รท'»»»! 1..)
Gas is expensive, (no» The gw·.. )
•	Don't use articles together with my, this, or other determiners.
my work (not the my work)
a friend of mine (not a my friend)
this problem (not the this problem)
•	Don't use singular countable nouns alone, without an article or other
determiner. We can say a cal, the cat, my cal, this cat, any an. either cal or
every cat, but not just cat. (For exceptions, » 142.)
Give it IO the cat (not Give if focal.)
Annie is a doctor, (not Annie is doctor.)
For more detailed information about articles, see the following sections.
136	more about the
1	the = 'you know which one(s)'
rhe usually means something like 'you know which I mean’. We use the before I
noun (singular, plural or uncountable) when our listener/reader knows (or can
easily see) which particular person(s), things), etc we are talking about.
Compare:
-	I'm going to the bank. (The listener knows which: the usual one.)
Is there a bank near here? (any bank)
I didn't like the film, (the one that the speaker and listener saw)
l et's go and see a film. ( Hie speaker doesn’t say which one.)
-	She arrived on the H. IS train. (The speaker says which train)
She arrived in an old taxi. (The speaker doesn't say which old taxi.)
-	Did you wash the clothes? (The listener knows which dothes.)
I need to buy clothes. (No one knows exactly which clothes will be bought.)
What did you do with the coffee I bought? (The speaker says which coffee.)
I don’t drink coffee (any coffee)
Our listener reader may know which one(s) we mean because:
a we have mentioned itAhem before
She's got two children: a boy and a girl, rhe boy's fourteen and the girl's eight.
'So what did you do then?' 'Gave the money right back to the policeman:
( rhe listener has already heard about the money and the policeman.)
b we say which one($) we mean
Who are the girls over there with Tom?
Tell 4my the story about lack and Susie.
He's already lost the phone he bought last week.
c it is clear from the situation which one(s) we mean
Could you close the door? (Only one door is open.)
Anna 'ร in the kitchen. I can Ί find the car papers.
Did you enjoy the party? What's the time?
grammar » 136 more about
Determiners: a/an and the, my, your, etc, this, that, etc
Section 12
the -- 'the only one(s) around'
The listener may know which one we mean because there Is no choice - there is
only one (e.g. lite รนท, lhe moon, lhe earth, the world, lhe universe, the future} or
there is only one in our part of the world (e.g. the government}.
I ha ten Ί seen the รนท for days.	Do you trust the government?
People used to think the earth was flat.
Do you know the Aldersons? (Il is clear to the listener that there can only be
one family of that name around.)
Go straight over two sets of traffic lights and then turn right after
lhe supermarket. (The listener doesn't know the supermarket,
but has enough Information to identify it.)
superlatives: I'm the oldest.
We usually use the with superlatives (► 206.6) because there is normally only
one best, biggest, etc individual or group (so it is clear which one(s) we are
talking about), For the same reason, we usually use the with first, next, last. same
and only.
I’m the oldest in my family.	Can I have the next pancake?
IVe went to lhe same school.
the meaning 'the well-known'
After a name, an identifying expression with the is often used Io make it clear
that the person referred to is 'the well-known one'.
She married Brad Pitt, the actor.
rd like you to meet Cathy Parker, lhe novelist
possessives and demonstratives
We do not use the with possessives or demonstratives.
this is my uncle, (noI ... the my uncle.}
Is that Emily's car? (νογ ... lhe Emily's cart}
I like this beer, (not .. ■ the this beer. }
proper nouns (names)
We do not usually use the with singular proper nouns (there are some
exceptions, ► 142.18-142.19).
Emily lives in Switzerland, (vol lhe Emily lives In the Switzerland.}
But note the use of the (pronounced /diะ/) with a person's name to mean
the well-known’.
'My name's Emma Watson.' ‘What, not the Emma WatsonT
things in general
We usually use no article, not the. to talk about things in general the does not
mean 'air. (For details and exceptions, ► 110.)
life is hard, (not lhe life is hard.}
pronunciation
lhe is normally pronounced ôiม’ before a vowel and à» before a consonant. -*
grammar · 136 more about lhe
Compare:
the ice /di: ais/ the snow 'da snau.'
The choice between di: and da depends on pronunciation, not spelling.
We pronounce /di:/ before a vowel sound, even if it is written as a consonant.
the hour /ôiะ 'athe MP /ôiะ 1em ·ρvJ
And we pronounce ’do*’ before a consonant sound, even if it is Witten as
a vowel.
the university da ju:ni*v3:sati/
the one-pound coin 'da 1พ'ท 1paond 'katn/
We sometimes pronounce a stressed .'di ะ/ before a hesitation, or when we want
to stress the noun phrase, even if the noun begins with a consonant.
He's the di: - just a moment - deputy assistant vice-president.
I've found the di:/ present for Angela!
lor Ihr IO»-. Ihr taurtlr,. me tea. the moaMธหเ et) » 141.4.
137	more about a/an
1	countable and uncountable nouns
Countable nouns are the names of separate objects, people, ideas, etc which we
can count.
a cat - three cals a secretary - four secretaries
a plan - two plans
Uncountable nouns arc the names of materials, liquids and other things which
we do not usually see as separate objects.
wool (mrr NOT a wool, two wools)	water (Bin SOT a wetter, three writers)
weather (Bin NOT a weather, four Heathers)
energy (Bin NOT UH energy, several energies)
•or more dr··.*«i Informjdon. » 119 120.
2	a/an with singular countable nouns
We normally use a!an only with singular countable nouns.
a secretary an office
rot apMtom lite « »»xr lua *r»rr. . 1107.
3	uses of a/an
Alan does not add much to the meaning of a noun - it is like a weak form of
one'. It has several common uses.
a one person or thing
We can use a!an when we mention one person or thing for the first lime.
there's a police car outside.	My brother's married to a doctor
Andy lives in an old house.
grammar· 137 more about a/an
Determiners: a/an and the; my. your, etc; this, that, etc
Section 12
b any one member of a class.
We can use a/an when we talk about any one member of a class.
A doctor must like people, l- any doctor)
I would like to live in an old house. (= any old house)
c classifying and defining
We can use a!an when we classify or define people and things - when we say
what they are. what job they do, or what they are used for.
She's a doctor.	I'm looking forward to being a grandmother.
A glider is a plane with no engine. Don Ί use your plate as an ashtray
d descriptions
Alan is common before nouns that are used เท descriptions.
She's a nice person that was a lovely evening
He's got a friendly face.	It's an extremely hot day.
4	when a/an cannot be left out
We do not normally leave out a/an เท negative expressions, after prepositions
or after fractions.
"Lend me your pen.' 7 haven't got a pen. (not I haven't got pen )'
You shouldn't go out without a coat, (not ... UHthoM-eoat)
three quarters of a pound (Mjr three-quarters of pound)
And we do not leave out a/an when we say what jobs people have, or how
things are used (see above).
She's an engineer (not She's engineer.)
I used my shoe as a hammer, (not ... «ร hammer)
5	when a/an is not used: adjectives alone; possessives
A/an cannot normally be used with an adjective alone (without a noun).
Compare:
A/an cannot be used together with a possessive. Instead, we can use the
structure a... of minc/yours, etc (► 177).
He's a friend of mine, (not He^-amyfriend.)
6	a/an and the
instead of a/an, we use the when we want to say 'You and I both knuw which
one I mean'. Compare:
She lives in a big house. (The hearer doesn't know which one.)
She lives in the big house over there. (The hearer knows which one.)
For details, ► >36.
7	a and an: the difference
We do not normally pronounce the sound /Λ before a vowel. So before a vowel,
the article a (/a/) changes to an an. Compare:
a rabbit a lemon an elephant an orange
The choice between a and an depends on pronunciation, not spelling. We use
an before a vowel sound, even if it is written as a consonant.
an hour /วท 'auafr/' an .MP an cm 'piะ/
And we use a before a consonant sound, even if it is written as a vowel.
a university /3 ju:m'v3isati/	a one-pound coin '’ว ,พ .รท 1paund 'kom
grammar · 137 more about a/an
Some people say an, not a. before words beginning with h if the first syllable
is unstressed.
an hotel (a hotel is more common)
an historic occasion (a historic... is more common)
an hypothesis (a hypothesis is more common)
HUT NUT an housewife the first syllable is stressed.
A is sometimes pronounced le 1/ before a hesitation, when we want to emphasise
the following word, or when we want to make a contrast with the.
I think I'll hair a /Cl/ - chocolate ice cream.
It's a ‘'ci' reason - it's not the only reason.
138	no article with plural and
uncountable nouns
1	a/an not used
Plural and uncountable nouns (e.g. cals, wool ► 137.1) cannot normally be used
with a/an (because a/an has a similar meaning to one). Instead, we most often
use no article.
There were cats in every room, (not ... a cals ,..)
Doctors generally work long hours. He's got very big ears.
Her coat is made of pure wool. ‘What's that? Ί think it's salt.'
2	confusing nouns
Some nouns that arc countable in some other languages are uncountable in
English (► 1193 for a list).
I need information and advice, (not . .an information ami an advice)
You've made very good progress (not .. a very good progress )
And note that we never use a/an with weather or English.
IVe’re having terrible weather. (Nor ... a terrible weather)
She speaks very good English, (not ... a very good English.)
3	some and any
Instead of no article, we can sometimes use some or any.
IVe met some nice Danish girls in Scotland. Have you got any matches?
For details, ► 139.
4	the
Instead of no article, we use the when we want to say 'You and I both know
which I mean' (► 136). Compare:
-	I'm working with children. (The hearer doesn’t know which ones.)
How are the children? (- the hearer's children)
-	We need salt (ะะ any salt)
Could you pass the saltT(The hearer can see the salt that is wanted.)
Hut we usually use no article, not the. to talk about people, things, etc เท general
(» 110).
Are dogs more intelligent than cats? (not ... Ihedogs.. . the tats)
Everybody likes music, (not .., the music.)
grammar · 138 no article with plural and uncountable nouns
Determiners: alan and the; my. your, etc; this. that, etc
Section 12
139	the difference between some!any and
no article
1	use with uncountable and plural nouns
Uncountable and plural nouns can often be used either with some!any or with
no article. There is not always a great difference of meaning.
We need (tome) cheese. I didn Ί buy (any) eggs
Some is used especially in affirmative sentences; any is more common In
questions and negatives (for details. ► 161).
2	some!any or no article?
We prefer some'any when we are thinking about limited but rather indefinite
numbers or quantities - when we don’t know, care or say exactly how much/
many. We prefer no article when we are thinking about unlimited numbers or
quantities, or not thinking about numbers/quantities at all. Compare:
We've planted some roses in the garden. (A limited number; the speaker
doesn't say how many.)
I like roses. (No idea of number.)
-	We got talking to some students. (A limited number.)
Our next-door neighbours are students. (The main idea is classification,
not number.)
-	I've just bought some books on computing. (A limited number.)
There were books on the desk, on the floor, on the chairs,...
(A large number.)
Would you like some more rice? (An indefinite amount - as much as the
listener wants.)
We need rice, sugar, eggs, butler, beer, and toilet paper. (The speaker is
thinking just of the things that need to be bought, not of the amounts.)
-	Is there any water in the fridge? (The speaker wants a limited amount.)
Is there water on the moon? (The interest is in the existence of water, not the
amount.)
-	This heating system hardly uses any oil. (rhe interest is in the amount.)
This heating system doesn't use oil (The interest is in the type of fuel, not
the amount.)
We do not use some!any when it is clear exactly how much/many we are talking
about. Compare:
You've got some great books.
You've got pretty toes (A definite number - ten. You've got some pretty toes
would suggest that the speaker is not making clear how many of them arc
pretty - perhaps six or sewn!)
grammar - 139 the difference between some 'any and no article
140	talking in general
1	the does not mean 'all'
We do not use the with uncountable or plural nouns to talk about things in
general - to talk about all books, all people or all life, for example. The does not
mean all'. Instead, we use no article. Compare:
- Moire the books off that chair and sit down. (ะ particular books)
Hooks are expensive, (not The books are expensive.)
I'm studying the life of Beethoven. (= one particular life)
Life is complicated, (wn lhe life...)
'Where's the cheese? Ί ate it:
I love cheese.
-	I've joined the local Dramatic Society.
It’s not always easy to fit in with society.
-	I never really understood the nature of my father's work.
She's very interested in nature, especially animals and birds.
-	Write your name in the space at the bottom of the page.
Would you like to travel into space'
-	Why has the light gone out?
Nothing can travel faster than light.
Note that most (meaning the majority of) is used without the.
Most birds can fly. (not (he most-birds ...)
Most of the children got very tired, (noi Themostof lhe children ..)
2	generalisations with singular countable nouns
Sometimes we talk about things in general by using the with a singular
countable noun.
Schools should concentrate more on lhe child and less on exams.
Ulis is common with the names of scientific instruments and inventions, and
musical instruments.
Life would be quieter without lhe telephone.
Jhe violin is more difficult than the piano.
We can also generalise by talking about one example of a class, using a!an
(meaning 'any') with a singular countable noun.
A baby deer can stand as soon as it's bom. A child needs plenty of love.
Note that we cannot use a!an เท this way when we are generalising about all of
the members of a group together.
lhe tiger is bl danger of becoming extinct, (noi a liger is เท danger of beeonum
extinct. The sentence is about the whole tiger family, not about
individuals.)
Do you like horses' (not Do you like Ct horse')

grammar · 140 talking in
Determiners; a/sn and the; my, your, etc; this, that,
Section 12
141	the: difficult cases
When we generalise about member» of a group, meaning 'any/evety individual',
we usually use no article. For example, we use no article to generalise with
uncountable and plural words (► 140); but we use the to show that the listener,
reader knows which people or things we are talking about (► 136). Sometimes
both these meanings come together, and it is difficult to know which form is
correct. The grammatical distinctions in this area are not very clean often the
same idea can be expressed both with the and with no article. The following
notes may help.
1	groups: nurses or the nurses·, railways or the railways?
when we generalise about members of a group, we usually use no article. But if
we talk about the group as a whole - as if it was a well-known unit - we are
more likely to use the. Compare:
-	Nurses mostly work very hard, (nearly every individual)
The nurses have never gone on strike, (the well-known professional body)
-	Stars vary greatly เท size, (every one is different)
The stars are really bright tonight, (the whole of our familiar night sky)
-	Farmers often vote Conservative, (individuals vote)
What has this government done for the farmers? (the whole
professional body)
It’s difficult for railways to make a profit, (any railways)
The railways are gelling more and more unreliable, (our well-known railways)
This often happens when we talk about nationalities. Compare:
Neu> Zealanders don't like to be mistaken for Australians
The Australians suffered heavy losses in the First World War.
2	French painters; the Impressionists
We are more likely to use the if we are talking about a closed' group or class
with a relatively definite, limited number of members. Compare:
-	French painters (a large Indefinite group)
the Impressionists (a particular artistic movement; we know more or less who
belonged to the group)
-	19th century poets
the Homantic poets (Shelley, Keats. Byron. Wordsworth and a few others)
Specialists are likely to use the for groups or classes that they study or know
about. Compare:
Metals are mostly shiny.
Next term we're going to study the metals เท detail.
3	1960s music; the music of the 1960s
Some expressions are half general' - in the middle between general and
particular. If we talk about 1961)ร music, eighteenth-century history or poverty in
fíritain. we arc not talking about all music” history or poverty, blit these are still
rather general ideas (compared with the music น'- heard last night, the history I
did al school or the poverty I grew up เท). เท these half general' expressions, ■*
grammar - 141 the: difficult
we usually use no article. However, the is often used when the noun is followed
by a limiting, defining phrase, especially one with of. Compare:
I960; music	the music of the 1960$
African butterflies the butterflies of Africa
4	physical environment: the town, the sea
The is used with a number of rather general expressions referring to our physical
environment - the world around US and its climate. Ihe suggests that everybody
is familiar with what we are talking about. Examples are:
the town, the country, the mountains, the sea. the seaside, the wind, the rain,
the weather, the sunshine, the night.
My wife likes the seaside, but I prefer the mountains.
Hritish people talk about the weather a lot. I love listening to the wind
But note that no article is used with nature, society or space when these have a
'general' meaning (► 140).
5	on the bus; at the gym
We use the (with a singular countable noun) when we talk about some kinds of
thing that are part of everybody's lives, like 'the bus' or the hairdresser'. เท this
case the bus, for example, does not mean 'one bus that you know about’; we use
the to suggest that taking a bus is a common experience that we all share.
I have some of my best ideas when I'm on the bus.
Most of my friends go to the gym two or three times a week.
Do you sing in the bath'
I’ve stopped reading the newspaper because it's too depressing.
For Umiln npmUons with no artictr (e g เท bed. เท ttorpual). » 142.1.
6	She kicked him on the knee.; He sat at the side.
We sometimes use the even when it is not exactly clear which of several
particular persons or things we are talking about. This can happen when there
are several similar possibilities, and it is unnecessary to be more definite.
Lying by the side of the road we saw the wheel of a car.
(sot... fl •«*«๗ of ft «พ.)
lack Perkins is the son of a rich banker, (who may have more than one son)
She kicked him on the knee.
The is often used like this with side and wrong.
I usually sit at the side in church. He's the wrong man for me.
(on the phone) I'm sorry. You've got a/the wrong number.
142	special rules and exceptions
1	common expressions without articles: in bed; at school
เท some common fixed expressions to do with place, time and movement,
normally countable nouns are treated as uncountable*, without articles.
Examples are:
to/at in from school/university/college	to/at/in/into/from church
to/in/into/out of bed prison	to/in/into/out of hospital (BrE)
to/al from work to/at sea lo/in/from town
grammar · 142
rules and exceptions
Determiners: a/an and the; my, your, etc this, that, etc
setion 12
at/from home	leave home
leave/start/enter school/university/college
by day at night
by radio/phone, lelter/mail/emalbtext
With place nouns, expressions with or without articles may have different
meanings, compare:
- I met her al college, (when พเ· were students)
I'll meet you at the college. (The college is just a meeting place.)
Megan's in hospital, (as a patient)
I left my coat เท the hospital when I was visiting Megan.
เท American English, university and hospital are not used without articles.
She was unhappy at the university.
Say that again and I'll put you in the hospital
double expressions: with knife and fork
Articles are often dropped in double expressions, particularly with prepositions.
with knife and fork	on land and sea	day after day
with hat and coal	arm เท arm	husband and wife
from top to bottom inch by inch
tor Mr Ar brrod and (Ar) hrtkr. · re.
3	possessive 'ร
Nouns lose their articles after possessive 'ร.
the coat that belongs to lack = lack's coat (xoi lack'ร lheeoai
OH the lack'ร twtij
the economic problems of America = America's economic problems
I	\	I
I steI Irn. nrnvrnu J ntrm/rrnt rrrcrmt rrij I
But the possessive noun itself may have an article.
the U'ife of the boss = the boss's wife
4	noun modifiers
When a noun modifies another noun, the first noun’s article is dropped.
lessons in how to play the guitar guitar lessons
a spot on the รนท = a sunspot
5	both and all
We often leave out the after both.
Roth (the) children are good at languages.
And we generally leave out the between all and a number.
All (the) three brothers were arrested.
We usually leave out the after all in all day. all night, all week, all year, all winter
and all summer.
lie’s been away all week	I havenΊ seen her all day.
6	kind of. etc
We usually leave out a!an after kind of, son of. type of and similar expressions
(► 592).
What kind of (a) person is she? Haw you got a cheaper sort of radio?
They've developed a new variety of sheep.
grammar · 142 special rules and exceptions
7	amount and number
The is dropped after the amount/number of.
I was surprised at the amount of money colletled. (not ... of the money)
The number of unemployed is rising steadily.
8	man and woman
Unlike other singular countable nouns, man and woman can be used in a
general sense without articles.
Man and woman were created equal.
But we more often use a woman and a man, or men and women.
A woman without a man is like a fish without a bicycle, (old feminist joke)
Men and women have similar abilities and needs.
Man is also commonly used to mean ‘the human race’, though many people
regard this usage as sexist and prefer to avoid it (► 328.6).
How did man first discoter fire?
9	days, months and seasons
We drop the when we mean the day. month before or after this one’.
Where were you last Saturday?	See you on Thursday.
I was away in April.	Were moving next September.
To talk about the seasons in general, we can say spring or the spring, summer or
the summer1 etc. There is little difference.
Home is lovely in (the) spring. I like (the) winter best.
When we are talking about particular springs, summers, etc, we are more likely
IO use the.
I worked very hard in the summer that year.
10	musical instruments
We often use the * singular when we talk about musical instruments เท general.
or about playing musical instruments.
The violin is really difficult. Who's that on the piano?
But the Is often dropped when talking about jazz or pop, and sometimes when
talking about classical music.
This recording was made with Miles Davis on trumpet.
She studied oboe and saxophone al the Royal Academy of Music.
11	(the) radio, (the) cinema, (the) theatre and television
When we talk about our use of these forms of entertainment, we generally say
the radio, the cinema (BrE), the theatre, but television or TV.
I	always listen to the radio while I'm driving.
II	UKIS a great treat to go to the cinema or the theatre when I was a child. (BrE)
What 's on ท?
The is often dropped in all four cases when we talk about these institutions as
art forms or professions.
Cinema is different from theatre in several ways.
He's worked in radio and television all his life.
grammar · M2 special rules and exceptions
Determiners: a/anand the; my, your, etc; this, that, etc
12	jobs and positions: He was elected President.
/hร.,.4.-''.0.1ร,5โ'1,'".,ร1’·’'.1*e «--"-.«tàrh. àúàr Obama. Compare:
Qwwr Elizabeth had dinner U'ilh President Obama
The Queen had dinner with the President
ÜJJ** "θ' “““£“ed,he “ทุ่พุ๊«พุ๊หฺท» ok- «-«Hence, when we say that
Compare * or Ra ns a unlquc posjtion ,lhe 0๗>’ one in lhe organisation).
They appointed him Head Librarian Where’s the librarian '
He was elected President เท 1879 I want to see the president
13	addressing people. Good morning, children.
.'ร Í" ?ddress poupe ol peoplc di,ec‘*y bv using rhe with (he name of
tne group.
(iood morning, children (no> Good-morning, thvehddren.)
14	exclamations: What a.../
Wc..ร?‘๙'?'' w!lh ?'พุ1.1,"· countable nouns in exclamations after What.
1» hat a lonely dress’ (not What lonely dressl)
Nouril·?1 ๙°โ3.??0, ‘’โ,พุ’·’1 ln «‘Clamations with uncountable nouns.
What nonsense· (not What« nonsense’)	What luck!
15	illnesses
The names of illnesses and pains are usually uncountable, with no article.
เท standard British English (for more details, ► 119.7).
Have you had appendicitis' I’ve got toothache again.
Λ/αη is used in a few cases such as a cold, a headache.
ท,!,!โ^!.a h"'l‘b‘! cold.,	Ηα,ν	รํ0, a headache?
. โโ" พุ‘พุcd ,n.,?rmallv wi,h a lew common illnesses.
L!. n* ร0, (lhe) flu. (AmE always lhe flu)
She's never had (the) measles
American usage is different in some cases.
'‘โน!,,!โ.' '.,!0che1'‘พุ rachr a backache/a stomach ache
(BrE I t<e got toothache earache, etc)
16	parts of the body, etc
When talking about someone's possessions, or parts of their body, we usually
use possessive*. not the.
Hcjlood เทthe doorway, his coat over his arm. (.NOT., the eval over
ท...*ΪΓ	‘"■พุ ‘“''พุ พุ๓ K«'y broke d,e arm dimb.ng)
BUI me is common after prepositions, especially when we are talking about
Wows, pains and other things that often happen to pan* of people’s bodies
She hit him เท the stomach He นพ shot in lhe leg.
Can’t you look me เท the eye?
17	measurements: by the hour; twice a week
Note the use of rhe in measuring expressions beginning with by.
Do you sell eggs by the kilo or by the dozen ?
He sits watching TV by the hour. Can I pay by the month>	-»
Section 12
grammar · 142 special rules and exceptions
Alan is used to relate one measuring unit to another.
sixty pence a kilo thirty miles an hour twice a week
18	place names
We use the with these kinds of place names:
•	seas (the Atlantic)
•	mountain groups (the Himalayas)
•	island groups (the West Indies)
•	rivers (the Rhine)
•	deserts (the Sahara)
•	most hotels (the Grand Hotel)
•	most cinemas ami theatres (rhe Odeon; the Playhouse)
•	most museums and art galleries (the British Museum; the Frick)
We usually use no article with:
•	continents, countries, states, counties, departments, etc (Africa, Brazil, Texas.
Berkshire, Westphalia)
•	towns (Oxford)
•	streets (New Street, Willow Road)
•	lakes (lake Michigan)
Exceptions: places whose name เร (or contains, a common noun like republic.
Slate, union (e.g. the People's Republic of China, the United Kingdom, the United
States). Note also the Netherlands, and its seat of government The Hague. There
are a few countries whose names used to have the, but are now normally used
with no article: (The) Ukraine, (The) Lebanon, (The) Gambia. (The) Sudan.
The is unusual in the titles of the principal public buildings and organisations of
a town, when the title begins with the town name.
Oxford University (sol the Oxford University)
Hull Station (soi the Hull Station)
Salisbury (nthedral	Manchester City Council
Birmingham Airport Cheltenham Football Club
Withthe names of less important institutions, usage varies.
(The) East Oxford Community Centre. (The) Newbury School of English.
Names of single mountains vary. Most have no article.
Everest Kilimanjaro Snowdon Table Mountain
But definite articles arc usually translated in the English versions of European
mountain names, except those beginning l.e Mont.
The Meije ( La Mcije)
The Matterhorn (- Das Matterhorn)
tan Mont Blanc (noi the Mont Blanc)
19	newspapers and magazines
The names of newspapers usually have the.
The Times lite Washington Post
The names of magazines do not always have the.
New Scientist
grammar · 142 special rules and exceptions
Determiners: a/an and the; my, your, etc; this, that, etc
Section 12
20	abbreviated styles
We usually leave out articles เท abbreviated styles (►291).
newspaper headlines
headings
picture captions
notices, posteis, etc
instructions
numbering and labelling
MAN KILLED '"> MOUNTAIN
Introduction Chapter 2
Section B
Mother anti child
SUPER CINEMA
Open packet at other end.
Go through door A
Control to Car 27: can you hear me?
Turn to page 26. (not ...the page 26.)
(native-speaker) dictionary entries palm inner surface of hand...
IU»	take car to garage; pay phone bill;...
notes	/ thinks company needs new office
Hir rtCks พ»h íMwúõons (NATO, the (ISA). · J16.2-J36i
l<*- hundrri ««. » jja.10. For rtr Nmd. etc. ► IH8 I.
For IS, tapannr. Mr. » เพ?. to, wa *nd thr พน. ► 53L tor last and m, toil. » 505.
For Ihr imlcad ot enough. » 450®. For anothrr ru« day,, a good Om tv. · IJ0.7.
143	possessive determiners: my, your, etc
1	What kind of words are they?
My, your, his, her, แร, our and their are pronouns, because they stand (or
possessive noun phrases: my younger brother means the speaker’s younger
brother’; their plans means for example those people’s plans' or
the children's plans'.
They arc used at the beginning of noun phrases, and (unction as determiners.
They are not adjectives, though they arc sometimes called 'possessive adjectives’
เท older grammars and dictionaries.
Like all 'possessive' words and structures, they can express various ideas besides
possession.
Note that mine, yours, etc (► 176) are also pronouns (of a different kind), but
they are not used as determiners
2	one’s and whose
One's (► 181.5) and whose (► 235. 628) are also possessive determiners ’
pronouns.
It's easy to lose one’s temper when one is criticised.
An orphan is a child whose parents are dead.	whose bicycle is that?
3	not used with other determiners
My, your, etc are not used with other determiners like the. a/an or this.
She's lost her keys, (not .. . the her keys.)
If we want to use a!an or this, that, etc with a possessive, we use the
'...ofmine structure(► 177).
A friend of mine has just invited me to Italy, (not a my friend . . .)
How's that brother of yours? (not ... llmfyom-brafher?)	-»
grammar · 143 possessive determiners: my. your, etc
4	distributive use: She told them to open their books, etc
After a plural possessive, we do not normally use a singular noun in the sense of
one each'. (For details, » 131.)
The teacher told the children to open their books, (not . . . their book:)
5	articles instead of possessives: a pain in the head
We sometimes use articles instead of my, your, etc. This happens in common
prepositional phrases which refer to the subject or object, mostly when we are
talking about blows, pains and other things that often happen to parts of
people's bodies.
The ball hit him on the head. She's got a pain in the stomach.
In other cases we do not normally use articles instead of possessives (► 142.16).
She's got a parrot on her shoulder, (not She's got a parrot on the shoulder.)
Mia broke her leg playing football, (not Mia broke the-leg-. . .)
He stood there, his eyes closed and his hands in his pockets, looking half
asleep, (not . . .-the eyes closed and the hands in the pockets-. . .)
6	spelling: its, whose
The possessives its and whose have no apostrophes. It's and who's are not
possessives, but contractions (► 337): they mean 'it is’ or 'it has'; 'who is' or
'who has’. Compare:
The dog's in a good mood. It's just had its breakfast.
‘Whose little girl is that?’ ‘You mean the one who's making all that noise?’
For structures like Do you mind my smoking?, ► 94.3. For my own1 your own, etc, ► 552.
For the older English form thy, ► 318.10. For southern AmE you all’s, » 174.8.
144	this and that
1	determiners or pronouns
This/that/these/those are often called 'demonstratives' in grammars. They can
be used as determiners at the beginning of noun phrases. (They are not
adjectives, though they are sometimes called 'demonstrative adjectives' in older
grammars and dictionaries.)
Look at that butterfly. Let me show you these patterns.
They can also be used without nouns, as 'demonstrative pronouns'.
Look at this. That's terrible!
Determiner and pronoun uses are both covered in this entry for convenience.
2	people and things
This/that/these/those can be used as determiners with nouns that refer to either
people or things.
this child that house
But when they are used without nouns ('pronoun' use), this/that/these/those
normally only refer to things.
This costs more than that, (but not This says he's tired:)
Put those down - they're dirty. This sdys^he's'iTrcd/y gp away.)
grammar · 144 this and that
Determiners: a/an and the; my. your. etc. this. that, etc
Section 12
However, this, etc can be used without nouns for people when we say who the
people are
Hello, this ll Elisabeth. Is that Huth? that looks like Mrs Walker.
Mio's that?	these are the Smiths.
Note also Those who ... (► 144,7 below).
3	the difference
We use this!these for people and things which are close to the speaker.
This is eery nice - can I have some more?
Get this cat off my shoulder.
I don't know what I'm doing in this country, (not ... in that country.)
Do you like these earrings? Joseph gate them to me.
We use that/those for people and things which are more distant from the
speaker, or not present.
That smells nice - is it for lunch? Get that cal off the piano.
All the time I was in that country I haled it.
I like those earrings. Where did you get them?
4	time
This/these can refer to situations and events which are going on or just about to
I like this music. What is it?
l isten to this. You'll like it. (not l isten to that...)
Watch this. This is a police message.
That/those can refer to situations and events which have just finished, or which
are more distant in the past.
Th at was nice. What was il? (not This พนร nne...)
Did you see that? Who said that?
Have you ever heard from that Scottish boy you used to go out with?
ÍJwkM ร-·^s»a nz.uf fA 2W1 Ziiif	\
C’vviir Vv r TUK	ΠΤΊΓνι/Πι ■<· rrr, >
That can show that something has come to an end.
.. and that's how il happened.
Anything elseV 'No, that's all. thanks.' (เท a shop)
OK. That'ร it. I'm leaving. Il was nice knowing you.
5	acceptance and rejection
We sometimes use this/these to show acceptance or interest, and that/those to
show dislike or rejection. Compare:
Now tell me about this new boyfriend of yours.
I don't like that new boyfriend of yours.
6	on the telephone
On the telephone, British people use this to identify themselves, and that to ask
about the hearer’s identity.
Hello. This is Max. Is that Alex?
Americans can also use this to ask about the hearer's identity.
Who is this?	-1
grammar - 144 this and that
7 that, those meaning 'the one(s)'
In a formal style, that and those can be· used with a following description to
mean ‘the one(s)’. Those who.. means ‘the people who ..
A dog's intelligence is much greater than that of a cat.
those who can, do. those who can't, teach.
8	this and that meaning 'so'
เท an informal style, this and that are often used with adjectives and adverbs in
the same way as so.
I didn't realise it was going to be this hot.
If your boyfriend's that clever, why isn't he rich?
เท standard English, only so is used before a following clause.
It was so cold that I couldn't feel my fingers, (sor ft was that cold that...)
Not all that can be used to mean nut very·.
‘How was the play? ‘Not all that good:
9	Other uses
Note the special use of this (with no demonstrative meaning) in conversational
story-telling.
There was this travelling salesman, you see. And he wanted. ..
I halt those can suggest that an experience is familiar to everybody.
I can't stand that perfume of hers.
This use Is common in advertisements.
When you gel that empty feeling - break for a snack.
Earn more money during those long winter evenings. Call...
แพ dlfcrriw bttwvcn Ml «Hl Aar arc U.à IO the (MmncM bctwwn he" ind Hurt (► Illi).
tome and รเ (► 42») and t-ιπχ and lair (» 40พ.	For Ms one, that one. ««. » IK.
For these and those with tintfidar เห d of, too of. ►ร».	For that ohtch. ► 2Ϊ7.2Ι.
145	this/that and it: things that have just
been mentioned	_________
1	referring back
this, that and it can all be used to refer back to things or situations that have
just been talked or written about. Il does not give any special emphasis.
So slut decided to paint her house pink. Il upset the neighbours a bit.
This and that are more emphatic; they ‘shine a light’, so to speak, on the things
or situations, suggesting an interesting new fact has been mentioned’.
So she decided to paint her house pink. This That really upset the neighbours,
as you can imagine.
This Is preferred when there is more to say about the new subject of discussion.
So she decided to paint her house pink. This upset the neighbours so much that
they took her to court, believe il or not. The case came up last week...
Then in 1917 he met Andrew lewis. This was a turning point in his career:
the two men entered into a partnership which lasted until 1946, and...
(More natural than ... That was a turning point...)
grammar · I IS this/that and if. things that have just been mentioned
Section 12
Determiners: alan and the, my. your, etc; this, that, etc
2	more than one thing
When more (han one thing has been mentioned, it generally refers to the main
subject of discussion; this and that generally refer to a new subject that has been
introduced (often the last thing mentioned). Compare:
-	We keep the ice cream machine in the spare room. It is mainly used by the
children, incidentally. (The machine is used by the children.)
We keep the ice cream machine in the spare room. 'Illis That is mainly used
by the children. Incidentally. (The spare room is used by the children.)
-	I was carrying the statue to my office when I dropped it on the kitchen table.
It was badly damaged. (The statue was damaged.)
I was carrying the statue to my office when I dropped it on the kitchen table.
This was badly damaged (The table was damaged.)
3	focus
It is only used to refer to things which are ‘in focus’ - which haw already been
talked about. This is preferred when we "bring things into focus" before anything
has been said about them. Compare:
I enjoyed 'Vampires' Picnic". It This is a film for all the family...
VAMPIRES' PICNIC: This is a film for all the family... (not VAMMRPS’PtGNiC:
Is ร*น-fibrtfor aU shefamdy ..)
4	referring forward
Only this can refer forward to something that has not yet been mentioned.
Now what do you think about this? I thought I'd get a job in Spain for six
months, and then ...(พ! Now what do you think about that nt...)
grammar · 145 this!that and it. things that have just been mentioned
Section 13 Determiners: Quantifiers
INTRODUCTION
Determiners in this group are mainly quantifiers: they show how much of a
class or category we are talking about (all, most, some, none,...).
other น;es
Besides their use as determiners เท noun phrases, these words can generally be
used without following nouns if the meaning is clear. Compare:
He doesn't eat any meat, and not much fish
Fish? He eats some, hut not mueh.
This ‘pronoun’ use of quantifiers is dealt with here, and not in Seaion 14, for
convenience, along with some other uses of these words. For uses not included
here, see the Index.
A few words which can have determiner and non determiner uses (e g. other,
only, such, which, what and numbers) are covered elsewhere - see the Index.
putting determiners together: use of of
Quantifiers can be put together if the combination makes sense.
We meet every Jew days.
Have you got any more coffee?
When a quantifier is put together with a ‘group Γ determiner (article, possessive
or demonstrative, ► Section 12), we use a structure with of. Compare:
-	some people
some of the people
-	each child
each of my children
-	neither door
neither of these doors
The same thing happens before a pronoun. Compare:
most horses
most of them
A quantifier with of. can be used directly before a noun เท a few cases. This
happens with proper nouns such as place names, and sometimes with
uncountable nouns that refer to the whole of a subject or activity.
Most of Wales was without electricity last night.
Much of philosophy is concerned with questions that have no answers.
Many, most, little, least, few and fewest can follow 'group Γ determiners directly
his many friends
the most money
-	a little time
the least difficulty
-	these few poems
the fewest problems
grammar · Section 13 Determiners: Quantifiers
Do you know what’s wrong with these, and why?
G All of children can be difficult ► 147.1
G Wc all can swim. ► 147.2-148
G All stood up. ► 149.1
G All what I have is yours. ► 149.2
G She lost all. ► 149.2
G The every plate was broken. ► 152.2
o I've written to my every friend. ► 152.2
G I see her every days. » 151.1
G Every room are being used. » 151.1
G Each new day are different. » 153.)
G He’s lost nearly each friend he had. ► 154.3
G Both iny brothers carried the piano upstairs. » 155.1
G The both children have fair hair. ► 155.3
G Come on Tuesday or Wednesday. Either days are OK. ► 156.1
G Please be quiet. Some of people want to get to sleep. ► 158.6
G She’s unhappy because she’s got any friends. » 159.3
G I can write with any hand. ► 160
G ‘Which newspaper would you like?’ ’It doesn't matter. Every one.’» 162
G Not any tourists ever came to our ullage. ► 163.4
G None of my parents could be there. » 163.5
G No one of my friends wished me a happy birthday. ► 164.)
G He's got much money. ► 165.4
G The most children like ice cream. » 167.1
G Most of cheese is made from cow’s milk. » 167.)
G A lot of my friends wants to emigrate. ► 172.2
G The majority of criminals is non violent ► 172.5
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
146	all·, introduction
147	till (of) with noun phrases
and pronouns
148	all with the verb: We can
all swim.
149	all, everybody,·'everyone
and everything
all and whole
every (one)
every and all
each and every-, the difference
both
either
neither
any
L82«rnrLA2S
160 any = it doesn't matter who.
which/what’
16) some and any. the main
differences
162	any and every, the difference
163	no, none, and nor a I any
164	no one and none
165	much and many
166	more
168	(aflinte and (a) few
169	less and fewer
170	least and fewest
172 quantifying expressions:
a lot, lots, a great deal,
the majority, etc
grammar · Section 13 Determiners: Quantifiers
146	all: introduction
1	three or more items
All refers to three or more items. Compare:
I'll take all three shirts, please.
I’ll take both shirts, (not ... all two shirts.)
2	all (of) with noun phrases and pronouns
All modifies noun phrases or pronouns.
All (of) the people were singing. / haven't read all of it.
Give my love to them all
3	with the subject or the verb
When all modifies the subject, it can RO either with the subject or with the verb.
All the people were singing. The people were all singing.
เผ inerr ci«in«ik* » แ7-Ι4Λ
4	all without a noun
All can sometimes be used without a noun to mean 'everything' but only in
certain structures (► 149).
All that matters is to be happy. That's all.
5	all with adjectives, adverbs, etc: all alone
All can be used to emphasise some adjectives, prepositions and adverbs.
You're all wet	She walked all round the town.
I was all alone.	Tell me all about your plans.
It's all because of you. I looked all round, but I couldn Ί see anything
147	all (of) with noun phrases and pronouns____
1	all and all of
All (of) can modify noun phrases and pronouns, especially in American English.
Before a noun with a determiner (for example the, my, this), all and all of are
both possible. All is more common than all of in British English.
She’s eaten all (of) the cake. All (of) my friends like riding
Before a noun with no determiner, we do not normally use of.
All children can be difficult, (not All efehildren ..)
2	all of + personal pronoun
With personal pronouns, we use all of ' uslyou them
All of us you. them can be a subject or object.
All of us can come tomorrow, (not AHwe...)
She's invited all of you.	Emily sent all of them her love.
grammar · 116 all·, introduction
Determiners: Quantifiers
Section 13
3	pronoun + all
We can put all after pronouns used as objects.
She’s invited you all. Emily sent her love to them all.
I've made US all something to eat.
This does not generally happen with complement pronouns (after be) or in short
answers.
I think that's all of them, (not I think that's them all.)
‘ Who did she invite? ‘All of US. (not Us all.)’
All can follow a subject pronoun (e.g. They all went home), but in this case
it is positioned with the verb (» 148) and may be separated from the pronoun
(e.g. They have all gone home).
For the American plural pronoun you all, ► 174.8.
4	types of noun
All is used mostly before uncountable and plural noun phrases.
all the water all my friends
However, all can be used before some singular countable nouns referring to
things that can naturally be divided into parts.
all that week	all my family	all the way
We can also use all (of) before proper nouns (e.g. the names of places or
writers), especially in BrE.
All (of) London knew about her affairs.
I’ve read all (of) Shakespeare.
With other singular countable nouns, it is more natural to use whole
(e.g. the whole story). For details, ► 150.
5	leaving out the
After all, we sometimes leave out the before numbers.
all (the) three brothers
And we usually leave out the in all day, all thc day]l week, all year, all winter
and all summer.
She stayed here all day. (not . . . all the day).
6	not all.. .
It is not very common to use all + noun as the subject of a negative verb
(e.g. All Americans don't like hamburgers). We more often use not all + noun +
affirmative verb.
Not all Americans like hamburgers.
Note the difference between not all and no. Compare:
Not all birds can fly. No birds can play chess.
148	all with the verb: We can all swim.
When all refers to the subject of a clause, it can go with the verb,
in 'mid-position' (for details of word order, » 200).
We can all swim.	Those apples were all bad.
The guests have all arrived.	My family all work in education.
grammar « 148 all with the verb: We can all swim.
Note that these meanings can also be expressed by using all (of) with the
subject (► 147),
All of us can swim.	All (of) the guests have arrived.
149	all, everybody/everyone and everything
1	all and everybody/everyone
We do not normally use all without a noun phrase to mean 'everybody·.
Compare:
All the people stood up.
Everybody Everyone stood up. (sot All stood up.)
2	all and everything
All (without a noun phrase) can mean ‘everything·, but usually only in the
structure all * relative clause (all that...). Compare:
All (that) I have เร yours, (not All what I have . . .)
Everything is yours, (not AU H yours.)
- She lost all (that) she owned.
She lost everything, (mu She lost all.)
This structure often has a rather negative meaning, expressing ideas like
nothing more' or ‘the only thing(s)’.
This is all I’ve got. All I want is a place to sit down.
All that happened was that he uent to sleep.
Note also That's all (- It's finished: There's no more).
3	older English
เท older English, all could be used alone to mean 'everybody' or 'everything'
(e g. Tell me all. All is lose. All are dead) This only happens regularly in modern
English เท dramatic contexts like newspaper headlines (e g SPY TELLS Al l).
150	all and whole
1	pronunciation
all /3:1/	whole haul/
2	word order
All (of) (especially BrE) and whole can be used with singular noun phrases to
mean 'complete', 'every pan of. The word order Is different.
all (of) » determiner · noun
determiner · whole . noun
tulle spent all (of) the summer at home.
lulie spent the whole summer at home.
- all (of) my life
my whole life
grammar · 149 all, everybody/everyone and everything
Determiners: Quantifiers
Section 13
3	indefinite reference
All is nor generally used before indefinite articles.
She's eaten a whole loaf, (not .. ■ all ft loaf.)
4	uncountable nouns
With most uncountable nouns we prefer all (of).
I’ve drunk all (of) the milk, (not ... the whole milk.)
5	the whole of (mainly BrE)
Instead of whole, the whole of is also possible, especially in British English.
tulle spent the whole of the summer at home.
the whole of my life
Before proper nouns (names) and pronouns we always use the whole of. not
whole. All (of) is also possible.
The whole of / All of Venue was under water, (not Whole Venue ..)
I’ve juft read the whole of/ all of ‘War and Peace'.
I've read the whole of / all of it.
b plural nouns
With plural nouns, all and whole have different meanings. All is like every- whole
means ‘complete’, 'entire'. Compare:
All Indian tribes suffered from white settlement in America. (- Every Indian
tribe suffered ...)
Whole Indian tribes were killed off. (- Complete tribes were killed off; nobody
was left alive in these tribes.)
151	every (one)
1	every + singular
Every Is a determiner. We normally use it before a singular noun (but ► 151.5
below). If the noun is a subject, its verb is also singular.
every · singular noun (- singular verb)
I see her every day. (not ... every days.)
Every room is being used, (not Every room are...)
2	every one of
We use every one of before a pronoun or a determiner (for example the. my,
these). The pronoun or noun is plural, but a following verb is singular.
every one of US/you/them (. singular verb)
ever)' one of - determiner · plural noun (· singular Serb)
His books are wonderful. I’ve read every one of them.
Every one of the children was crying.
3	every one without a noun
We can drop a noun and use every one alone, if the meaning is clear.
His books are great. Every one's worth reading	-»
grammar «151 every (one)
4	negative structures
To negate every, we normally use not every.
Not every kind of bird can fly. (More natural than Every kind of bird
cannot fly.)
5	every + plural noun
Every is used before a plural noun เท expressions that refer to intervals.
I see her every feu’ dayร.	There 'ร a meeting every six weeks.
She had to stop and rest every tuo or three steps.
6	everybody, etc
Everybody, everyone, everything and everywhere are used with singular verbs,
like every.
Everybody has gone home, (not Everybody have...)
Everything I like is either illegal, immoral or fattening.
I found that everywhere was closed.
When possessives and pronouns refer back to everybody'everyone, they can
usually be either singular (more formal) or plural (less formal). Sometimes only
a plural word makes sense. Compare:
Has everybody got his or her ticket? (more formal)
Has everybody got their tickets? (less formal)
When everybody had finished eating the waiters took away their plates.
(not ...his or her plate·)
Note that everyone (- ‘everybody·) does not mean the same as every one (which
can refer to things às well ás people).
7	everyday
Everyday is an adjective meaning 'ordinary', usual', 'routine'. It is not the same
as the adverbial expression every day. Compare:
เท everyday life, you don't often find an elephant in a supermarket.
You don Ί see elephants every day.
8	common expressions
Note the following common expressions with every.
every single
She visits her mother every single day.
every other
We meet every other Tuesday. (ะ___every second Tuesday.)
every so often·, every now and then
We go out for a drink together every so often every now and then.
For more InfomuiKin about nerybody.'nrfyw. · แพ.
grammar · 1SI every (one)
Determiners: Quantifiers
Section 13
152	every and all
Every and all can both be used to talk about people or things in general, or
about all the members of a group. There is little difference of meaning; every
often suggests 'without exception*. The two words are used เท different
structures.
1	every with singular nouns; all with plurals
Every is used with a singular noun. To give the same meaning, all is used with a
plural noun. Compare:
-	Every child needs love, (not AU child Heeds tom.)
All children need love.
-	Every light was out.
All (of) the lights were out.
2	every not used with determiners
We can use all (of), but not normally every, with certain determiners (articles,
possessives or demonstratives). Compare:
-	All (of) the plates were broken.
Every plate was broken, (not Every the plate - fhe every plate...)
-	I've written to all (of) my friends.
I've written to every friend I have. (NOT .. .every my friend ' my every friend.)
3	all with uncountable
We can use all. but not every, with uncountable nouns.
I like all music, (not ... every music.)
4	all day and every day, etc
Note the difference between all day week, etc and every day/week, etc.
She was here all day. (ะ from morning to night)
She was here every’ day. (Monday, Tuesday. Wednesday,...)
แพ the difference between mry and airt, ► IM.
153	each
1	each + singular
Each is a determiner. We use it before a singular noun.
I enjoy each moment (not .. . each moments )
A following verb is also singular.
Each new day is different, (not ... are different)
2	each of
We use each of before a plural pronoun, or before a determiner (for example the.
my, these) with a plural noun.
Each of us sees the world differently.
I phone each of my children once a week.	-*
grammar · 153 each
A following verb is normally singular.
Each of them hat problems.
3	position with object
Each can follow an object (direct or indirect), but does not normally come at the
end of a clause.
She kissed them each on the forehead, (but SWT She kissed them each )
I want them each to make their own decision.
I sent the secretaries each a Christmas card.
However, each can come at the end of a clause in expressions referring to exact
amounts and quantities.
They cost £150 each. I bought the girls two pairs of trainers each
4	without a noun
We can drop a noun after each, if the meaning is clear. However, each one or
each of them is more common in an informal style.
I've got five brothers, and each (one/of them) lives เท a different city.
5	with the verb
When each refers to the subject, it can also go with a verb in mid position, like
all and some adverbs (for details of word order, ► 200). เท this case plural
nouns, pronouns and Serbs are used.
They hair each been told.
We can each apply for our own membership card.
You are each right in a different way.
The plans each have certain advantages and disadvantages.
154 each and every: the difference
1	each with two or more; every with three or more
Each and every are both normally used with singular nouns. Each can be used to
talk about two or more people or things; every is normally used to talk about
three or more.
The business makes less money each/every year, (not ... each/every years.)
She had a child holding on to each hand. (พT.. every hand.)
Tor expressions like mry tuง ytan, tfiwy rfc/r* นepi, ► IMS,
2	meaning
Each and every can often be used without much difference of meaning.
You look more beautiful each/every time I see you.
But we prefer each when we are thinking of people or things separately, one at a
lime. And every is more common when we are thinking of people or things
together, in a group. (Every is closer to all.) So we are more likely to say:
Each person เท turn went to see the doctor.
Every patient came from the same small village.
grammar · 154 each and every, the difference
Determiners: Quantifiers
Section 13
3	structures
We do no( use each with words and expressions like almost, practically, nearly or
without exception, which stress the idea of a whole group.
She's lost nearly every friend she had. (not ... nearly each friend...)
Fitch can be used in some structures where every is impossible.
They each said what they thought (mrr NOT They every...)
Each of them spoke for five minutes, (etn NOT Every of them...)
for mor» drt.ih » I5J .mt . ISI (««>·
155 both
1	meaning
noth means 'each of two'.
Hath my parents were horn in Scotland.
When the meaning is not 'each of two', we normally use a different expression.
My two brothers carried the piano upstairs. (More natural than Both my
brothers carried the piano upstairs they didn't each carry it separately.)
2	both and both of
Before a noun with a determiner (e g the. my. these), both and both of are
equally possible.
She's eaten both (of) the chops. Both (of) these oranges are bad.
He lost both (of) his parents when he was a child.
We often drop the or a possessive after both; of is not used in this case.
She’s eaten both chops (not .. both of chops)
He lost both parents when he was a child.
3	the not used before both
Note that we do not put the before both.
both (the) children (not the both children)
4	personal pronouns: both of
With personal pronouns, we use both of · US/you/them. Both of us/you/them
can be a subject or object.
Both of them can come tomorrow. She's invited both of US.
Emily sends both of you her love.
We can put both after pronouns used as objects.
She's invited US both Emily sends you both her love.
But this structure is not used in complements (after be) or in short answers.
■ Who broke the window - Sarah or Alicer 'll was both of them'.
(mii . . . them both.)
• Who did she invite? Both of US.' (not พร both.)
5	position with verb
When both refers to the subject of a clause, it can go with the verb,
in 'mid position’, like all and each (for details of word order, ► 200).
We can both swim.	Those oranges were both bad.
The children have both gone to bed. My sisters both work เท education. -»
grammar - 155 both
Note that these meanings can also be expressed by using both (of) with a subject
(sec above).
Hath of US can su,‘in Both (of) the children have gone to bed.
6	negative structures
Instead OÍ both ... nor, we normally use neither (► 157).
Neither of them is here. (xor Hath of them are not here.)
156 either
1	either * singular
We use either with a singular noun to mean 'one or the other' of two.
Come on Tuesday or Thursday. Hither day is OK. (not Hither days ...)
She didn't get on with either parent (not ... either parents')
2	either of
We use either of before a determiner (for example the. my. these) or a pronoun.
A following noun Is plural.
You can use either of the bathrooms
I don Ί like either of my history teachers.
I don't like either of them.
A verb after either of is more often singular, but it can sometimes be plural in an
informal style.
Either of the children is perfectly capable of looking after the baby.
She just doesn’t care U’hat either of her parents say(s).
3	without a noun
We can use either alone if the meaning is clear.
‘Wouldyou like tea or coffeeT 7 don't mind. Either.’
a pronouns
When a pronoun is used later in a clause to refer back to either · noun/
pronoun, the later pronoun can be singular (more formal) or plural (more
informal).
If either of the boys phones, tell him’them I'll be in this evening.
5	either side/end
เท these expressions, either sometimes means 'each'.
There are roses on either side of the door.
6	pronunciation
Either is pronounced 'aida(r). or /'i:da(r)/ (in American English usually i:Aar).
grammar · 156 either
Determiners: Quantifiers
Seaion 13
157
neither
neither + singular noun
We use neither before a singular noun to mean not one and not the other (of
two)’.
'Can you come on Monday or Tuesday? 'I'm afraid neither day is possible.'
neither of + plural
We use neither of before a determiner (for example the. my, these), and before
pronoun. The noun or pronoun is plural.
Neither of my brothers can sing (not Neither my brothers f«« sing.)
Neither of US saw it happen.
After neither of » noun'pronoun.
Neither of my sisters is married.
เท an informal style, a plural verb is possible.
Neither of my sisters are married.
neither used alone
We can use neither without a noun or pronoun, if the meaning is clear.
'Which one do you wantr 'Neither:
pronunciation
เท British English, neither can be pronounced both ท,H0a(r)/ and "ni:ôa(ry.
เท American English, the usual pronunciation is/*ni:darA
singular verb เท a formal style.
158 some
1	meaning: indefinite quantity/number
Some is a determiner. It often suggests an Indefinite quantity or number, and is
used when it is not important to say exactly how much many we arc thinking of.
I need some new clothes.
Would you like some tea?
2	pronunciation
When some has this indefinite meaning, it usually has a 'weak' pronunciation
s(o)nv before (adjective ') noun.
some s(o)nv new clothes
some:sfa/nv tea
3	some and any
With this meaning, some IS most common in affirmative clauses, and in
questions which expect or encourage the answer 'Yes’. เท other cases, any is
generally used. For details, ►161.
grammar· 158 some
Com pair:
-	There are some children at the front door.
1)0 you mind if I put some music on?
Did you meet any interesting people on rhe trip?
She hasn't got any manners.
4	some and a/an
Some (in ihis sense) is used in similar ways to the indefinite article a/an (► 137).
However, it is not normally used with the same kind of nouns. Compare:
I need a new coat, (singular countable noun) (nor... some new eon/.)
I need some new shirts, (plural countable noun)
I need some help, (uncountable noun)
5	when some is not used
With an uncountable or plural noun, some usually suggests the idea of an
indefinite (but not very large) quantity or number. When there is no idea of a
limited quantity or number, we do not usually use some. For details, ► 139.
Compare:
We’พ* planted some roses in the garden, (a limited number)
I like roses, (no idea of number)
bring some food in case we gel hungry.
The President has appealed for food for the earthquake victims.
6	some and some of; some with no following noun
Before another determiner (article, demonstrative or possessive word) or a
pronoun, we use some of. Compare:
-	/'ir got tickets for some concerts next month. (.SOT... seme of concerts. ..)
Dans coming Io some of the concerts. (เสท·... some lhe contens . ..)
Some people want to get to sleep, (xor... some of people ...)
Some of us want to gel to sleep, (μπ .Some พ...)
Nouns can be dropped after some, if the meaning is clear.
I've got too many strawberries. Would )<ou like some?
Before of, or with no following noun, some is pronounced /SAtlV.
some 'ร Atrv of US	Would you like some /SARIIT
7	contrast with others, etc
Some (pronounced ssm ) can have a more emphatic meaning, contrasting with
others, all or enough.
Some people like the sea; others prefer the mountains.
Some of us were late, but we were all there by ten o'clock.
I've got some money, but not enough
8	an unknown person or thing
Some (/SAtnO can refer to an unknown person or thing (usually with a singular
countable noun).
Some idiot has taken the bath plug.
There must be some yob I could do.
She's living in some village เท Yorkshire.
We can use this structure to suggest that we are not interested in somebody or
something, or that we do not think much of him/her/it.
grammar · 158
Determiners: Quantifiers
Section 13
Emily's gone IO Amenta to many some sheep farmer or other.
I don 'I want to spend my life doing some boring little office job.
9 some party!
In informal speech, some can show enthusiastic appreciation.
It Uftu some parly!
10	with numbers
Some (ฆเพ) with a number suggests that the number is high or impressive.
We have exported some four thousand tons of bootlaces this year.
>0, Mimr/orf, and anytrnà1. MMnrihing and anything «Í. » ISO.
1	meaning: indefinite amount or number
Any is a determiner. It generally suggests an indefinite amount or number, and
is used when it is not important to say how much many we are thinking of.
Because of its open', non-specific meaning, any is often used in questions and
negative clauses, and เท other cases where there is an Idea of doubt or negation.
Is there any more coffee?
We didn't have any problems going through customs.
You never give me any help.
rhe noise of the party prevented me from getting any sleep.
I suddenly realised I'd come out without any money.
Any is common after if.
If you find any blackberries, keep some for me.
Sometimes any means if there is/are any or ’whatever there is/are'.
Any fog will clear by noon. (ะ if there is any fog, it will clear by noon.)
Perhaps you could correct any mistakes I’ve made.
Any can be used to emphasise the idea of open choice: it doesn't matter who
what,'which'.
You can borrow any book you want.
For details of this use. ► IGO.
2	any and some
Any often contrasts with some, which is most common เท affirmative clauses.
Compare:
I need some razor blades	Do you have any razor blades?
Sorry, I don Ί have any razor blades.
For details of the difference. ► 161.
3	any and not any
Any alone does not have a negative meaning. It is only negative น-hen used with
not.
She's unhappy because she hasn’t got any friends, (not ... because she has got
any fihmtis.)
No (» 163) means the same as not any, but is more emphatic.
She's got no friends.	-*
grammar · 159 any
Not any cannot begin a sentence; no Is used instead.
.Vo cigarette is harmless, (not Not any cigarette...)
No tourists came to the town that year.
We do not usually use not any with singular countable nouns (but » 160).
She hasn't gota job. (not khe hasn't gm any job.)
4	when any is not used
With an uncountable or plural noun, any usually suggests the idea of an
Indefinite but limited amount or number. When there is no idea of a limited
quantity’ or number, we do not usually use any. Compare;
-	Is there any water in that can?
Is there water on the moon? flhe interest is in the existence of water, not its
amount.)
-	Dad hasn't got any hair. (He has lost the amount he had.)
Birds have feathers, not hair. (No idea of amount.)
None of her children have got any sense. (Not even a small amount.)
Anna looks like her mother, hut she hasn t got blue eyes (not . . .sheJmsn'l
got any blue eyes people have a definite number of eyes: two.)
5	any and any of
Before a determiner (definite article, demonstrative or possessive word) or a
pronoun, we use any of. Compare:
-	I didn't go to any lectures last term, (not ... an^oflectures. ..)
I wasn't interested เท any of the lectures, (not ... any the ktfures.)
-	Do any books here belong to you?
Do any of these books belong to you?
-	/ don't think any staff want to work tomorrow.
I don't think any of US want to work tomorrow.
Note that when any of is followed by a plural subject, the verb can be singular or
plural. A singular verb is more common เท a formal style.
If any of your friends is/'are interested, let me know.
6	without a noun
A noun can be dropped after any, if the meaning is clear.
‘Didyou get the oilr 'No, there wasn't any left.'
Instead of not any without a noun, none (► 163) can be used. I his is often more
emphatic.
Ihere was none left.
We don’t use any or not any alone as answers.
‘What day should I comer 'Any day. (not Any.)'
How much money do you haver ‘None. (NOT Not any.)'
7	compounds
Many of the rules given above also apply to the compounds anybody, anyone,
anything and anywhere. For more Information about these, ► 180.
grammar · 159 any
Determiners: Quantifiers
Section 13
160	any = 'it doesn't matter who/which/what'
Any can be used to emphasise the idea of free choice, with the meaning of
'it doesn’t matter who/which/what'. With this meaning, any is common in
affirmative clauses as well as questions and negatives, and is often used with
singular countable nouns as well as uncountables and plurals. In speech,
it is stressed.
Ask any doctor - they'll all tell you that alcohol is a poison.
My brother's looking for work. He'll take any job he can get.
‘When should I come?’ Any time.’
We can use just any if necessary to make the meaning clear.
I don't do just any work - I choose jobs that interest me. (/ don't do any
work . . . could be misunderstood.)
Note that we use either (► 156), not any, to talk about a choice between two
alternatives.
I can write with either hand, (not . . . any hand.)
At all (► 387) is often used to emphasise the meaning of (not) any.
I’ll do any job at all - even road-รพeertinp^ nd
She doesn 't speak any English at all.
161	some and any: the main differences
1	indefinite quantities
Both some (► 158) and any (► 159) can refer to an indefinite quantity or
number. They are used when it is not easy, or not important, to say exactly how
much/many we are thinking of.
I need some new clothes. Is there any milk left?
Used in this sense, some is most common in affirmative clauses; any is a 'non-
affirmative' word (► 222) and is common in questions and negatives. Compare:
I need some flour.	Do you have any flour?
Sorry, I don't have any flour, (not Sorry, I don't have some flour.)
2	some in questions
We use some in questions if we expect people to answer 'Yes', or want to
encourage them to say 'Yes' - for example in offers and requests.
Have you brought some paper and a pen? (The hearer is expected to
bring them.)
Shouldn’t there be some instructions with it?
Would you like some more meat?
Could I have some brown rice, please?
Have you got some glasses that I could borrow?
grammar · 161 some and any: the main differences
3	any in affirmative clauses
We use any in affirmative clauses alter words that have a negative or limiting
meaning: for example never, hardly, without1 little.
You never give me any help.	I forgot to get any bread.
There's hardly any tea left. We got then· without any trouble.
There is little point in doing any more work now.
Ihe guards prevented US from asking any questions.
4	//-clauses
Both some and any are common in «/ clauses.
If you want some any help, let me know.
Sometimes any is used to suggest ‘if there is/are any'.
Any ears parked in this road will be towed away. (- If there are any cars
parked in this road, they will...)
162	any and every: the difference___
Any and every c an both be used to talk in general about all the members of a
class or group
Any/Every child can learn to swim.
I he meaning is not quite the same. Any looks at things one at a time: it means
'whichever one you choose'. Every looks at things together: its meaning is closer
to all'. Compare:
‘Which newspaper would you likeT ‘It doesn't matter. Any one.’ (- one or
another or another) (not... Everyone.)
On the stand there were newspapers and magazines of every kind. (ะะ one and
another and another) (not ... magazines of any kind.)
163	no, none and not a/any
1	no: emphatic
No can be used instead of not a or not any when we want to emphasise a
negative idea.
Would you believe It? there’s no mirror in the bathroom! (More emphatic than
... there isn't a mirror...)
Sorry I can't stop. I've got no time. (More emphatic than ...I haven't got any
time.)
there were no messages for you this morning I’m afraid. (More emphatic than
2	none of
Before a determiner (e g. the. my. this) or a pronoun, we use none of.
She's done none of the work, (not .. . no of Ihe work.)
We understood none of his arguments. I’ve been to none of those places.
None of us speaks Greek.
grammar · 162 any and every, the difference
Determiners: Quantifiers
Section 13
When we use none of with a plural noun or pronoun, the verb can be singular
(a little more formal) or plural (a little more informal).
None of my friends is interested, (more formal)
None of my friends are interested, (more informal)
We can use none alone if the meaning is clear.
'How many of the books have you readT ‘None.’
3	nota/any
We prefer not aiany เท objects and complements when the sense is not
emphatic. Compare:
He's no fool. (= He's not a fool at all. - emphatic negative)
A whale is not a fish, (rail A whale is no fish the sense is not emphatic.)
4	subjects
Not any cannot normally be used in subjects. No and none of are used instead.
No brand of cigarette is completely harmless, (vol Not any brand...)
No tourists ever came to our village, (not Not arty tourists...)
None of my friends lives near me. (not Not any of my friends .)
5	not used to talk about two
We use neither, not no or none, to talk about two people or things (► 157).
Neither of my parents could be there. (.SOI None of my parents...)
6	nobody, etc
Nobody, nothing, no one and nowhere are used เท similar ways to no.
I saw nobody (More emphatic than I didn't see anybody.)
Nobody spoke, (not Not anybody spoke.)
164	no one and none
1	no one
No one (also written no one in British English) means the same as nobody.
It cannot be followed by of.
No one wished me a happy birthday, (not No one of my friends . ..)
I stayed in all evening waiting but no one came.
2	none
To express the idea not a single one (of)', we can use none (of), not any (of) or
not one (of) (more emphatic). No one is not used เท this way.
None of my friends wished me a happy birthday.
I haven’t read any of his books.
Not one of my shirts is clean, (koi No one of my shirts . . .)
Have you found any blackberries? ‘Not one.'
grammar · 161 no one and none
165	much and many
1	the difference
Much is used with singular (uncountable) nouns; many Is used with plurals.
I haven Ί got much time I don 'เ know many of your friends.
2	much/many of
We use much/many of before another determiner (article, possessive, etc) or a
pronoun. Compare:
-	She didn 't eat much breakfast, (not ... much of breakfast.)
She didn 't eat much of her breakfast.
She didn't eat much of it.
-	There aren Ί many large glasses left.
There aren't many of the large glasses left.
There aren't many of them left.
However, much of can be used directly before personal and geographical names
Toe seen too much of Howard recently.
Not much of Denmark is hilly.
3	much/many without a noun
We can drop a noun after much or many, if the meaning is clear.
You haven't eaten much.
Did you find any mushroomsT 'Not many.'
Note that much and many are only used like this when a noun has been
dropped.
There wasn't much (food), (but not The food-wasnT much No noun has been
dropped. You couldn't say The food wasn't mueh food.)
Many is not usually used alone to mean 'many people'.
Many people think it's time for a change. (More natural than Many think ...)
4	not used in affirmative clau5S5
เท an informal style, we use much and many mostly in questions and negative
clauses. เท most informal affirmative clauses they arc unusual (especially mudi);
other words and expressions are used instead.
How much money have you got? I've got plenty.' (not I've got much.)
He's got lots of men friends, but he doesn Ί know many women.
(More natural than He's got many men friends ...)
‘Did you buy any clothes? 'Yes, lots.’ (not Yes, many.)
เท a formal style, much and many are more common in affirmative clauses.
Much has been written about unemployment. เท the opinion of many
economists,...
Far and long (- a long time) are also used mostly in questions and negative
clauses. ► 461. 517
grammar · 165 much and many
Determiners: Quantifiers
Section 13
5	after so, as and too
So much. many, as much many and loo much/many are quite natural เท
affirmative clauses.
there was so much traffic that it took me an hour to gel home.
I play as much tennis as I can. You make loo many mistakes.
6	my many friends, etc
Note that many can follow possessive In expressions like my many friends,
her many prizes. Olis is rather formal.
7	much as adverb
We can use much as an adverb เท questions and negative clauses.
1)0 you work much at weekends? I don 7 travel much these days
We can also use much before comparative adjectives and adverbs, in affirmative
clauses as well as questions and negatives.
She's much older than her brother. I don 7 drive much faster than you.
Much can be used before some verbs expressing enjoyment, preference and
similar ideas, เท affirmative clauses as well as questions and negatives, especially
เท a formal style.
I much appreciate your help. IV'e much prefer the country to the town.
I didn't much enjoy the concert.
Very much can be used เท affirmative clauses as an adverb.
I very much like your new hairstyle.	Thank you very much.
to «« and LTV, Miih paU pwwipte» (or mudvtrr, amuiafí. » <*e
166	more
1	more (of)
We can use more as a determiner before uncountable or plural nouns. Before
another determiner (article, possessive, etc) or a pronoun, we use more of.
Compare:
-	We need more butler.
We need more of that salted butter.
We need more of it.
-	More climbers have been found.
More of the missing climbers hat e been found.
More of them have been found.
However, more of can be used directly before personal and geographical names.
It would be nice to see more of Kay and Barbara.
live hundred years ago, much more of Britain was covered with trees.
2	more without a noun
We can drop a noun after more if the meaning is clear.
I'd like some more, please.
3	one more, etc
Note the structure one more, two more. etc. เท this case more can be used
before a countable noun.
There's just one more river to cross.	-*
grammar· 166 more
4	more as an adverb
More can also be used as an adverb.
I couldn't agree more.
More and more is used 10 talk about continual increase.
I hate thii job more and more as the years go by.
Kot iwr เท compiraiivr* (eg "แพ («พเ-·iNrl. » ร»«’'เท 17.
167	most
1	most (of)
We can use most as a determiner before uncountable or plural nouns. Note that
we do not use the before most เท this case.
Most children like ice cream, (sol the most fhUdreH: ..)
Before another determiner (article, possessive, etc) or a pronoun, we use
most of. Compare:
- Mast fruit is imported.	- Most people can sing a little.
Most of our fruit is imported. Most of these people can sing a little.
Most of it is imported.	Most of them can sing a little.
However, most of can be used directly before personal and geographical names.
I've read most of Shakespeare. The Romans conquered most of England
2	most without a noun
We can drop a noun after most if the meaning is clear.
Some people had difficulty with the lecture, but most understood.
3	the most (= 'more than any other/others’) with nouns
เท comparisons (when most means ‘more than any other/others') it is normally
used with the before nouns.
Susan found the most blackberries.
The Is sometimes dropped in an informal style.
Who earns (the) most money in your familyt
4	the most as an adverb
(The) most can also be used as an adverb, rhe is often dropped เท an
informal style.
they all talk a lot, but your little girl talks (the) most The truth hurts most
168	(a) little and (a) few
1	uncountable and plural
We use the determiner (a) little with singular (usually uncountable) words, and
we use (a) few with plurals. Compare:
I have little interest in politics. Few politicians are really honest.
We've got a little bacon and a few eggs.
grammar - 167
Determiners: Quantifiers
Section 13
Before another determiner (article, possessive, etc) or a pronoun, we use
(a) little of and (a) few of. Compare:
-	Could I have a little butter?
Could I have a tittle of that butter?
Could I have a little of that'
Few people always tell the truth.
Few of the people questioned told the truth.
Few of them told the truth.
2	use of a
There is a difference between little and a little, and between few and a few.
Without a, little and few usually have rather negative meanings, close to no or
none. They may suggest not as much/many as one would like’, 'not as much
many as expected', and similar ideas.
file average MP has little real power.
Few people can speak a foreign language perfectly.
Λ little and a few are more positive: their meaning is generally closer to some.
they may suggest ideas like 'better than nothing· or more than expected’.
Would you like a little soup?
You don't need to go shopping. Wt've got a few potatoes and some steak
Compare:
-	Cactuses need little water, (not much water)
Give the roses a little water every day. (not a lot, but some)
-	His ideas are difficult, and few people understand them.
His ideas are difficult, but a few people understand them.
Quite a few (informal) means a considerable number'.
We've got quite a few friends in the village.
3	formal and informal language
Little and few (with no article) are rather formal. เท an informal style
(e g. ordinary conversation), we generally prefer not much/many.
or only a little/few.
Come on! We haven't got much lime!
Only a few people remembered my birthday.
However, very little and wry few are possible เท an Informal style.
He's got wry little patience and very few friends.
4	(a) little and (a) few without nouns
We can drop a noun and use (a) little few alone, if the meaning is clear.
‘Some more soupT ‘lust a little, please.'
5	not used after be
(Λ) little and (a) few are determiners. They are normally used before nouns, but
They had little hope. (Bin NOT Their hope was little.)
6	his few friends, etc
Note that /hr can follow possessives in expressions like his few friends, my few
visits to Scotland. This is rather formal.
Tor a tutte with «txnpurwriv» In" IIIHr brtw). ► 207.1.	hot the 4<t|«u»« IMr. · รท
grammar · 168 (a) little and (a) few
169	less and fewer
1	the difference
Less is the comparative of Hille (used especially before uncountable nouns).
Fewer is the comparative of few (used before plural nouns). Compare:
I earn lea money than a (leaner. I've got fewer problemร than I used to have.
เท an informal style, less is quite common before plural nouns. Some people
consider this incorrect.
I’ve got tea problems than I used to have.
2	less/fewer with and without of
Before another determiner (article, possessive, etc) or a pronoun, we use leu 0Í
and fewer of. Compare:
if you want to lose weight, cat lea food, (not ... less offend.)
Fewer people make their own bread these days, (sot Fewer of people...)
I’d like to spend leu of my time answering emails.
At the college reunions, there are fewer of US each year.
3	less and fewer without nouns
Nouns can be dropped after less and fewer if the meaning is clear.
Some people go to church, but less,'fewer than 20 years ago.
Less can be used as an adverb (the opposite of the adverb more).
I worry leu than I used to.
170	least and fewest
1	the least as determiner: superlative of little
rhe least can be used as a determiner before uncountable nouns; it is lhe
superlative of little (- not much, ► 168), and the opposite of lhe most.
I think I probably do lhe least work เท this office.
The least can be used without a noun if the meaning is clear.
less earns the most money in our family; Dan earns the least.
We use the least o/before plural abstract nouns to mean the smallest of.
' What wilt your mother thinkr 'That's the least of my worries.'
2	’any ... at all'
With singular abstract nouns, lhe least can mean any... at all'.
Do you think there's the least chance of Smith winning lhe election?
What's the timer Ί haven’t got the least idea.'
3	the fewest as determiner: superlative of few
lhe fewest can be used before plural nouns as the superlative of few (► 168).
The translation with the fewest mistakes isn't always the best.
Least is often used instead of fewest before plural nouns (... the least mistakes),
especially in an informal style. Some people feel this is incorrect.
grammar · 169 leu and fewer
Determiners: Quantifiers
Section 13
4	(the) least with adjectives: the opposite of (the) most or
(the).. .est
(rhe) least is used before adjectives in the same way as (the) most or (the).. .esl
(► 20-1), but with the opposite meaning.
the least expensive trips are often the most interesting.
I'm least happy when I have to work al weekends.
for the	»ith wpttbovt* » 208.
5	least as adverb
teast can be used as an adverb (the opposite of most).
She always arrives when you least expect it.
I don't much like housework, and I like cooking least of all.
k at least
At least means 'not less than (but perhaps more than)'.
‘How old do you think he isf 'At least thirty.'
He's been in love at least eight times this year.
We can also use at least as a discourse marker (► 28-1.3) to suggest that one
thing is certain or all right, even if everything else is unsatisfactory
We lost everything in the fire. Hut at least nobody was hurl.
7	not in the least
We can use not เท the least in a formal style to mean not at all’, especially when
talking about personal feelings and reactions.
I IVOS not in the least upset by her bad temper.
171	enough
1 enough + noun
Enough can be used before a noun as a determiner.
Have you got enough milkf	t here aren Ί enough glasses.
Enough is occasionally used after a noun, but this is rare in modern English
except in a few expressions.
If only we had time enough ... I was fool enough to believe him.
Before another determiner (article, possessive, etc) or a pronoun, we use
enough of. Compare:
-	I don ’t know enough Spanish to read this. (not... enough of Spanish...)
I don't understand enough of the words in the notice.
We haven Ί got enough blue paint, (sor .. enough of Noe point)
We haven't got enough of that blue paint.
-	You didn't buy enough cards, (sor ... enough of turds)
You didn ‘t buy enough of them.	-*
grammar *171 enough
Note lhe idiomatic structure I've had enough of... This can be followed by a
noun without a determiner.
I've had enough of mathematics; I’m going to give it up.
She's had enough of England•1 she's going hack home.
2	without a noun
Enough can be used alone without a noun to refer to an amount, if the meaning
is clear.
Half a pound of carrots will be enough.
That's enough, thank you. Enough IS enough.
BUT NOT The meal is enough. (The meat is not an amount.)
172	quantifying expressions: a lot, lots,
a great deal, the majority, etc_____________________________________________________
1	introduction; use of of
Expressions of this kind have similar meanings to the determiners much, many
and most, but the grammar is not quite the same. เท particular, of is used after
these expressions even before nouns with no determiner. Compare:
- There's not a lot of meat left, (sott There's not a hi meat left.)
There's not much meat left, (not There's HOI much of meal left.)
Plenty’ of shops open on Sunday mornings, (not Plenty shops...)
Many shops open on Sunday mornings. (NOT Many of simps .)
2	a lot of and lots of
These are rather informal. เท a more formal style, we prefer a great deal of,
a large number of, much or many. There is not much difference between a lot of
and lots of. they are both used mainly before singular uncountable and plural
nouns, and before pronouns. It is the subject, and not the form lot.'lots, that
makes a following verb singular or plural. So when a lot of is used before a
plural subject, the verb is plural; when lots of is used before a singular subject,
the verb is singular.
A lot of time is needed to learn a language.
Lots of patience Is needed, too. (not lots of patience are needed, too.)
A lot of my friends want to emigrate, (not A lot of myfrtends wants . ..)
lots of us think it's time for an election.
3	plenty of
Plenty of is usually rather informal. It is used mostly before singular
uncountables and plurals. It suggests ‘enough and more’.
Don Ί rush. There's plenty of time.	Plenty of shops sell batteries.
4	a great deal of, a large amount of and a large number of
These are used in similar ways IO a lot of and lots of. but are more formal.
A great deal of and a large amount of arc generally used with uncountable nouns.
Mr Lucas has spent a great deal of time in the Ear East.
I've thrown out a large amount of old clothing
grammar . 172 quantifying expressions: a lot. lots, a great deal, the majority.
Section 13
Determiners: Quantifiers
A large number of is used before plurals, and a following verb is plural.
A large number of problems still have to be solved. (More common than
A large amount of problems . . . or A great deal of problems . . .)
Some people think it is a mistake to use a plural noun after a large amount or
a great deal, but the usage is quite common in standard English speech.
5	the majority of
The majority o/(= 'most' or 'most of) is mostly used with plural nouns and
verbs.
The majority of criminals are non-violent.
However, if it is used with a singular noun, any following verb is singular.
The majority of his work is concerned with children's artistic development.
6	not used with measurement nouns
These expressions are not generally used before words for units of measure, like
pounds, years or miles. Other words have to be used.
It cost several pounds, (not It cost a lot of pounds.)
from the '°Πνοτ They lived plenty of miles from'"
7	use without following nouns
These expressions can be used without nouns if the meaning is clear. In this
case, of is not used.
'How much money did it cost? 'A lot.’ (not a lot of.)
We should be all right for cheese - I've bought plenty.
He does not often speak, but when he does he says a great deal.
For a couple of, ► 128.2.
grammar · 172 quantifying expressions: a lot, lots, a great deal, the majority, etc
Section 14 Pronouns
INTRODUCTION
Pronouns arc words that arc used instead of noun phrases, when i( is
unnecessary or impossible to use a more precise expression. Examples:
/ - meaning 'the speaker'
it - referring to a thing that has already been mentioned
your - meaning 'belonging to or associated with the hcarcr(s)'
somebody referring to an unknown or undefined person
one - meaning for example ‘people เท general’
Most pronouns arc covered เท this Section. For relative pronouns, ► Section 21
For the interrogative pronouns who, what, which, ► 625-627. For whoever,
whatever, whichever, ► 252.
Some determiners (e g. this, both, most) can be used alone without following
nouns, like pronouns, when the determiner alone makes the meaning clear.
look at this. (- ‘this thing that you can see )
'Which scarf would you like?' ‘i'll take both: (= both scarves')
Not all bears can climb trees, but most can. l- most bears’)
These pronoun like uses of determiners are covered in ► Sections 12 13. along
with their other uses.
grammar · Section 14 Pronouns
Do you know what's wrong with these, and why?
o She loved the picture because reminded her of home. ► 173.4
o The forecast it was reasonably accurate. ► 173.5
o ‘Who's that over there?· lie's John Cook.' ► 173.9
Q Everybody except he can come. ► 174.2
o It's for he to decide. » 174.4
o fie who leaves last should lock the door. » 174.9
o Why don’t I and you go away for the weekend? ► 174.10
o Can I borrow your keys? I can’t find the mine. ► 176
õ I met another Lucy'ร boyfriend yesterday. ► 177
o We got out of the water and dried US. ► 178.2
o She took her dog with herself. ► 178.4
Õ Do you shave yourself on Sundays? ► 178.10
o His book's selling itself well. ► 1.8.10
Õ Try to concentrate yourself. ► 178.10
Q Susan and Daniel talk to themselves on the phone every day. ► 179.4
Q One speaks English เท this shop. ► 181.3
Õ One speaks a strange dialed where I come horn. ► 181.3
o เท the 16th century one believed in witches. ► 181.4
o We re looking for a house. We’d like a one with a garden ► 182.2
o If you haven’t got fresh juice I'll take canned one. ► 182.4
o I’ll take both ones. ► 182.6
Õ A grandparent's job is easier than a parent's one. ► 182.7
o Do you need coffee cups or tea ones? ► 182.8
o Let’s go and ask the old one for advice. ► 182.9
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
173	personal pronouns:
basic information
174	personal pronouns:
175	singular they
176	possessive pronouns: mine,
yours, etc
177	a friend of mine, etc
178	reflexive pronouns: myself, etc
179	reciprocal pronouns: each other
and one another
180	somebody, someone, anybody,
anyone, etc
181	one. you and they·, used for
people in general
182	one (substitute word): a big one
grammar · Scdion 14 Pronouns
173 personal pronouns: basic information
1	terminology and use
The words I, me, you, he, him, she, her, it, we, US, they and them are usually
called 'personal pronouns’. (This is a misleading name: it, they and them refer to
things as well as people.)
Personal pronouns are used when more exact noun phrases are not necessary.
I'm tired. (/ replaces the name of any speaker.)
______________
lack's ill. He'll be away for a few days, (not . . ■ lack'll be away . . .)
Tell Emily I miss her. (noi fell irmly I miss Emily. I
2	subject and object (not Tell Emily / miss Emily.)d him, etc
Personal pronouns (except you and it) have one form when they are used as
subjects, and a different form for other uses - for example, when they are the
objects of verbs or prepositions.	
Subject:	I	he	she	we	they
Object:	me	him	her	us	them
Compare:	
- I like dogs.	We sent her some flowers.
Dogs don 7 like me.	She sent us some flowers.
3	other uses of object forms: It was her.
Me, him, her, US and them are used not only as objects, but also as complements
after be, and in short answers, especially in an informal style.
‘ Who said that?’ ‘(It was) her.’ ‘Who's there?’ ‘Me.’
In a more formal style, we use subject form + verb where possible.
' Who said that?’ ‘She did.’ (but not She;)
It is possible to use a subject form alone after be (e.g. It is I; It was he), but this
is extremely formal, and is usually considered over-correct.
Object forms are also common in coordinated subjects in informal speech.
lack and me are going skiing this weekend.
This is considered incorrect in more formal usage (► 174.1).
I or sentences like It's me that needs help, ► 174.3.
4	Personal pronouns cannot be left out.
We cannot normally leave out personal pronouns, even if the meaning is clear
without them (for some exceptions ► 174.11).
It's raining, (not Iร raining;)
She loved the picture because it reminded her of home, (not . . .-because
reminded her of home.)
They arrested Alex and put him in prison, (not . . . ctnd^Hibircprison.)
‘Have some chocolate.’ ‘No, I don’t like it.' (not ... I don’t like.)
5	One subject is enough.
One subject is enough. We do not usually use a personal pronoun to repeat a
subject that comes in the same clause.
My car is parked outside, (not My car it is fHtrked fHthide. I
grammar · 173 personal pronouns: basic information
Pronouns
Section 14
lhe budget forecast was reasonably accurate, (no I Ute budget forecast it was
the situation is terrible, (not II is terrible thnsbuafioH.)
(here are exceptions in wry informal speech (► 299).
He's not a bad bloke1 Jeff.	It's a horrible place, london.
6	personal and relative pronouns: one or the other, not both
We do not use personal pronouns to repeat the meaning of relative pronouns
(► 233.6).
that's the girl who lives in the next room, (not ... -who she lw<* ...)
Here's the money (that) you lent me. (not . .. (that) you lent พ-พ่.)
7	it referring to nothing1 the situation, etc
It not only refers to particular things. It can also refer to a whole fact, event or
situation.
Our passports were stolen. It completely ruined our trip.
I	did all I could, but it wasn't enough.
H's terrible - everybody'รgot colds, and the central heating isn't working.
Wasn't it lovely there·
Nothing happened, did it?
Everything ร all right, isn 't it?
8	it as 'empty' subject: It's ten o’clock.
We use it as a meaningless subject with expressions that refer to time, weather,
temperature or distances.
It's ten o'clock, (not Is ten o'clock.) It's Monday again.
II	rained for three days.	It 'ร thirty degrees
It's ten miles to the nearest garage.
9	it used to identify
We use it for a person when we are identifying him or her.
Who’s that over there'’ •แ ร Jack Cook: (urn He's Jack Cook1)
Is that our waiterr ‘No. it isn't: (not No, he HWf)
(on the phone) Hello. It's Luke Williams, (not... I'm lake Williams.)
It's your sister who plays the piano, isn't it?
10	we women, you men
We and plural you (but not other personal pronouns) can be put directly before
nouns.
We women know things that you men will never understand.
(Bin NO I I womtmdtnow	they men will-Het-er understand.)
for you uwd for p«npte เท grntrul. · I HI lor Ihr prrMin.ll pronoun one · IBI
lor the Inccnoguhr prrMinal pronoun utw/m). · ran I
grammar · 173 personal pronouns: basic information
174	personal pronouns: advanced points
1	Jack and me went; between you and I; US women understand
We often use object forms in coordinated subjects in informal speech and
writing And I is often used informally in coordinated objects. Some authentic
examples from speakers of standard British English:
Jack and them are going skiing this weekend.
Me and Clio will เท· coming to see you and Mum on Sunday.
Between you and 1.1 think his marriage is เท trouble.
Really nice picture of tosh and I taken at the weekend by my friend /oc.
thanks. Andrew - Feb. 23rd is good for both lack and I.
I often think of the old days and how you helped Bertie and I. (letter from
Elizabeth, wife of the future King George VI, to King Edward VIII)
Us is sometimes used as a subject together with a noun.
Us women understand these things better than you men.
These structures are often condemned as 'incorrect', but they have been
common เท educated speech for centuries. (There are examples of me in
coordinated subjects in lane Austen's novels, written around 1800.) They are,
however, restricted to an informal style. They are not considered correct in
formal speech or writing.
2	as, than, but and except + me or /
After as and than, object forms are generally used in an informal style.
My sister's nearly as tall as me. I can run faster than her.
เท a more formal style, subject forms are used, usually followed by verbs.
My sister's nearly as tall as I am. I can run faster than she can.
But (meaning ‘except’) and except are normally followed by object forms
(► 413,456).
Everybody except him can come, (noj Everybody except he can come)
Nobody but me knew the answer.
3	It is/was me that ...II who ...
When a relative clause comes after an expression like II is/was me/1, there are
two possibilities:
object form · that (very informal)
It's me that needs your help. It was him that told the police.
subject form · who (very formal)
It is I who need your help. It was he who told the police.
We can avoid being too formal or too informal by using a different structure.
He was the person the one who told the police.
4	mixed subject and object: It's for him to decide.
Sometimes a pronoun can be seen as (he object of a verb or preposition, but (he
subject of a following infinitive or clause. Normally an object form is used
It's for him to decide. (not แ'ร ft* hr to ttafcfc»)
grammar · 174 personal pronouns: advanced points
Pronouns
Section 14
I think it's a good idea for you and me to meet soon. (Considered more
correct than ... /or you and I to meet soon.)
Everything comes to him who wails. (Considered more correct than ... to he
who waits.)
5	inclusive and exclusive we
Note that we and US can include or exclude the listener or reader. Compare:
Shall we go and have a drink? l We includes the listener.)
We're going for a drink. Would you like to come with US? (We and US exclude
the listener.)
b US meaning 'me'
เท very informal British speech, US is quite often used instead of me (especially
as an indirect object).
Give US a kiss. love.
7	Poor you!
You can he modified by adjectives in a few informal expressions such as Poor
Clever/Lucky (old) you! (This occasionally happens also with me.)
8	you. different singular and plural forms
Although standard modern English uses you for both singular and plural,
separate forms exist in certain varieties of English. Some speakers in Yorkshire
use thu or tha as a singular subject form and thee as a singular object form.
Some British dialects have a separate plural form )V, youse or yii Many
Americans (and increasingly, British people) use you folks or you guys (to both
men and women) as an informal second person plural.
Hi, you guys. Listen to this.
เท southern US speech there is a second person plural form you all (pronounced
y'all), used instead of you when people wish to sound friendly or intimate; there
Is also a possessive you all's (pronounced y'all's).
Hi, everybody, llow're you all doing? What are you all's Idans for
Thanksgivingΐ
t« lki> older แ«W form» Vtrr and ihou. » 118.10
9	he!she who ...
The structure he/she who... (meaning ’the person who ...') is found in older
literature.
He who hesitates is sometimes lost.
But this is very unusual in modern English.
The person who leaves last should lock the door. OH Whoever leaves last.. .
(xor He-She who leaves Iasi. . .)
10	politeness
It is considered polite to use names nt noun phrases, rather than he. she or they,
to refer to people who arc present.
‘Dad said I could go out.' 'No. I didn't.' (More polite than He said I could
go out.)
Lhis lady needs an ambulance.	·*
grammar · 171 personal pronouns: advanced points
However, pronouns need to be used IO avoid repetition (► 287).
Dad laid he didn't mind... (not Dad said Dad didn’t mind...)
It is considered polite to mention onesell Iasi in double subjects or objects.
Why don't you and I RO away for the weekend? (not Why don't I and you-...?)
The invitation was for Tracy and me. (More polite than ...for me and Tracy.)
11	leaving out personal pronouns
Personal pronouns cannot usually be left out (► 173.4).
She loved the picture because it reminded her of home, (not ... because
reminded het of home.)
However, in informal speech, subject pronouns and/or auxiliary verbs are
sometimes left out at the beginning of a sentence. For details of this. ► 277.
Can't help you. I'm afraid. (- I can’t...)
Seen Oliver? l- Have you seen Oliver?)
We seldom put it after know (► 504.6 for details).
‘It’s getting late: Ί know: (not I know it)
After certain verbs (e g. believe, think, suppose), we use so rather than it.
(For details, ► 585.)
'Is that the managerr Ί believe so.' (not ... I behci-efaf)
And in British English, personal pronouns can be dropped after prepositions in
descriptive structures with have and with.
All the trees have got blossom on (them).
He was carrying a box with cups เท (it).
Object pronouns are not normally used in infinitive clauses if the object of the
infinitive has just been mentioned (► 101.4).
She's easy to please, (not She's easy to please her.)
The pie looked too nice to eat. (not . . loomeetoeal ท่)
The bridge wasn Ί strong enough to drive over, (not ... to drive over it)
This dish lakes two hours to prepare.
175	singular they
1 Somebody left their umbrella.
They/them/their is often used to refer to a singular indefinite person. Ibis is
common after a person, anybodyione, somebody'one, nobody .One. whoever,
each, every, either, neither and no. They has a plural verb in this case.
If a person doesn't want to go on living they are often very difficult to help.
If anybody calls, take their name and ask them to call again later.
Somebody left their umbrella in the office. Would they please coded it?
Nobody was late, were they f? Whoever comes, tell them I'm not in.
Tell each person to help themselves to what they want.
Every individual thinks they're different from everybody else.
This singular use of they!them!their is convenient when the person referred to
could he either male or female (as in the examples above). He or she. him or her
and iris or her are clumsy, especially when repealed, and many people dislike
the traditional use of he/him/his in this situation (► 328).
grammar · 175 singular they
Pronouns
Section 14
can à° be used when (he person's sex is known.
Two examples from interviews:
λΣ"*** when Vm	to « toy, tocou*,/o, nor afraid of shocking
N\ack'^Mat^ lo uia' ’๗'°°' ^ωι’ " à" rftem foot à ท
n7^โโ'!ร^?ร1,?ๆ ?.“d	4 defin“.e p««>n "ho is nor identified.
I naa a friend เท Paris, and they disappeared for a month.
2	correctness
h.as exi',cd ,01 centuries, and is perfectly correct It is
£2 sk	_íá n? “ . °und 'àmànnen
,1; . example from an old British passport application form
ร^ร^.^
country they may lose this when they get a British Passport
176	possessive pronouns: mine, yours, etc
พทไใท^โใโโ'	iíไ!^. mine, yours, his. hers, ours and theirs
โโ,, .ร*“โรฯ,.1. *í“ besides possession. They are similar to my. your. etc.
” and *re ^ ^· foltoZng n~ns. compare
That coal is mine.
- Which is your car?
iWroft· can be used with or without a following noun (> 143, fi28).
Hhov caris that?	Whose is that car?
We do not use articles with mine, etc.
.โรโ	ร,!โรmlne (n01 ^·"-1 fmd the à.)
โ. ..ร.??! !*. uwd ^""»!' a following noun, instead, we use on.·•ร own.
Its nice to have a room of one's own (not ... of ones.)
แร is not normally used without a following noun.
1 *■ **ร''*/«น and the dog’s had แร breakfast too (not ...and the
For I hr older Efxdfeh lorm rtw » 318.10.
177	a friend of mine, etc
We	••po^'ivcbenveen another determiner and a noun,
orzss	*’“·	« -ฟ้to
à' An»** friend. Instead, we use á structure with o/. possessive
determiner . noun » of* possessive
โรรร?Λ.‘^end °fmlne_. .	'tor brother of yours!
Quern'รุ. She's a friend õf my father's
Have you heard this new idea of the boss's?
My work is no business of yours.
I met another boyfriend of Lucy's yesterday.
grammar. 177 a friend of mine.
The structure has a variant in which a noun docs not have possessive this is
sometimes used when talking about relationships.
He's a cousin of the Queen.	She's a friend of my father.
The word own is used เท a similar structure (► 552).
/ wish / had a room of my own.
178	reflexive pronouns: myself, etc
1	What are reflexive pronouns?
Reflexive pronouns arc myself, yourself, himself, herself, itself, oneself, ourselves,
yourselves, themselves.
2	use: / cut myself shaving.
Reflexive pronouns are used as objects, in cases when rhe objeci refers (O the
same pcrson(s) or thingfs) as the subject.
I cut myself shaving this morning, (not I cut me...)
We got out of the water and dried ourselves, (not ... dried พ')
I need to get myself some new shoes.
Reflexive pronouns can refer back not only to subjects, but also to possessives
or objects.
His conversations are all about himself.
I 'm going to tell her a few facts about herself
I love you for yourself not for your money.
3	same clause
A reflexive only refers to a noun เท the same clause. Compare:
lack says that lames talks to himself a lot. (lames talks to lames, not to lack.)
lack says that lames talks to him a lot. (lames talks to lack, not to lames.)
4	after prepositions: She took her dog with her.
After prepositions of place, we often use a personal pronoun ("ie, you, etc) if the
meaning is clear without using a reflexive. Compare:
She took her dog with her. (not ... with herself. She could hardly take her dog
with somebody else.)
She's very pleased with herself. (She could be pleased with somebody else.)
Other examples:
Close the door after you. He was pulling a small carl behind him.
5	emphatic use: Do it yourself.
We can use reflexives as emphasisers, to mean 'that person thing and nobody
nothing else'.
It's quicker if you do it yourself. The manageress spoke to me herself
The house itself is nice, but the garden’ร very small.
I'll go and see the President himself if I have to.
6	reflexives used instead of personal pronouns
Reflexives are sometimes used instead of personal pronouns after as, like,
but (for) and except (for).
grammar · 178 reflexive pronouns: myself etc
Pronouns
Section 14
These shoes are designed for heavy runners like yourself. (on ... like you.)
Everybody was early except myself, (ok... except me.)
Reflexives can also be used instead of personal pronouns in co ordinated noun
phrases.
There will be four of US al dinner: Robert. Alison, Jenny and myself.
(<*... and //me.)
7	by oneself
Ry myself/yourself, eic means 'alone, without company· or 'without help'.
I often like to spend time by myself.
‘Do you need helpr "No, thanks. I can do it by myself.'
8	-selves and each other / one another
Note the difference between -selves and each other I one another (► 179).
They talk to themselves a lot. (Each of them talks to him/herself.)
They talk to each other a lot. (Each of them talks to the other.)
9	own
There are no possessive reflexives. Instead, we use my own. your own. etc.
I'always wash my own clothes. (not... myselfsclothes.)
The children have both got their own rooms.
10	reflexives not used
Certain verbs (e.g. wash, dress, shave) have reflexive pronouns in some
languages but not in English.
Do you shave on Sundays? (not Do you shave yourself OH Sundays')
However, reflexives can be used if it is necessary to make it clear who does the
action.
She's old enough to dress herself, now.
The barber shaves all the men in the town who don't shave themselves.
So does he shave himself.or not?
Some other verbs which do not normally have reflexive pronouns:
Suddenly the door opened, (not รนdderdyfheiioof opened Itself)
His book's selling well, (sol Hi* book's setting itself wvU )
Try to concentrate. (Mil Dy Io concentrate yourself.)
I feel strange, (not I feel myself strange.)
Hurry! (not Hurry yourself)
179	reciprocal pronouns: each other and
one another _________________________ _____________
1	no difference
Each other and one another mean the same.
Anna and / น,rite to each other one another every week.
Each other is more common than one another, especially in an informal style*.
grammar · 179 reciprocal pronouns: each other and one another
2	not used as subject
Each other and one another arc not normally used as subjects (though this
occasionally happens in subordinate clauses in very informal speech).
They each listened carefully to what the other said, (sor นพ่เ 1.V They listened
carefully to U'hal each other said.)
3	each other's / one another's
Both expressions have possessive forms.
They'll sit for hours looking into each other's / one another's eyes.
4	-selves, possessives and each other / one another
Note the difference between -selves and each other one another. Compare:
lack and Emily are strange they talk to themselves a lot. (lack talks to lack.
Emily talks to Emily.)
Susan and Daniel talk to each other on the phone every day. (Susan talks to
Daniel; Daniel talks to Susan.)
there is a similar difference between possessives and each other / one another.
Compare:
My girlfriend and I are both very interested in our work. (I'm interested in
mine; she’s interested in hers.)
My girlfriend and I are both very interested in each other's work.
(I’m interested เท hers; she's Interested เท mine.)
5	words used without each other / one another
We do not normally use each other ,■ one another after words like meet or marry,
where the verb itself makes the meaning clear.
They met เท 1992 and married in / 9ÍM.
180	somebody, someone, anybody, anyone, etc
These indefinite pronouns and adverbiais replace more definite noun/adverbial
phrases when it is not necessary, or not possible, to be more precise.
1	-body and -one
There is no significant difference between somebody and someone, anybody and
anyone, everybody and everyone, or nobody and no one. The -one forms are more
common in writing; the -body forms are more frequent in speech in British
English.
2	some- and any-
The differences between somebody and anybody, something and anything,
somewhere and anywhere, etc are the same as the differences between some and
any (► 161 for details). Compare:
-	there's somebody at the door.
Dul anybody telephone f
-	Can I get you something to drink?
If you need something anything, just shout.
-	l et 'ร go somewhere nice for dinner.
I don't want to go anywhere too expensive.
grammar» 180 somebody, someone, anybody, anyone, etc
Pronouns
Seclion 14
3	singular
When these words are subjects they arc used with singular verbs.
Everybody likes her. (koi Everybody Me her.)
/» everything ready? (koi Are everything ready?)
Somebody normally refers to only one person. Compare:
There's somebody outside who wants to talk to you.
There are some people outside who want to talk Io you.
4	use of they
They, them and their are often used with a singular meaning to refer back to
// anybody wants a ticket for the concert, they' can gft it from my office.
‘There’s somebody al the door: ‘Tell them I’m busy.'
Someone left their umbrella on the bus.	Nobody phoned, did they?
5	complementation: somebody nice, etc
Somebody, etc can be followed by adjectives or adverbial expressions.
I hope he marries somebody nice.
She's going to meet someone in the Ministry.
I feel like eating something hot. Let's go somewhere quiet this weekend.
They can also be followed by else (► 447).
Emily - are you in love with somebody else?
I don't like this place - let's go somewhere else.
Note also the informal use of much after any and no-.
We didn't do anything much yesterday.
There's nothing much on TV tonight.
6	someplace
เท informal American English, someplace, anyplace, everyplace and no place
are common.
Let's go someplace quiet.
7	anyone and any one; everyone and every one
Anyone means the same as anybody, any one means 'any single one (person or
thing)’. Compare:
lioes anyone know where Celia lives?
You can borrow any one book at a time.
There is a similar difference between everyone and every one. Compare:
Everyone had a good lime at the party.
There aren't any cakes left - they’ve eaten every one.
8	sometime
Sometime (► 590) is not exactly part of this group. There are no words everytime
or HOtime. and any time is written as two words. We say some other time, not
sometime else.
for the difference between no one and nont. » 164
for question URI after ereoifn"» and nortrflt · «6 5. for ion* "me. uimttintt and romrumer. » 5*1
grammar · l«0 somebody, someone, anybody, anyone, etc
181	one, you and they: used for people
in general
1	one and you: meaning
We can use one or you IO talk about people ill general, including lhe speaker
and hearer.
One. You cannot learn a language in six weeks.
One'You should never give people advice.
2	one and you: formality and class
One is more formal than you (and more common in writing than in speech).
Compare:
If you want to make people angry, you fust have to tell them the truth.
If one wishes to make oneself thoroughly unpopular, one tuts merely to tell
people the truth.
One is often considered typical of more upper-class and intellectual usage, and
is avoided by many people for this reason. It Is less common in American
English than in British English.
3	one and you: only used in generalisations
One and you are only used in this way in very general statements, when พ are
talking about 'anyone, at any time'. Compare:
One You can usually find people who speak English in Sweden.
English is spoken in this shop. OH They speak English in this shop.
(Nor One speaks tnghsk-... - the meaning is not 'people in general')
One/You should knock before going into somebody's room.
Somebody's knocking at the door, (not One is-knocktng...)
- Il can take you/one ages to get served เท this pub.
Thanks, I'm being served, (not Thanksrone is serving me.)
One generally has a singular meaning: 'any individual·; it is not used to refer to
whole groups.
We speak a strange dialect where I come from, (not One-speaksm-stmnge
ifjjjLu Í ท1 t	)
rmrmr Wm r	rr v>ri« I
4	people including the speaker/hearer
One is not used for Jieople who could not include the speaker; you is not used
for people who could not include the hearer. Compare:
One You must believe in something.
เท the sixteenth century people believed in witches, (not ... one'you believed
in witches - this could not include the speaker or hearer.)
5	one/you as subject, object, etc
One can be a subject or object; there is a possessive one's and a reflexive
pronoun oneself.
He talks to one like a teacher. One's family can be very difficult.
One should always give oneself plenty of time to pack.
You/your, yourself can be used in similar ways.
grammar · I Hl one, you and they, used for people in general
Pronouns
Section 14
British English uses one,'one's lor a reference back.
One should always try to keep one's temper.
American English generally avoids this, traditionally preferring he!him!his.
One should always try to keep his temper.
However, the use of he/him/his for people in general is now seen as sexist and
also avoided (► 328.2).
6	they
They has a rather different, less general kind of meaning than one and you.
It usually refers to a particular but rather vague group (for example the
neighbours, the people around, the authorities).
They don't like strangers round here.
They're going IO widen the road soon.
I bet they put taxes up next war.
Note also the common expression they say (- people say).
They say her husband's been seeing that Smith woman again.
182	one (substitute word): a big one
1	use
We often use one instead of repealing a singular countable noun.
‘Which is your hoyT "The one in the blue coat.'
I'd like a cake. A big one with lots of cream.
‘Can you lend me a penT ‘Sorry, I haven't got one.'
2	a...one
We drop a if there is no adjective Compare:
We're looking for a house We’d like a small one with a garden.
We'd like one with a garden, (not ... a one with a garden.)
3	ones
One has a plural ones.
'I'd like to try on those shoes.' ‘Which onesT 'The ones in the window.'
Green apples often taste heller than red ones
'What sort of sweets do you likeT Ones with chocolate inside.'
4	uncountable nouns
We do not use one(s) for uncountable nouns. Compare:
If you haven't got น fresh chicken I'll take a frozen one.
if you haven't got fresh juice. I'll take canned (juice), (not ... canned one )
5	which (one), this (one), etc
We can leave out one(s) immediately after which, this, that, another, either,
neither and superlatives.
' Which (one) would you HkeT ' This (one) looks the nicest.'
Let's have another (one).	Either (one) will suit me.
I think my dog's the fastest (one).
Bui we cannot leave out one(s) if there is an adjective.
grammar · 182 one (substitute word): a big one
This small one looks the nicest. (not This small hots ...)
We nearly always leave OUI ones afrer these and those.
I don't think much of these. (More natural than___these ones.)
6	not used after my, etc. some, several, a few, both or a number
We do not use onefs) immediately after my. your, etc. some, several, (a) few. both
or a number.
Take your coat and pass me mine, (not ... pasune-my- one )
'Are there any grapes? ' Yes. I bought some today.'
(not	/ bought soffit* out*5 totioy )
I'll lake both, (noi ... both ones-.)
She bought รน. (not ... พ่พเ เ
But onefs) is used if there Is an adjective.
I'll wear my old one. (not ... my old.)
I bought some sweet ones today, (not I bought some sweet today.)
Has the cat had her kittens'รุ 'Yes, she's had four white ones.’
(not . .. four while.)
7	that of
Onefs) is not normally used after a noun with possessive 'ร. Instead, we can
either just drop onefs), or use a structure with that those off more formal).
Λ grandparent's job is easier than a parent's, (not ... than a parent's one.)
Λ grandparent's job IS easier than that of a parent, (not .. .Ihanlheoneofa
parent.)
Trollope's novels are more entertaining than those of Dickens
f L'/SV
I "ri ■ a · irmri tyivmri/	■»av	Sy ■ zivnv I
8	noun modifiers
Onefs) is not generally used after noun modifiers.
Do you need coffee cups or tea cups? (not ... or lea ones'<)
9	Onefs) always refers back.
We use onefs) to avoid repeating a noun which has been mentioned before. It
cannot normally be used in other cases.
Let's go and ask the old man for advice, (not ... ask the old one...)
grammar» 182 one (substitute word): a big
Section 15 Adjectives
INTRODUCTION
English has a large class of adjectives which can express a variety of meanings
classification, description, evaluation and many other ideas. Most European
languages, and many others, have similar classes of adjectives. Some of the
world' ร languages, however, have few if any adjectives. เท such languages the
relevant ideas might be expressed by using nouns or verbs; so the equivalent of,
for example. She's angry could be something corresponding to She has anger’ or
‘She rages’.
English adjectives are relatively easy to use, since (except for comparatives and
superlatives. » Section 17) an adjective can only have one possible form. I here
are some complications of position and word order: these and a few other points
are covered in the following entries.
Do you know what's wrong with these, and why?
G He lives in a palace grand. ► 183.1
G She’s three years elder than me. ► 183.2
G an asleep baby ► 183.3
G It's a political old idea. ► 184.1
G Look at the green beautiful mountains. ► 184.2
G an attractive, traditional, woollen dress » 184.6
G an angry and young man ► 185.3
o After two days crossing the foothills, they readied the proper
mountain. * 186.3
G The tree is high thirty feet. ► 186.4
G They're advertising for skilled เท design people. » 186.5
G It's a difficult to solve problem. - 186.5
Ο I like your so beautiful country. ► 187
G The most important is to be happy. ► 188.4
G The blind next door is getting a new job. > 188.1
G This government isn't interested in the poor’s problems. ► 188.1
G My sister s marrying a Welsh. ► 188.2
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
183 adjectives: normal position
181 order of adjectives
185	adjectives with and
186	adjectives after nouns
and pronouns
187	adjectives: position after as, how.
SO, too
188	adjectives without nouns
188 gradable and non gradable
adjectives
180 measurements: 'marked' and
'unmarked' forms
191	pronunciation of aged,
192	What can follow an adjective?
grammar · Section 15 Adjective
183	adjectives: normal position
1	two positions
Most adjectives can go in two main places in a sentence.
a with a noun, usually before it- Illis is called ‘attributive position'.
The new secretary doesn't tike me.
lie's going out with a rich businesswoman.
เท older English (► 318.10), it was quite common to put adjectives after nouns,
especially in poetry and songs.
He came from his palace grand.
เท modern English, this only happens in a few cases.
Hoi	bciocr personal ptofkourte (e.g. Awr JMtQ' ► »74.?.
b after be, seem, took, become and other linking verbs (► 11). This is called
■predicative position'.
That dress is new, isn't it? She looks rich.	I feel unhappy.
2	adjectives used only before nouns
Some adjectives are used only (or mostly) before nouns. After verbs, other words
must be used. Common examples:
elder and eldest Compare:
My elder sister is a pilot. She's three years older than me.
live /laIV/ (meaning 'not dead') Compare:
a lite fish It's still alite.
old (referring to relationships that have lasted a long time)
an old friend (not the same as a friend who is old)
little (เท BrE: ► 580) Compare:
a nice little house The house is quite small.
Some others:
He's a mere child, (wr NOT That child is mere.)
It's sheer madness, (mn NOT Thatmadnessis sheer:)
I was studying for my future career as a lawyer, (but NOT AfteweHMtaw
IMW )
This is the main problem! (เพท NOT This problem is main1)
3	adjectives used only after verbs
Some adjectives beginning with a·, and a few others, arc used mainly after
linking verbs, especially be. Common examples: ablaze, afloat, afraid. alight,
alike, alite, alone, asleep, awake. Compare:
-	The baby's asleep.	- He was afraid.
a sleeping baby (not an asleep baby) a frightened man
-	The ship's still afloat.
a floating leaf
The adjectives ill (►494) and well (► 622) are most common after verbs. Before
nouns, many people prefer other words.
grammar
adjectives: norma! position
Adjectives
Section 15
- He's iwy well. - You look ill.
a healthy/fit man	Nurses take care of sick people.
4	verb * object + adjective
Another possible position for adjectives is after the object, in the structure
verb · object ♦ adjective.
I 'll get the car ready. Do I make you happy? Let 'ร paint the kitchen yellow.
184	order of adjectives
When several adjectives come before a noun (or when nouns are used as
modifiers before another noun), they are usually put in a more or less fixed
order. However, this is a complicated grammatical area, and it is not possible to
give simple reliable rules for adjective order. The following guidelines will help.
1	description before classification: an old political idea
Words which describe come before words which classify (say what type of thing
we are talking about).
description classification	noun
an	old	political	idea	(«1!polnicul old à.)
the	latest	educational	reform	(not	the educational latest reform)
a	green	wine	bottle	(noI	a น‘เทe green hottie)
leather	dancing	shoes	(not	dummy leather thm-y)
2	opinion before description: S wonderful old house
Words which express opinions, attitudes and judgements usually come before
words that simply describe, l-xamples are lovely, definite, pure, absolute, extreme,
perfect, wonderful, silly.
opinion	description noun
a	lovely	cool	drink
a	wonderful	old	house
beautiful	green	mountains
that	silly	fat	cal
(nut a cool lovely drink)
(not an old wonderful house)
(not green beautiful mountains)
(Mil fhwtfirt silly,al)
3	order of descriptive words
The order of descriptive words is not completely fixed. Words for origin and
material usually come last. Words for size, age, shape· and colour often come in
that order.
	size	agl-	shape	colour	origin	material	noun
(1	if	ow		white			horse
fl	big	ท«•น'		grey	Italian	woollen	sweater boots
a	small		round	black		leather	handbag
tin	enormous			brown	Herman	glass	mug
2	little	modern	square			brick	house
grammar
order of adjectives
4	numbers
Numbers usually go before adjectives.
six large eggs the second big shock
First, next and Iasi most often go before one, two, three, etc.
the first three days (More common than the three first days)
my last two fobs
5	noun modifiers after adjectives
Note that noun modifiers (which often classify, or refer to material) usually
follow adjectives.
a big new car factory enormous black iron gates
6	commas
Before nouns, we generally use commas between adjectives (especially in longer
sequences) which give similar kinds of information, as in physical descriptions.
a steep, slippery, grassy slope
an expensive, ill planned, wasteful project
But commas can be dropped before short common adjectives.
a tall(.) dark(,) handsome cowboy
We do not use commas between adjectives which give different kinds of
information.
an attractive traditional woollen dress
Commas are not used after numbers or other determiners.
ten green bottles (not ten, green boules)
these new ideas (not these, new ideas)
7	after a verb
rite order of adjectives เท predicative position (after be, seem and similar verbs.
► II) is similar to the order before nouns. Note that noun modifiers are not
used in this position.
a big, green wine bottle Bin NOT lhe boule is big, green and wine.
185	adjectives with and
When two or more adjectives (or other modifiers) come together, we sometimes
put and before the last one, and sometimes not. it depends partly on their
position in the sentence, and partly the kinds of information they give.
1	after a verb
When adjectives come เท predicative position (after he, seem and similar verbs.
► 11), we usually put and before the last one.
He was tall, dark and handsome.
You're like a winter's day: short, dark and dirty.
เท a very literary style, and it sometimes left out.
My soul is exotic, mysterious, incomprehensible.
grammar · 185 adjectives with and
Adjectives
Section 15
2	before a noun
เท attributive position (before a noun), and is less common.
a big beautiful garden
However, and Is possible when the adjectives give similar kinds of information,
especially when we are 'piling up' favourable or unfavourable descriptions.
a cruel (and) vicious tyrant a warm (and) generous personality
an ill-planned, expensive (and) wasteful project
And is necessary when two or more adjectives (or other modifiers) refer to
different parts of something, or distinguish different types of thing.
a yellow and black sports car a concrete and glass factory
hot and cold drinks (ะ hot drinks and cold drinks)
We also use and when we say that something belongs to two or more
different classes.
Il’s a social and political problem.
She's a musical and artistic genius.
3	and not used
We do not use and between adjectives that give different kinds of information.
an angry young man (\OI an angry and young man)
a ridiculous economic policy (not a ridwulmà and economic policy)
4	nice and...
เท an informal style, the expression nice and is often used before another
adjective or an adverb. It means something like ‘pleasantly’ or ‘suitably’.
It's nice and warm in front of the fire. (- pleasantly warm)
The work was nice and easy
Now just pul your gun down nice and slow.
186	adjectives after nouns and pronouns
Adjectives come immediately after nouns in a few special cases.
1	fixed phrases: Secretary General; court martial
Adjectives come after nouns in some fixed phrases.
Secretary General	President elect
court martial (- military court) Attorney General
Poet laureate
2	available, possible, etc
Some adjectives can be used after nouns in a similar way to relative clauses.
This is common with adjectives ending in able/ ible.
Send all the tickets available / available tickets. (ะะ... tickets which
arc available.)
It's the only solution possible possible solution.
Some adverbs can also be used like this.
the woman upstairs the people outside
grammar · 186 adjectives after nouns and pronouns
3	present, proper
Before a noun, present refers IO time; after a noun it means 'here/there', 'not
absent’. Compare:
the present members l- those who are members now)
the members present (ะ those who arc/wcre at the meeting)
Before a noun, proper (especially เท British English) means 'real', ’genuine'.
•After a noun it refers to the central or main part of something. Compare:
Snowdon's a proper mountain, not a hill.
After two days crossing the foothills, they reached the mountain proper.
4	expressions of measurement: two metres high
Adjectives usually follow measurement nouns.
two metres high ten years older two miles long	six feel deep
Exception: worth (e g. worth too euros). ► 634
5	adjectives with complements: people skilled เก design
When an adjective has its own complement (e.g. skilled in design), the whole
expression normally comes after a noun.
We are looking for people skilled in design, (not ... skilled in design people.)
A relative clause is often mote natural.
We are looking for people who are skilled in design.
เท some cases an adjective can be put before a noun and its complement after it.
This happens with different, similar, the same. next. last, first, second, etc;
comparatives and superlatives; and a few other adjectives like difficult and easy.
a different life from this one	the second train from this platform
the next house to the Royal Hotel	the best mother in the world
(c» the house next to the Royal Hotel)	a difficult problem to solve
6	something, everything, etc
Adjectives come after something, everything, anything, nothing, somebody,
anywhere and similar words.
Have you read anything interesting lately?	Let's go somewhere quiet.
187	adjectives: position after as, how, so, too
After as, how, so, too and Ihis/lhat meaning so, adjectives go before a. an.
Ulis structure is common เท a formal style.
as how.'so. too. this, that · adjective 4 a/an 4 noun
I have as good a voice as you. She is too polite a person to refuse.
How good a pianist is he?	I couldn 'I afford that big a car.
It was so warm a day that I could hardly work.
The structure is not possible without a/an.
I like your country - it's so beautiful, (wt I Me your -»beautiful country.)
Those girls are too kind to refuse, (not They are too kind girls Io refuse.)
grammar - 187 adjectives: position after as. how, so, too
Adjectives
Section 15
188	adjectives without nouns
We cannot usually leave out a noun after an adjective.
Poor hl tie boy.'(noI Poor little1)
The most important thing is to be happy, (noi Fhe most important M...)
But there are some exceptions.
1	well-known groups: the old; the poor
The » adjective is used to talk about certain well-known groups of people who
are in a particular physical or social condition. Common expressions:
the blind	the	disabled	the mentally ill	the rich
the dead	the	handicapped	the old	the unemployed
the deaf	the	fobless	the	poor	the young
The term handicapped is now often considered offensive; people with physical
disabilities generally prefer the adjective disabled.
He's collecting money for the blind
The unemployed are losing hope.
The meaning is usually general; occasionally a limited group is referred to.
After the accident, the injured were taken to hospital.
These expressions are normally plural: the dead means 'all dead people' or
'the dead people', but not the dead person'.
The dead have no further worries. (Bin NOT Fhedeadhas ...)
Note that these expressions cannot be used with a possessive 'ร.
the problems of the poor o· poor people's problems (xor the poor's problems)
Adjectives arc normally only used in this way with the or a determiner.
This government doesn’t care about the poor, (not ... about poor.)
there are more unemployed than ever before.
However, adjectives without the are sometimes used เท paired structures with
both... and___
opportunities for both rich and poor
2	adjectives of nationality: the Irish; the Dutch
A few adjectives of nationality ending in sh or -ch (► 321.3) are used after the
without nouns. They include Irish, Welsh, English, British. Spanish,
Dutch, Trench.
The Irish are very proud of their sense of humour.
These expressions are plural; singular equivalents are for example an
Irishwoman, a Welshman (sor a Welsh).
Where nouns exist, these are preferred to expressions with the.. .ish: we say
the Danes or the Turks (not the Danish OH the Turkish).
3	singular examples: the accused
เท a few formal fixed phrases, the · adjective can have a singular meaning.
These include the accused1 the undersigned, the deceased, the former and
the latter.
The accused was released on bail.
... Stephen Gray and Susan Cook; the latter is a well-known designer.
grammar · 188 adjectives without nouns
4	abstract ideas: the supernatural
Adjectives arc sometimes used after the to refer to general abstract ideas,
especially in philosophical writing. (Examples: the beautiful, the supernatural,
the unreal.) These expressions are singular.
She's Interested เท the supernatural.
The difficult น* do immediately, the impossible lakes a little longer.
5	choices ■.พhite or brown?
We sometimes leave out a noun that has already been mentioned, or which
does not need to be mentioned, when thinking about a choice between two or
more different kinds of thing.
'Have you got any breadT 'Do you want while or brown f
rd like two large packets and one small.
Colour adjectives can sometimes have a plural ร in this situation, effectively
becoming nouns.
Wash the reds and blues separately. (- red and blue clothes)
6	superlatives: We bought the cheapest.
Nouns are often left out after superlative adjectives.
I'm the tallest เท my family. We bought the cheapest.
189	gradable and non-gradable adjectives
Adjectives can be divided into gradable and non-gradable. Gradablc adjectives
(e g. difficult, important, happy, tired) are words for qualities that exist in
different degrees. Things can be more or less difficult or important; people can
be more or less happy or tired. Non gradablc adjectives (e g. impossible,
essential, alive, exhausted) are words for either or' qualities. We don't generally
say that some things are more impossible than others, or that somebody is not
very exhausted: things arc either impossible or not, and people arc either
exhausted or not.
Degree adverbs like t*ry or more are mostly used with gradable adjectives, and it
is mainly gradablc adjectives that have comparative and superlative forms.
Note that quite has different meanings in British English with gradablc and
non gradable adjectives (► 564).
190	measurements: 'marked' and
'unmarked' forms
Many adjectives that arc used in measurements come in pairs (e g. tall/short,
old/young, heavy light, fast slow). The word that is used for the top end of the
measurement scale can usually be used in another sense, to talk about the
quality in general. For instance, one can ask how long something is even if it is
relatively short. Grammarians call these uses ‘unmarked’. Compare:
- รhe's very tall and he's very short, (marked)
Exactly how tall are they both? (unmarked) (not Exactlyhow^hort. ..)
grammar · 189 gradable and non-gradable adjectives
Adjectives
Section 15
-	Will you รtill love me when I'm old? (marked)
He's only twenty-three years old. (unmarked) (not ... years yawιχ.)
lead is one of the heaviest metals, (marked)
Scales measure how heavy things are. (unmarked) (not ... howltgkt ..)
Some nouns are used in similar 'unmarked' ways. Compare:
-	Age brings wisdom hut I’d rather hate youth and stupidity, (marked)
IVhal is her exact age? (unmarked) (not Muri it her eutei youth?)
-	The worst thing about the film was its length (marked)
What 's the length of the runway? (unmarked) (not Whitt 's the shortness ...?)
191	pronunciation of aged, naked, etc
A few adjectives ending in -ed have a special pronunciation: the last syllable is
pronounced 'idJ instead of d or 1*1/ (► 44.2).
aged eidzid (- very old)	blessed blesid
beloved bl'lAVid''	dogged dogid
crooked krokid	learned ?!a:nid
cursed 'ka:sid
naked 'neikid/
sacred 'scikrid/
wicked ''พ!kid1
ragged iLyid
rugged 'rxqid
wretched "rctfid
one/three/four-legged 'Icyid
Note that aged is pronounced /eidzd when It means 'years old’ (as in He has a
daughter aged fen), or when it is a verb.
192	What can follow an adjective?
Many adjectives can be followed by ‘complements' - words and expressions that
'complete' their meaning. Not all adjectives arc followed by the same kind OÍ
complement. Some can be followed by preposition · noun/-Ing (► 103).
I'm interested เท cookery. I'm interested in learning to cook.
Some can be followed by infinitives (► 101).
You don Ί look happy to see me. The soup is ready to eat.
All infinitive may have Its own subject, introduced by for (► 113).
I'm anxious for her to get a good education. (- I'm anxious that she
should get...)
Some adjectives can be followed by clauses (► 264).
I’m glad that you were able to come.
It's important that everybody should feel comfortable.
And many adjectives can have more than one kind of complement.
I'm pleased about her promotion. I'm pleased to see you here.
We rarely put adjective · complement before a noun (► 186.5).
He's a difficult person to understand, (noi He's a difficult to

grammar - 192 What can follow an adjective?
Section 16 Adverbs and Adverbiais
INTRODUCTION
rhe term adverb is used for a wide variety of words with different kinds of use:
for example frankly, now, very, right, regularly. Their general function is to
modify (add meaning to) sentences, clauses or various pans of clauses
(but not nouns).
Frankly, I think she’s crazy.
You did that very well.
Please answer now.
She went right up the stairs.
When I teas a student. I went to the gym regularly.
Other longer expressions can modify sentences, clauses, verbs, etc เท the same
way as adverbs. To he honest. I think she's crazy.
You did that quite remarkably well.
Please answer right away.
She went all the way up the stairs.
When I was a student, I went to the gym every day.
It can be convenient to use a single word to talk about modifiers of this kind,
whether they are adverbs, or longer expressions functioning like adverbs. เท this
Section they are called adverbiais when necessary. For adverbial clauses
(e g IVhen 1 was a student), ► Sections 20. 22-23.
Note that not all languages make a grammatical distinction between adverbs and
adjectives. This can cause problems for some learners.
grammar · Section 16 Adverbs and Adverbiais
Do you know what's wrong with these, and why?
o She danced happy Into the room. ► 193.1
Ο I don't reinember him very good. ► 193.1
o It’s terrible cold today. ► 193.2
Q They smiled friendly at น.ร. ► 194.1
Q You’re doing finely. ►194.2
Ο I worked very hardly for the exam. ► 194.2
o The door was widely open. ► 194.2
Q I gel often headaches. ► 196.1
o She speaks very well English. ► 196.1
o Never I get up early. ► 198.1
o Here your bus comes. ► 201.2
Q Put the butter at once เท the fridge. ► 201 4
Ο I play always tennis on Saturdays. ► 200.1
Q I never have seen a whale. ► 200.1
o He does probably not know. ► 200.2
Ο I often am late for work- ► 200.1
Ο I will completely have finished by next year. ► 198.3
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
193	adverbs of manner
and adjectives
194	adverbs or adjectives:
confusing cases
195	adverb particles: up, down, back,
away, etc
196	position of adverbiais:
introduction
197	connecting and comment
adverbiais
198	indefinite frequency, certainty
and completeness
199	focusing adverbiais
200	mid-position: details
201	manner, place and time
202	adverbiais modifying adverbiais:
terribly sorry, right past me
grammar . Section 16 Adverbs and Adverbiais
193	adverbs of manner and adjectives_________
1	adverbs of manner with verbs: He sang badly.
Adverbs of manner typically say how something happens or is done.
Examples: happily, terribly, fast, badly, well
Adverbs of manner can modify verbs. They should not be confused with
adjectives (happy, terrible, etc). Adjectives are not used to modify verbs.
She danced happily into the room, (xor She danced happy...)
She sang badly, (not Shebang bad.)
I don't remember him very well. (not ... eery good.)
but note that some adjective forms are sometimes used as adverbs in an
informal style, especially in American English (► 194.4).
She talks funny.
2 other uses: terribly cold
These adverbs can also modify adjectives, past participles, other adverbs and
prepositional phrases.
It's terribly cold today, (not . terrible cnld.)
adverb * past participle
This steak is very badly cooked, (not .. bad evoked)
adverb - adverb
They're playing unusually fast, (not ... unusual fast.)
adverb · prepositional phrase
He was madly in love with her. (not ... mad tn love...)

M^ectfvet ending เท fy, » เพ
I'll «hrrtn tnd adlrata· M«h
DOMCjon of adverta OÍ manner.
grammar · 193 adverbs of manner and adjectives
Adverbs and Adverbiais
Section 16
194 adverbs or adjectives: confusing cases
1	adjectives ending เท -ly: friendly, lively
Some words ending in -ly are adjectives, and not normally adverbs. Common
examples: costly, cowardly, deadly, friendly, likely, lively, lonely, lovely, silly,
ugly, unlikely.
She gave me a friendly smile.	Her singing was lovely.
There are no adverbs friendly/friendlily, lovely/lovelily, etc.
She smiled in a friendly way. (not She พ*wterf friendly.)
He gave a silly laugh. (.MH He kiitghed sdly.)
Daily, weekly, monthly, yearly, early and leisurely are both adjectives
and adverbs.	(Nm "c	»■'» >
It's a daily paper. It comes out daily. an early train I got up early.
2	adjectives and adverbs with the same form; adverbs with
two forms
Some adjectives and adverbs have the same form: for example, a fast car goes
fast; if you do hard work, you work hard. In other cases, the adverb may have
two forms (e.g. late and lately), one like the adjective and the other with -ly.
There is usually a difference of meaning or use. Some examples follow; for more
detailed information, check in a good dictionary.
clean The adverb clean means 'completely' before forget (informal) and some
expressions of movement.
Sorry I didn 't turn up - I clean forgot.
The explosion blew the cooker clean through the wall.
dead The adverb dead is used in certain expressions to mean 'exactly',
'completely' or 'very'. Examples: dead ahead, dead certain, dead drunk, dead
right, dead slow, dead straight, dead sure, dead tired.
Note that deadly is an adjective, meaning 'fatal', 'causing death’. The adverb for
this meaning is fatally. Compare:
Cyanide is a deadly poison. She was fatally injured in the crash.
direct Direct is often used informally as an adverb.
The plane goes direct from London to Houston without stopping.
50% cheaper - order direct from the factory!
easy Easy is used as an adverb in some informal expressions.
Go easy! (= Not too fast!) Take it easy! (= Relax!)
Easy come, easy go.	Easier said than done.
fair Fair is used as an adverb after a verb in some expressions.
to play fair	to fight fair	to hit/win something fair and square
For the adverb of degree fairly, ► 460.	ฟ
grammar · 194 adverbs or adjectives: confusing cases
fast hast can mean both 'quick' and ‘quickly’ (a fast car goes fail). Fast means
'completely' เท the expression fast asleep, and It means ’tight’, ’impossible to
remove’ เท expressions like hold fast, stick fast, fast colours.
fine The adverb fine (- well) Is used in some informal expressions.
that suits me fine.	You’re doing fine.
The adverb finely is used to talk about small careful adjustments and
similar ideas.
a finely tuned engine	finely chopped onions (- cut up very small)
flat Flat can be used as an adverb เท a musical sense (to sing flat means to sing
on a note that is too low’). เท most other cases, the adverb Is flatly.
free The adverb free (used after a verb) means 'without payment’; freely means
‘without limit or restriction’. Compare:
You can eat free in my restaurant whenever you like.
You can speak freely - I won't tell anyone what you say.
hard The adverb hard means 'with a lot of force, energetically’.
Hit it hard. I trained really hard for the marathon.
Hardly means 'almost not'.
I’ve hardly got any clean clothes left.
Compare:
Anna uorks hard. Her brother hardly works.
high High refers to height; highly (rather formal) expresses an extreme degree
(Il often means very much’). Compare:
He can lump really high. - It's highly amusing.
Throw it as high as you can. I can highly recommend it.
just lust is an adverb with several meanings (► 503). There is also an adjective
just, meaning ’เท accordance with justice or the law’; the adverb is justly.
He was justly punished for his crimes.
late Hie adverb late has a similar meaning to the adjective late, lately means
’recently'. Compare:
I hate arriving late. I haven't been to the theatre much lately.
loud Loud is often used informally as an adverb after a verb.
Don’t talk so loud(ly) - you'll wake the whole street.
low Low is an adjective and adverb (fl low bridge, a low voice, bend low).
most Most is the superlative of much, and is used to form superlative adjectives
and adverbs (► 204).
Which part of the concert did you like most?
This is the most extraordinary day of my life.
เท a formal style, most can be used to mean very’.
You're a most unusual person.
Mostly means ‘mainly’, most often’ or ‘in most cases'.
My friends are mostly non smokers.
grammar · IfM adverbs or adjectives: confusing
Adverbs and Adverbiais
pretty The informal adverb of degree pretty is similar to rather (► >60).
Prettily means in a pretty way’. Compare:
I'm getting pretty fed up. เรท Ί your little girl dressed prettilyf
quick In an informal style, quick is often used instead of quickly, especially after
verbs of movement.
I ’ll get back as quickfly) as I can.
real เท informal American English, real is often used instead of really before
adjectives and adverbs.
That was real nice. He cooks real well.
right Right with adverbiais means just', ’exactly’ or all the way'.
She arrived right after breakfast.
Ihe snowball hit me right on the nose.
Turn the gas right down.
Right and rightly can both be used to mean correctly. Right is only used after
verbs, and is usually informal. Compare:
I rightly assumed that Henry น«ร not coming.	You guessed right.
It serves you right. (... rightly is not possible.)
sharp Sharp can be used as an adverb to mean ’punctually'.
Can you be there at six o'clock sharp?
Il	also has a musical sense (to sing sharp means 'to sing on a note that is too
high'), and is used in the expressions turn sharp left and turn sharp right
(meaning 'with a big change of direction’).
เท other senses the adverb is sharply.
She looked at him sharply.
I thought you spoke to her rather sharply.
short Short is used as an adverb in the expressions stop short (- stop suddenly')
and cut short ( interrupt ). Shortly means 'soon'; it can also describe an
impatient way of speaking.
slow Slow is used as an adverb in road signs (e g. SLOW - DANGOtOUS fif.VD), and
informally after go and some other verbs. Examples: go slow, drive slow.
sound Sound is used as an adverb in the expression sound asleep. เท other
cases, soundly is used (e g. She's sleeping soundly).
straight The adverb and the adjective are the same. Λ straight road goes straight
from one place to another.
sure Sure is often used to mean ‘certainly’ in an informal style, especially in
American English.
'Can I borrow your tennis racketT 'Sure.'
Surely (not) is used to express opinions or surprise (► 600 for details).
Surety house prices will stop rising soon!
Surely you're not going out in that old coati
tight Alter a verb, tight can be used instead of tightly, especially in an informal
style. Typical expressions: hold light, packed tight (compare tightly packed).
grammar· 194 adverbs or adjectives: confusing cases
well Well is an adverb corresponding lo the adjective good (ส good singer sings
well). Well is also an adjective meaning 'เท good health’ (the opposite of พ).
For details. ► 622.
wide The normal adverb is U'ide; widely suggests distance or separation.
Compare:
The door was wide open. She's travelled widely.
They have widely differing opinions-
Note also the expression wide awake (the opposite of fast asleep).
wrong Wrong can be used informally instead of wrongly after a verb. Compare:
I wrongly believed that you wanted to help me.
You guessed wrong.
3	comparatives and superlatives
Informal uses of adjective forms as adverbs are especially common with
comparatives and superlatives.
Can you drive a bit slower?	let's see who can do it quickest.
4	American English
เท informal American English, many other adjective forms can also be used as
adverbs of manner.
He looked at me real strange. Think positive.
195	adverb particles: up, down, back, away, etc
1	adverb particles and prepositions
Words like down, in, up are not always prepositions. Compare:
I ran down the road.
Please sit down.
-	Something's climbing up my leg.
She's not up yet.
-	He's in his office.
You can go in.
เท the expressions down the road, in his office and up my leg, the words down, in
and up are prepositions: they have objects (rhe road, his office and my leg).
เท sit down, go in a ltd She's not up, the words down, in and up have no objects.
They are adverbs, not prepositions.
Small adverbs like these are usually called advcrb(ial) partides'. They include
above, about, across, ahead, along, (a)round, aside, away, back, before, behind,
below, by. down, forward. เท. home, near, off, on, out. over, past, through, under,
up. Many words of this kind can be used as both adverb particles and
prepositions, but there are some exceptions: for example back, away (only
adverb panicles): from, during (only prepositions).
grammar · 195 adverb panicles: up, down, back, away.
Adverbs and Adverbiais
Section 16
2	phrasal verbs: give up, break down
Adverb panicles often join together with verbs to make two-word verbs,
sometimes with completely new meanings le g break down, put off. work out,
give up). These arc often called phrasal verbs. For details of their use, ► 12.
3	adverb particles with be: I'm off!
Adverb particles are often used, rather like adjectives, as complements of
the verb be.
Why are all the lights on ?	Hello! You ’re back'
the match will be over by 4.30.	I'm off - see you later!
l or แพriwd word order เท lencrncri beginning พฬเ an adverb parade (eg. Our inriพ Seroh» » 271
196	position of adverbiais: introduction
Different kinds of adverbiais typically go in different positions in a clause.
The very simple explanations below show the commonest patterns; entries
► 197-202 give some more detail. However, this is a very complicated area of
grammar, and it is impossible to give reliable rules that apply all the time to all
adverbiais.
1	verb and object: She speaks English well.
We do not usually pul adverbiais between a verb and its object.
adverbial · verb · object
I often get headaches (not l-gef-often-keadaehe*)
verb ' object ' adverbial
She speaks English well, (noI She speriks well English.)
But an adverb particle like on, off, out can go between a verb and a noun object.
Could you switch off the light7
2	front, mid- and end position
There are three normal positions for adverbiais:
a front position (at the beginning of a clause)
Yesterday morning something very strange happened.
b mid position (with the verb - for exact details ► 200)
My brother completely forgot my birthday.
I have never understood her.
c end position (at the end of a clause)
What are you doing tomorrow'
3	What goes where?
Connecting adverbiais (which join a clause to what came before) and comment
adverbiais (which show a speaker's or writer's opinion of what he/shc is talking
about) usually go เท front position.
However, not everybody agreed. Fortunately, nobody was hurt.	-4
grammar · 196 position of adverbiais: introduction
Adverbiais of indefinite frequency (c.g. always, often), certainly (e.g. probably,
definitely) and completeness (e g. completely, almost) usually go
in mid position.
My boss often travels to America.
I’ve definitely decided to change my job.
rhe builder said he had almost finished, but It wasn't true.
Focusing adverbiais (e g. also. just, even) can go in mid position: other
positions arc possible, depending on the particular adverbial.
He’s even been to Antarctica.
Adverbiais 0Í manner (how), place (where) and time (when) most often go เท
end position.
She brushed her hair slowly. The children are playing upstairs.
I phoned Alex this morning
Time adverbiais can also go in front position.
Tomorrow I've got a meeting in Cardiff.
Emphasising adverbiais (e g. terribly, really) usually go with the words
they emphasise.
I'm terribly sorry about last night.
Degree adverbiais (c.g. more, very much, most, a lot, so) go เท various places,
depending on their function in the sentence. Details are given เท other entries.
posUMn ๗ the»
197	connecting and comment adverbiais
Examples of connecting adverbiais: then. next, after that, besides,
anyway, suddenly, however, as a result, on the other hand
These words and expressions show how a clause connects with what came
before. Naturally, they generally go in front position.
I worked until five o'clock. Then I went home.
Atext I want to say something about the future.
Suddenly the door opened.
Some of us want a new system However, not everybody agrees.
It was hard work; on the other hand, we really enjoyed the experience.
Examples of comment adverbiais: fortunately, surprisingly, in my
opinion, arguably, as you might expect
These adverbiais show a speaker's or writer's opinion of what he/she is talking
about. They, too, most often go in front position.
Fortunately, several people hai r decided to help US.
Stupidly, I did not read the contract before signing it.
Arguably, this is her finest novel since 'Flowers of Doom'.
As you might expect, his remarks have attracted widespread criticism.
Other positions are possible, especially with shorter adverbiais.
Not everybody, however, agrees.
I stupidly did not read the contract before signing it.
FM lhe นพ of พ·™· oí rhr·» 4<lvrrbul« 4< dixouiu murtrr». » ;m Ml.
grammar · 197 connecting and comment adverbiah
Adverbs and Adverbiais
Section 16
198	indefinite frequency, certainty and
completeness
Adverbiais in this group most often go in mid position (before a one-part verb
and after an auxiliary verb - for more exact details, ► 200).
1	adverbiais of indefinite frequency: usually, often, etc
Examples: usually, normally, often, frequently, sometimes, occasionally,
always, rarely, ever, hardly ever, seldom, never
We usually go to Scotland in August.
It sometimes gets very windy here. I have never seen a whale.
You can always come and stay with US if you want to.
Have you ever played American football?
My boss is often bad-tempered. I'm seldom late for work.
We have never been invited to one of their parties.
She must sometimes have wanted to run away.
Other positions are possible for most of them.
Sometimes I think I'd like to live somewhere else.
I see her occasionally.
Always, ever, rarely, seldom and never cannot normally go in front position.
I always/never get up early, (not Always/Never I get up early.)
However, always and never can begin imperative clauses.
Always look in the mirror before starting to drive.
Never ask her about her marriage.
For rarely, seldom, never, hardly and scarcely in front position before verb + subject ('inversion'), ► 270.7.
2	adverbiais of certainty: probably, certainly, etc
Examples: probably, certainly, definitely, clearly, obviously
He probably thinks you don’t like him.
It will certainly rain this evening. There is clearly something wrong.
I definitely feel better today.	The train has obviously been delayed.
Maybe and perhaps usually come at the beginning of a clause.
Maybe I’m right and maybe I'm wrong. Perhaps her train is late.
3	adverbiais of completeness: practically, partly, etc
Examples: completely, practically, almost, nearly, quite, rather, partly,
sort of, kind of, more or less, hardly, scarcely
I have completely forgotten your name.
Sophie can practically read. I kind of hope she wins.
It was almost dark.	It hardly matters.
Adverbiais of completeness usually follow all auxiliary verbs.
I will have completely finished by next June, (not / นุ»พ เพ^เฟฺ* Jmm»
fini&fwíi )	(not J- นทํแ completely have
Do you think the repair has been properly done?	-»
grammar « 198 indefinite frequency, certainty and completeness
4 longer adverbiais: from time to time, etc
Longer adverbiais do nor usually go เท mid-position. Compare:
I sometimes visit my old school
I visit my old school from lime to time. (.NOT I from lime Io lime visit.. l
199	focusing adverbial
These adverbiais 'point to' one part of a clause.
Examples: also, just, even, only, mainly, mostly, either, or. neither, nor
They often go in mid-position.
Your bicycle just needs some oil - that's all.
She neither said Thank )<ou nor looked at me.
He's been everywhere - hr's even been to Antarctica.
We’re only going for two days.
She's my teacher, but she's also my friend.
The people at the meeting were mainly scientists.
Some of these adverbiais can also go in other places เท a clause, directly before
the words they modify. For details, see the entries on each adverbial.
Only you could do a thing like that. I feel really tired.
200	mid-position: details	_________ ________
1	What exactly is mid-position?
Mid position adverbiais usually go before one-word verbs te g. play. won). If a
verb has more than one part le g. has written, was trying), they normally go after
lite auxiliary. And they go after am/are/is/was/were.
a before one-word verbs
I	always play tennis on Saturdays, (not I play always tennis ..)
It certainly looks like rain. We nearly won the match.
b after auxiliary verbs
รhe has never written to me. (not MUMIA She never has written to me.)
He was definitely trying to get into the house.
The train will probably be late. You can almost see the sea from here.
c after amlare/is/was/wcrc
She นพ always kind to me. (not usuAttv Shewlways was kind to me.)
II	is probably too late now. I am obviously not welcome here.
When there are two or more auxiliaries, the adverbial usually goes after the first.
You have definitely been working too hard.
She would never have been promoted if she hadn't changed jobs.
grammar· 199 focusing adverbiais
Adverbs and Adverbiais
Section 16
When an auxiliary verb is used alone instead of a complete verb phrase (► 279),
a mid position adverbial comes before it.
‘Are you working? 7 certainly am.'
I don't trust politicians. I never have, and I never will.
2	mid-position (details): adverbiais with negative verbs
เท negative sentences, adverbiais generally come before not if they emphasise
the negative; otherwise they come after. Compare:
/ certainly do not agree. I do not often have headaches.
Both positions arc possible with some adverbiais, often with a difference of
meaning. Compare:
I don't really like her. (mild dislike)
I really don’t like her. (strong dislike)
When adverbiais come before not, they may also come before the first auxiliary
verb; they always come before do.
I probably will not be there, (ox I will probably not he there.)
ฟ้รฺะะ,ริ
I probably won't be there.
3	mid position (details): adverbiais with emphatic verbs
When we emphasise auxiliary verbs or am/are/ls/was/were. we put most mid
position adverbiais before them instead of after. Compare:
-	She has certainly made him angry.
She certainly HAS made him angry!
-	Polite people always say thank-you.
Yes, well. I always IX) say thank-you.
-	I'm really sorry.
I really AM sorry.
4	mid position (details): American English
เท American English (► 319). mid position adverbiais are often put before
auxiliary verbs and am/ate/is/was/were, even when the verb is not emphasised,
especially เท an informal style. Compare:
He has probably arrived by now. (normal in both AmE and BrE)
He probably has arrived by now. (also normal in AmE; emphatic in BrE)
As an extreme example, here are four sentences in a journalistic style taken from
an American newspaper article on crime เท Britain, fire most normal British
equivalents are given เท brackets.
‘Britain long has been known as a land of law and order.' (BrE Britain has
long been known ...)
· but it probably will lead to a tote ...'(BrE ...but it will probably
'... the Labor Party often has criticized police actions.’ (BrE ... the labour
Party has often criticised...)
'... he ultimately was responsible for the treatment.. .'(BrE ...he was
ultimately responsible...)
grammar «200 mid position: details
201	manner, place and time	_______________
Adverbiais of manner, place and time usually RO เท end position, often in that
order.
1	manner
Adverbiais of manner say how something happens or is done.
Examples: angrily, happily, fast. รlowly, well, badly, nicely, noisily,
quietly, hard, softly
lie drove of! angrily	You speak English well.
She read the notice slowly lack works really hard.
Adverbiais เท ly can also go เท mid position if the adverb is not the main focus
She angrily tore up the letter. I slowly began to feel belter again.
Mid-position (after ail auxiliary verbs) is especially common with passive verbs.
rhe driver has been seriously injured
2	place
Examples: upstairs, around, here, to bed, in London, out of the window
The children are playing upstairs. Come and Sil here.
Don't throw orange peel out of the window.
She's sitting at the end of the garden.
Front position is also possible, especially เท literary writing and If the adverbial is
not the main focus of the message. เท this case the verb often comes before
the subject (►271.1).
On the gruss sat an enormous frog. Down came the rain.
Here and there often begin clauses. Note the word order in Here'There is,
Here comes and There goes.
Here comes your büs. (not Here your bus comes.)
There's Alice.	There goes our train!
Pronoun subjects come directly after here and there.
Here it conies (not Here eomes il.)	lhere she is. (not There is she.)
Adverbiais of direction (movement) come before adverbiais of position.
The children are running around upstairs.
3	time and definite frequency
Examples: today, afterwards, in lune, last year, finally, before, eventually,
already, soon, still, last, daily, weekly, every year
I'm going to London today. What did you do afterwards '<
She has a new hairstyle every week
Front position is also common if the adverbial is not the main focus of
Today I'm going to London. Every week she has a new hairstyle.
Finally, eventually·, already, soon and last can also go เท mid position
grammar · 201 manner, place and time
Adverbs and Adverbiais
Section 16
4	order
Most often, adverbiais of manner, place and lime go เท (ha( order.
Pul the butler in the fridge at once. (not... al ante HUhefrtdge.)
Let's go to bed early, (not ... early Io bed.)
I worked hard yesterday. She sang beautifully เท the town hall last night
202	adverbiais modifying adverbiais:
terribly sorry; right past me
Examples: very, extremely, terribly, just (meaning ’exactly' or ‘a short
time’), almost, really, right
These adverbiais go directly before the words that they modify.
We all thought she sang very well.
Everybody น«ร extremely annoyed with lulian.
I'm terribly sorry about last night.
I'll see you in the pub Just before eight o'clock.
lie threw the ball almost over the house.
I'm really tired today. She walked right past me.
Almost can also go in mid position (► 1983).
grammar · 202 adverbiais modifying adverbiais: terribly sorry, right past
Section 17 Comparison
INTRODUCTION
Various words and structures can I* used (or comparing. This Section deals
particularly with structures used for expressing equality and inequality.
equality: as... as
To say that people, things, etc are equal in a particular way, we often use the
structure as (much/many) ...สร (► 203).
My hands were as cold as ice.	I earn as much money as you.
inequality: older than, more attractive than, laziest,
most annoying, etc
To say that people, things, etc are unequal in a particular way, we can use
comparative adjectives and adverbs, or more ' adjective adverb (► 204-208).
He's much older than her. The baby's more attractive than you.
To say which one of a group is outstanding เท a particular way, we can use a
superlative or most · adjective adverb (► 204-208).
You're the laziest and most annoying person เท the whole office.
inequality: less, least, not solas ... as
We can also talk about inequality by looking at the 'lower' end of the scale. One
possibility’ is to use less (than) (► 169) or least (► 170).
The baby'ร less ugly than you.
I want to spend the least possible time working.
เท informal usage, we more often use not so... as or not สร... as (► 203).
The baby'ร not so ugly as you.
similarity and identity: as, like, so do I, too, the same, etc
If we want to say that people, things, actions or events are similar, we can use
as or like (► 515); so/neither do I and similar structures (► 309); or adverbs such
as too, also and as well (► 369). To say that they are identical, we can use
the same (as) (► 571).
He liked working with horses, as his father did.
Your sister looks fust like you. She likes music, and so do /.
The fish was over cooked and the vegetables were too.
His eyes are fust the same colour as mine.
grammar · Section 17 Comparison
Do you know what’s wrong with these, and why?
G lie’s not so friendly like she is. ► 203.2
G Your hands are as cold like ice. ► 203.11
G He’s the happyest person 1 know. ► 204.3
G Hie most easiest solution is to do nothing. » 201.3
G /We humans really the intelligentest creatures? ► 204.4
G Would you mind talking quictlier? ► 205
G Emily's the taller of the four girls. ► 206.2
G Your accent is the worse in the class. ► 206.2
o We’re going more slowly and more slowly. ► 206.4
G Older I get. more I am happy. ► 206.5
G rhe more it is dangerous, the more I like it. ► 206.5
G My boyfriend is very older than me. » 207.1
G I’m not going out with a man who’s twice older than me. ► 208.3
G She spent more money than it was sensible. » 208.4
G Is this the first time for you to stay here? ► 208.5
G This dictionary is best I could find. ► 208.6
G He's the nicest when he’s with children. ► 208.6
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
203	«ร...«ร:«ร much·1 many as
204	comparative and superlative
adjectives
205	comparative and superlative
adverbs
206	using comparatives and
superlatives
207	much older, by far the oldest, etc
208	comparison: advanced points
grammar · Section 17 Comparison
203	as... as; as much/many as
We use «... « IO say that people or things are equal in some way.
She's as tall as her brother. Is it as good as you expected1
She speaks Spanish as well as the rest of US.
Take as much time as you need.
2	negative structures
After not, we can use so... as instead of «... as.
He’s not as/so friendly as she is. (more informal than He’s less friendly...)
3	as... as possible, etc
The structures «... as possible,1 necessary/ever/needed are common (and others
using words with similar meanings).
Please get here as soon as possible.
I'll spend as much as necessary You're as beautiful as ever.
Well do as much as practicable before the end of the week.
Λ pronouns after as
เท an informal style wc can use object pronouns (me, him, etc) after as.
She doesn't sing as well as me.
เท a formal style, we prefer subject * verb after as.
She doesn't sing as well as I do
A subject form without a verb (e.g. as well as he) is unusual เท this structure เท
modem English.
5	as much/many ...as
We can use « much'many ...as IO talk about quantity.
I haven't got as much money as I thought
We need as many people as possible.
As much/many can be used without following nouns.
I ate as much as I could.	She didn Ί catch as many as she'd hoped.
And as much ... can be used as an adverb.
You ought to rest as much as possible.
6	emphatic use: as much as 80kg
As much/many as can be used before a number IO mean the large amount/
quantity os.
Some of these fish can weigh as much as 80kg.
There are sometimes as many as 10 students in the classes.
As little/few can be used to mean 'the small amount/quantity os.
You can fly to Paris for as little as 20 euros.
grammar · 203 «...«;« much/many
Section 17
Comparison
7	half as... as. etc
Half, twice, three times, etc can be used before as ... as.
You're not half as clever as you think you are.
I'm not going out with a man who'ร twice as old as me.
It took three times as long as I expected, (or ... three times longer than I
expected. ► 2083)
8	modification: nearly as...
Before as... as we can use (not) nearly, almost, just, nothing like, every hit.
exactly, not quite.
It's not nearly as cold as yesterday.	He's just as strong as ever.
You're nothing like as bad-tempered as you used to be.
She's every bit as beautiful as her sister.
I'm not quite as tired as I was last week.
9	tenses
เท (น... (U-clauses (and other kinds of as-clauses), a present tense is often used
to refer to the future, and a past tense can have a meaning similar to would ·
infinitive (► 231).
We'll get there as soon as you do/will.
If you married me, rd give you as much freedom as you wanted.
10	leaving out the second part: twice as long ...
The second part of the as... as or so... as structure can be left out when the
meaning is clear from what comes before.
The train lakes 10 minutes. By car it'll take you twice as long.
I used to think he was clever. Now I'm not so sure
เท cases like this, nor so is much more common than not as.
11	traditional expressions: as cold as ice
We use the structure as... as... in a lot of traditional comparative expressions,
os cold as ice as black as night as hard as nails
The first as can be dropped เท these expressions in an informal style.
She's hard as nails
th* ธ. It utuaU) pronoumed U.I ,»3I ร»
F<x ธ. rrplKln* wbt«i or <>M«r leg at เพ1, proplr ธ, u«nr II» » 256.
grammar
much.· many
204	comparative and superlative adjectives
One-syllable adjectives normally have comparatives and superlatives ending in
er, -at. Some two syllable adjectives are similar; others have more and most.
longer adjectives have more and most.
1 one-syllable adjectives (regular comparison)
Adjective	Comparative	Superlative	
old tall	older taller cheaper	oldest tallest cheapest	Most adjectives:
late nice	later nicer	latest nicest	Adjectives ending in -c.
fat big thin	/alter thinner	/attest biggest thinnest	One vowel ' one consonant: double consonant.
Note the pronunciation of:
younger fjAQipfry
youngest /·jftQgist/ 0« / jAQgast/
longer loygsfr>
longest Inygist OR 'lorjgast'
stronger ' stroqga/rM
strongest rstrntjyisl เพ ."strnrjipst
2 irregular comparison
Adjective	Comparative	Superlative
£00(1	better	best
ill		worst
far	farther!further (► 1fá)	farthest/furthest
old	older/elder	oldest/eldest
grammar · 201 comparative and superlative adjectives
Comparison
Section 17
Ute determiners little and much/many have irregular comparatives and
superlatives:
little (► 168)	leu (► 169)	least (►170)
much/many (► 165) more (► 166)	most (► 167)
Few has two possible comparatives and superlatives: fewer! less and fewest'least.
► 169-170.
two-syllable adjectives
Adjectives ending in -y have -ier and -iesl.
happy	happier	happiest
easy	easier	easiest
Some other two-syllable adjectives can have -er and -est, especially adjectives
ending in an unstressed vowel, ΛΙ or 'a(r)/.
narrow narrower narrowest
simple	simpler	simplest
clever	cleverer	cleverest
quiet	quieter	quietest
With many two syllable adjectives (e g. polite, common), -er!-est and more!most
are both possible. With others (including adjectives ending เท ing, cd, Jul and
■less), only morel most is possible. เท general, the structure with more1 most is
becoming more common. To find out the normal comparative and superlative
for a particular two syllable adjective, check in a good dictionary.
longer adjectives
Adjectives of three or more syllables have more and most.
intelligent	more intelligent	most Intelligent
practical	more practical	most practical
beautiful	more beautiful	most beautiful
Words like unhappy (the opposites of two syllable adjectives ending in -y) are an
exception: they can have forms เท -er and -est.
unhappy	unhappier : more unhappy	unhappiest most unhappy
untidy	untidier more untidy	untidiest most untidy
Some compound adjectives like good looking or well-known have two possible
comparatives and superlatives.
good looking	better-looking
well known	bet ter-known
ox more well-known
best-looking
most good-looking
best-known
most well-known
grammar · 201 comparative and superlative adjectives
5	more, most with short adjectives
Sometimes more! most art· used wilh adjectives that normally have er/ est.
I his can happen, for example, when a comparative is not followed immediately
by than; forms with er are also possible.
Ihc road’s getting more and more steep, (oh ... steeper and steeper.)
When we compare two descriptions (saying that one is more suitable or accurate
than another), we use more; comparatives with er are not possible.
He's more lazy than stupid, (not He's lazier limn stupid)
เท a rather formal style, most can he used with adjectives expressing approval
and disapproval (including one-syllable adjectives) to mean 'very'.
Thank you very much indeed. Hull is most kind of you. (not .. That i'
kindest of you.)
You are most welcome.
Heal, right, wrong and like always have more and most.
She's more like her mother than her father, (ran... hker her mother...)
205	comparative and superlative adverbs
Most comparative and superlative adverbs are made with more and most.
Could you talk more quietly? (not ... quieflief)
Adverbs that have the same form as adjectives (► 194), and a few others, have
comparatives and superlatives with er and esr. The most common are: fast,
early, late, hard, long, near, high, low. soon, well (better, bat), badly (worse,
worst), and in informal I nglish slow, loud and quick.
Can Ί you drive any faster?	Can you come earlier ?
Talk louder, (informal)
We've all got terrible voices, but I sing worst of all.
Note also the irregular comparatives and superlatives of far (farther .'further,
farthest!furthest. ► 162), much (more, most, ► 166 and ► 167), little (less, least.
► 169-170).
206	using comparatives and superlatives
1	than
After comparatives we use than, not that nr as.
Today's hotter than yesterday. (.NOT .. . h&Uer that... on .. hotter as ...)
2	the difference between comparatives and superlatives
We use a comparative to compare one person, thing, action, event or group with
another person, thing, etc. We use a superlative to compare somebody/
something with the whole group that hc/shc/it belongs to.
grammar · 205 comparative and superlative adverbs
Comparison
Section 17
Compare:
-	Emily’s taller than her three sitters.
Emily’s the tallest of the four girls. («Π ... the taller ...)
Your accent is worse than mine.
Your aceent is the worst in the class, (xor... the worse...)
-	He plays better than everybody else in the team.
He's the best in the team.
3	groups with two members
When a group only has two members, we sometimes use a comparative instead
of a superlative.
I like Lily and Mia, but I think Mia’s the nicer nicest of the two.
I'll give you the bigger biggest steak: I’m not very hungry·.
Some people feel that a superlative is incorrect in this case
4	double comparatives: fatter and fatter; more and more slowly
We can use double comparatives to say that something is changing.
I'm getting fatter and fatter.
We're going more and more slowly, (tor... more slowly and more slowly.)
5	the... the...
We can use comparatives with the... the... to say that things change or vary
together.
Word order (in both clauses):
the · comparative expression · subject - verb
The older I get, the happier I am. (xor Older เ get, more I am happy.)
The more dangerous it is, the more I like it. (not Ihe-more it
μ	I
The more I study, the less I learn.
Noun phrases with more can be used in this structure
rhe more money he makes, the more useless things he buys.
เท longer structures, that is sometimes used before the first verb.
The more information that comes in, lhe more confused the picture is.
A short form of this structure is used เท the expression The more the merrier, and
in sentences ending the better.
‘How do you like your coffeer 'The stronger the better.'
Note that in this structure, the word the is not really the definite article - it was
originally a form of the demonstrative pronoun, meaning 'by that much*. ->
grammar
using comparatives and superlatives
6	than me; than I (am)
เท an Informal style, object pronouns (me. ere) arc used after than. In a more
formal style subject pronouns (/. etc) are used (usually with verbs).
She's older than me. (informal)
She is older than I (am), (formal)
7	the happiest man in the world
After superlatives, we (Io not usually use of with a singular word referring to a
place or group.
I’m the happiest man in the UOrld. (not ... of the world.)
She's the fastest runner เท the class, (not .. . of the class)
But of can be used before plurals, and before lot.
She's the fastest runner of them all He's the best of the lot.
Note also the structure with possessive 'ร.
He thinks he's the world's strongest man.
8	than anybody; the best... ever
Kon affirmative' words like ever, yet and any (► 222) often follow comparatives
and superlativos.
It’s the best book I've ever read. This is my hardest job yet
You're more stubborn than anybody I know.
For lenw» .hr" ๗»». ► 231. For Ihr firutmond/bnl. CIC . pmtM/pM pert«l. ► 56.
207	much older, by far the oldest1 etc
1	much, far, etc with comparatives
We cannot use very with comparatives. Instead, we use. for example, much, far,
very much, a lot (informal), lots (Informal), any and no (► 373), rather, a little,
a bit (informal), and even.
My boyfriend is much far older than me. (not ...«พุ elder than me.)
Russian is much far more difficult than Spanish.
very much nicer	rather more quickly
a bit more sensible (informal) She looks no older than her daughter
a lot happier (informal)	a little less expensive
Is your mother any better' Your cooking is even worse than Harry's
Quite cannot be used with comparatives except in the expression quite better.
meaning 'recovered from an illness' (► 402.1). Any, no, a bit and a lot arc not
normally used to modify comparatives before nouns.
There are much far nicer shops in the town centre.
(am Mil... aM ft·«พ shops. ..)
grammar · 207 much older, by far the oldest.
Comparison
Section 17
2	many more/less/fewer
When more (*166) begins a plural noun phrase, it is modified by many instead
of much. Compare:
much 'far / a lot. etc more money
many /far / a lol, etc more opportunities
Much and many are not used to modify less or fewer, เท plural noun phrases.
far fewer words (muchrnwny fewer words}
3	much, by far, quite, etc with superlative noun phrases
Superlative noun phrases can be modified by much and by far. and by other
adverbs of degree such as quite (meaning absolutely), almost, practically, nearly
and easily. Much and quite are used in this way mostly เท British English'
He’s much the most imaginative of them all. (BrE)
She’s by far the oldest.	Were walking by far the slowest.
He's quite the most stupid man I’ve ever met. (BrE)
I'm nearly the oldest in the company.
This is easily the worst party I've been to this year.
4	very with superlatives
Note the special use of very to emphasise superlatives and first, nett and last.
Kring out your very best wine - Michael's coming to dinner.
You're the very first person I’ve spoken to today.
This is your my Iasi chance.
Fo· modification of toff. ► 610.x
208	comparison: advanced points
1	comparative meaning ‘relatively*, more than average*
Comparatives can suggest ideas like relatively', ‘more than average". Used like
this, comparatives make a less clear and narrow selection than superlatives.
Compare:
There are two classes - one for the cleverer students and one for
the slower learners.
The cleverest students were two girls from York.
Comparatives are often used in advertising to make things sound less definite.
less expensive clothes for the fuller figure (Compare cheap clothes for
fat people.)
2	all/any/none the ♦ comparative
All the ♦ comparative (more common in British English) suggests the idea of
even more .. .*.
I feel all the belter for that swim.
Her accident made it all the more important to get home fast.
Any and none can be used in similar structures.
He didn't seem to be any the worse for his experience.
He explained it all carefully, but I was still none the wiser.
Note that this structure is used mainly to express abstract ideas. We would not
say, for example. Those pills have made him all the slimmer.
เท this structure, the was originally a demonstrative, meaning by that.	-*
grammar» 208 comparison: advanced points
3	three times .. .er, etc
Instead of three'four, etc times as much (► 203.7), we can use three/four, elc
limes « comparative
She can walk three times faster than you.
It was ten times more difficult than I expected.
Note that twice and half are not possible in this structure.
She's twice as lively as her sister, (not .. twtce-iweber ..)
4	words left out after than
Than often replaces a subject or object pronoun or an adverbial expression,
rather like a relative pronoun or adverb (► 256).
She spent more money than was sensible, (not ... than it was sensible.)
There were more people than we had expected, (not ... than "V had
t love you more than she does, (not ... than how much the doe,)
(เท some English dialects, the above sentences would be constructed with
than what.)
5	the youngest person to ...
After a superlative, an infinitive can mean the same as a relative clause.
•She's the youngest person ever to swim the Channel. (ร... the youngest
person who has ever swum ...)
This structure is also common after first, last and next.
Who was the first unman to climb Everest?
The next to speak was Mrs lenshaw.
Note that this structure is only possible in cases where the noun with the
superlative (or first, etc) has a subject relationship with the following verb. เท
Other cases, infinitives cannot be used.
Is this the first lime that you have stayed here? (n๓... the first time for you to
stay here - time is not the subject of slay.)
6	superlatives with or without the
Nouns with superlative adjectives normally have the article the.
Il's the best book I've ever read.
After linking verbs, superlative adjectives also usually have the, though it is
sometimes dropped in an informal style.
I 'm the greatest.	Which of the boys is (the) strongest?
this dictionary is (the) best.
The cannot lie dropped when a superlative is used with a defining expression.
Ibis dictionary is the best I could find, (not This dictionary H best I
«mb! findr)
However, we do not use the with superlatives when we compare the same
person or thing in different situations. Compare:
- Of all my friends, he's (the) nicest, (comparing different people)
lie's nicest when he’s with children.
[not He’s the nicest when ... - we're comparing the same person in
different situations.)
grammar
comparison: advanced points
Comparison
- She works (the) hardest เท the family; her husband doesn't know what
work is. (A woman is being compared with a man the is possible.)
She works hardest when she's doing something for her family.
(not She works the hardest when... - a woman’s work is being compared
in different situations.)
The is sometimes dropped before superlative adverbs in an informal style.
Who can run (the) fastestT
grammar
comparison: advanced points
Section 18 Prepositions
INTRODUCTION
meanings and use
It is difficult to learn to use prepositions correctly in a foreign language. Most
English prepositions have several different functions (for Instance, one well-
known dictionary lists fifteen main uses of al), and these may correspond to
several different prepositions in another language. At the same time, different
prepositions can have very similar uses (in the morning, on Monday morning,
al night). Many nouns, verbs and adjectives are normally followed by particular
prepositions: we say the reason for. depend on. angry with somebody. Often the
correct preposition cannot be guessed, and one has to learn the expression as a
whole. เท some expressions English has no preposition where one may be used
in another language; in other expressions the opposite is true.
word order
เท English, prepositions can come at the ends of clauses in certain structures,
especially เท an informal style. For details, ► 209.
What are you thinking about>	She's not very easy to talk to.
-ing forms
When we use verbs after prepositions, we use ing forms, not infinitives.
For details, ► 104, 211.
She keeps fit by going to the gym.
When to Is a preposition, it is also followed by ing forms. (► 104.2)
I look forward to seeing you soon.
prepositions before conjunctions
Prepositions are sometimes dropped before conjunctions and sometimes not.
For details, ► 210.
I'm not certain (of) u-hat I'm supposed to do.
The question (of) whether they should turn back was never discussed.
prepositions, adverb particles and conjunctions
Words like on, off, up, down can function both as prepositions and as adverb
panicles. For the difference, ► 195. For verbs with prepositions and partides.
► 12-13.
She ran up the stairs, (preposition)
She picked it up. (adverb panicle)
Some prepositions can also function as conjunctions: ► 249 (after), ► 250
(before) and ► 579 (since).
grammar · Section 18 Prepositions
Do you know what's wrong with these, and why?
o You bought it? What money with? ► 209.2
G I admired the patience she spoke with. ► 209.6
G Which period did it happen during? ► 209.6
G For whom is it madam? ► 209.7
G To where sliall I send it? ► 209.7
G In my family, about money was never spoken. ► 209.7
G I knew about that he had problems. ► 210.1
G The judge paid a lot of attention that the child was unhappy. ► 210.3
G He said the parents were responsible for that the child
had run away. ► 210.3
G I'm worried where she is. ► 210.4
G I’m concerned about if you're ill. ► 210.4
G 1 don't like the Idea of to gel married. ► 211
G Try to see it after my point of view. ► 212
G She looks much younger on this picture. ► 212
G I like walking under the rain. ► 2J2
G What time do we arrive to Cardifl? ► 213
G I'm not bad เท tennis. ► 213
G She doesn’t want to depend of her parents. ► 213
G Who's the woman dressed with green? ► 213
G We must discuss about your plans ►214.1
G See you on next Monday. ► 214.2
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
(This Section mostly contains information about the grammar of prepositions.
Problems concerning particular prepositions and preposition contrasts (e g. at,
เท and on. between and among, facing and opposite, above and over) are dealt
with in Section 31. See the Index fortheir entry numbers.)
209	prepositions at the ends
of clauses
210	prepositions before conjunctions
211	-ing forms and infinitives
212	prepositions before particular
words and expressions
213	prepositions after particular
words and expressions
214	expressions without prepositions
grammar. Section 18 Prepositions
209	prepositions at the ends of clauses
1	introduction
A preposition often connects two things: (I) a noun, adjective or verb that comes
before it, and (2) a prepositional object - a noun phrase or pronoun that comes
after the preposition.
This is a present for you. He's looking al her.
I'm really angry with toe. They live in a small village.
เท some structures we may put the prepositional object at or near the beginning
of a clause. เท this case, the preposition does not always go with it - it may stay
together with its' noun, adjective or verb at the end of the clause. This happens
especially in four cases:
ιΐ'/r questions: Who's the present for?
relative structures: lot's the person that I'm angry with.
passives: She likes to be looked at.
infinitive structures: The village is pleasant to live In.
2	wh-questions: What are you looking at?
When a question word is the object of a preposition, the preposition most often
comes at the end of the clause, especially in informal usage.
Hiro's the present for? (For whom is the present? is extremely formal.)
What are you looking at? Who did you go with?
Where did she buy it from? Which /light IS the general travelling on?
What kind of films are you interested in?
This also happens in indirect u h questions, and in other ll/mr clauses.
Tell me what you're worried about What a lol of trouble I'm inf
Some questions consist simply of question word ♦ preposition.
What with? Who for?
However, this structure is unusual when there is a noun with the question word.
With what money? (not What money with?)
3	relative clauses: the house I told you about
When a relative pronoun (► 233) is the object of a preposition, the preposition
also often goes at the end of the clause, especially in informal usage.
Zoe's the person that I’m angry with, (less formal than ... with whom I am
angry.)
This is the house (that) I told you about (Less formal than .. about which I
told you.)
You remember the boy (who) I was going out with?
She's the only woman (who) I've ever really been in love with
That 's what I'm afraid of
Because whom is unusual in an informal style, it is very rare in clauses that end
with prepositions (► 237.3).
grammar · 209 prepositions at the ends of clauses
Prepositions
Section 18
4	passives: She likes to be looked at.
In passive structures (► Section 6), prepositions go with their verbs.
She likes to be looked at.
! don't know where he is - his bed hasn't been slept in.
Kate was operated on last night.
5	infinitive structures: pleasant to live in
Infinitive complements (► 101-102) can have prepositions with them.
The village is pleasant to live in.
She needs other children to play with.
Can you get me a chair to stand on?
I've got lots of music to listen to.
Their house isn't easy to get to.
6	exceptions: During which period. . .?
During and since are not normally put at the ends of clauses.
During which period did it happen? (not Which period did it happen during?)
Since when have you been working for her? (NOT
'	. J	°J	K (NOT vVncn nave you been working
jxJt	J
7	formal structures: With whom . ..?
In a more formal style, a preposition is often put earlier in questions and relative
structures, before the question word or relative pronoun.
With whom did she go?
It was the house about which he had told them.
She was the only person with whom he could discuss his problems.
This can also happen in infinitive complements, in a very formal style. A relative
pronoun is used.
She needs other children with whom to play.
It is a boring place in which to live.
Note that after prepositions which and whom can be used, but not normally who
and that.
Even in a very formal style, prepositions are not often put at the beginning of
questions which have be as the main verb.
Who is it for, madam? (not Per whom is it?}
And the structures where ... to, what. . . like and what.. . for have
a fixed order.
Where shall I send it to? (but not To where shall I send it?)
What does she look like? (but not Like what dees she leek?)
What did you buy that for? (but not Por-udiHfdul you buy that?)
Prepositions cannot be moved away from passive verbs even in a formal style.
In my family, money was never spoken about, (not . .. -ubtrut-HMHey u*tts
For more information about formal and informal language, ►281.
For sentences like It's got a hole in (it); I like cakes with cream on (them), ► 275.13.
grammar · 209 prepositions at the ends of clauses
210	prepositions before conjunctions____________________
Prepositions can be followed by conjunctions in some cases but not in others.
1	indirect speech: prepositions dropped before that
Prepositions are not used directly before the conjunction that. เท indirect
speech, after words that refer to saying, writing, thinking, etc, propositions are
usually dropped before that-clauses. Compare:
-	I knew about his problems
I knew that he had problems, (mji I knew aboHl that he had problems.)
-	She had no idea of my stale of mind.
She had no idea that I was unhappy, (so I She had no idea of that
/ UW5	)
-	I wasn't aware of the time.
I wasn't aware that it was so late. (so, I tertsn'f meoreof dun II tens so late )
2	emotional reactions: prepositions dropped
Prepositions are also dropped before that after many common words that refer
to emotional reactions. Compare:
-	We are sorry about the delay.
We are sorry that the train is late, (sol... sorry about that the train is kite.)
I was surprised at her strength.
I was surprised that she was so strong, (xor ... surprised at that she was . ..)
3	the fact that
เท other cases (not involving indirect speech or words referring to emotional
reactions) prepositions cannot so often be dropped before that-clauses. Instead,
the expression the fact (► 264.3) is generally put between the proposition
and that.
lhe judge paid a lot of attention to the fact that the child was unhappy al
home. (ร''- lhe fudge paid a lot of adertdenflo) that lhe rhdd ..)
He said lhe parents were responsible for the fact that the child had run away.
(xor .. responsible (for) that lhe child had run away.)
4	question words
After some very common words like tell. ask. detrend, sure. idea, look,
prepositions can be dropped before who. which, what, where, whether and other
question words. This Is especially common in indirect questions. Compare:
Tell me about your trip.
Tell me (about) where you went.
I asked her about her religious beliefs.
I asked her whether she believed เท Cod. (More natural than I asked her about
whether she believed in God.)
-	We may be late - it depends on the traffic.
พ,' may he late - it depends (on) how much traffic there is.
-	I'm not sure of his method.
I'm not sure how he does it. (More natural than I'm not sure of how he
does it.)
grammar *210 prepositions before conjunctions
Prepositions
Section 18
-	I've no idea of the owner.
I've no idea (of) who owns ÍI.
-	Look at this.
l ook (at) what I've got.
เท other cases it is unusual or impossible to leave out the preposition.
I'm worried about where she is. (พ: I'm worried where she t*)
The police questioned me about what I'd seen, (not The police questioned me
/ yy	J
There's the question of who's going to pay.
(More natural than ... the question who's going to pay.)
People's chances of getting jobs vary according to whether they live เท the
North or the South, (not . . . according whether ..)
If does not normally follow prepositions; we use whether (► 261) instead.
I'm worried about whether you’re happy, (not I'm worried about if. . .)
M-<. r—l dictionary	p	***
211	-ing forms and infinitives
Prepositions are not normally used before infinitives เท English. After verb
noun/adjective · preposition, we usually use the ing form of a following verb.
He insisted on being paid at once, (not He insisted on to be paid ...)
I don't like the idea of getting married, (sol.., the idea of to get married.)
I'm not very good al cooking, (not .. good al IH cook.)
เท some cases we drop the preposition and use an infinitive. Compare:
lie asked for a loan.
He asked to borrow some money.
She was surprised at his mistake.
She was surprised to see what he had done.
- We're travelling for pleasure
We're travelling to enjoy ourselves.
Sometimes two structures are possible. There may be a difference of meaning
(► 105 for some examples).
I'm interested in learning more about my family.
I was interested Io learn that my grandfather was lewish.
for drtail, nt I hr .nurture that arc ptiwlblc after a pariicular «rrh. noun or adlcrtnr. we a ipxxl dictionary
212	prepositions before particular words
and expressions
Illis is a list of a few expressions which often cause problems. For other
preposition + noun combinations, sec a good dictionary.
at the cinema (BrE); at the theatre; at a party; at university
What's on at the cinema this week?
grammar · 212 prepositions before particular words and expressions
a book (written) by Dickens; a concerto (composed) by Mozart;
a film (directed) by Orson Welles (nor of c* from)
I’ve never read anything by Dickens.
by car/bike'bus train/boat/plane/land/sea/air, on foot (but in the car,
on a bus. etc)
Let's lake our time and go by boat
for ... reason
My sister decided to go to America for several reasons.
from . . point of view (nor according to I* after)
Fry to see kt from my point of view
เท... opinion (not according to on after))
เท my opinion, she should have resigned earlier.
in the end ( - finally, after a long time)
เท the end. I got a visa for Russia.
at the end (- at the point where something stops)
I think the flint's a bit weak at the end.
in pen. pencil, ink, etc
Please fill in the form tn ink.
in picture, photo, etc (sot on)
She looks much younger In this photo
เท the rain, snow, etc
I like walking in the rain
เท a suit, raincoat, shirt, skirt, hat. etc
Who's the man in the funny hat over there?
in a ... voice
Stop talking to me เท that stupid voice.
on page 20, etc (nor «ท/,»)
There's a mistake on page 120
on the radio; on TV; on the phone
Is there anything good on 7V tonight?
Il's Mrs Ellis on the phone: she says it's urgent.
on time (- at the planned lime, neither late nor early)
Daniel wants the meeting to start exactly on time.
in time ( with enough time to spare, before the last moment)
lie would hate died if they hadn't got him to the hospital in time
213	prepositions after particular words
and expressions	_____________
It is not always easy to know which preposition to use after a particular noun,
verb or adjective. Here are some of the most common combinations which
cause difficulty to students of English Alternatives are sometimes possible, and
American and British usage sometimes differ. There is only room for very brief
notes here; for more complete information about usage with a particular word,
consult a good dictionary.
grammar · 213 prepositions after particular words and expressions
Prepositions
Section 18
accuse somebody of something (not for)
She accused ทน.· of poisoning her dog,
afraid of (mot by)
Are you afraid of spiders?
agree with a person, opinion or policy
He left the company because he didn't agree with their sales policy.
I entirely agree with you.
agree about’on a subject of discussion
We agree about/on most things.
agree on a matter for decision
Let's try to agree on a date.
agree to a suggestion or demand
I'll agree to your suggestion if you lower the price.
angry with (sometimes at) a person for doing something
I'm angry with her for lying to me.
angry about (sometimes at) something
พนน are you so angry about?
anxious about (ะ worried about)
I'm getting anxious about money.
anxious for (ะะ eager to have)
We're all anxious for an end to this misunderstanding.
anxious · infinitive (ะะ eager, wanting)
She's anxious to find a better fob.
apologise to somebody for something
I think we should apologise to the Smiths.
I must apologise for disturbing you.
arrive at or in (not le)
What time do we arrive al Cardiff station ?
When did you arrive in England?
ask: ► 383.
bad at (sot เท)
I'm not bad at tennis.
believe เท God, Santa Claus, etc ( believe that ... exists; trust)
I half believe in life after death.
If you believe in me. I can do anything.
BUT believe a person or something that is said (- accept as truthful/true
no preposition)
Don't believe her.
I don't believe a word she says.
belong in/on, etc l- go, fit, have its place in/on, etc)
Those glasses belong on the top shelf.
belong to i- be a member of)
I belong to a local athletics club.
blue with cold, red with anger, etc
My hands were blue with cold when I got home
borrow ► -108.
clever at (not เท)
I'm not very clever at cooking.
grammar · 213 prepositions after particular words and expressions
congratulate congratulations on something
I must congratulate you on your exam resultร.
Congratulations on your new job.'
congraiulate/congratulations on/for doing something
He congratulated the team on for having won all their gomes.
crash into (not IBUAUY against)
I wasn't concentrating, and I crashed into the car in front.
depend dependent on (not from OR of)
We may play football - it depends on the weather.
He doesn't want to be dependent on his parents.
BIT independent ol
details of
Write now for details of our special offer.
die of from
Mon' people died of flu in 1919 than were killed in the hirst World War.
A week after the accident he died from his injuries.
different: ► 433.
difficult)' with something, (in) doing something (xoi difficulties..)
I'm having difficulty with my travel arrangements.
You won't have much difficulty (in) getting to know people in Italy.
disappointed with/in somebody
My father never showed Iif he was disappointed with/in me.
disappointed with'al/about something
You must be pretty disappointed with al about your exam results.
|a| discussion about something
We had น long discussion about politics.
MH |to| discuss something (no preposition)
We'd better discuss your travel plans.
divide into (m>i เท)
Hie book is divided into three parts.
drcam of ( think of. imagine)
I often dreamed of being famous when I was younger,
dream about of (while asleep)
What does it mean if you dream about'of mountains?
dress(ed) เท (not with)
Who's the woman dressed in green?
drive Into (not against)
lhat idiot Kim drove into a tree again yesterday.
enter into an agreement, a discussion, etc
We've just entered into an agreement with Carsons Ltd,
enter a place (no preposition)
When I entered the room everybody Slopped talking
example of (xor for)
Sherry Is an example of a fortified wine.
explain something to somebody (noi explain somebody something)
Could you explain this rule to me?
fight, struggle, etc with somebody
I've spent the last two weeks fighting with the tax office.
grammar · 213 prepositions after particular words and expressions
Prepositions
Section 18
fight, struggle, etc against something
As Schiller said, against stupidity even the gods fight in vain.
frightened of or by: - 96.9.
get in(to) and out of a car, taxi or small boat
When I got Into my car, I found the radio had been stolen.
get on(to) and off a train, plane, bus, ship, (motor)bike or horse
We ll be getting off the train in ten minutes.
good al (xor เท)
Are you any good at tennis?
|the| idea of.. .ing (not the idea to ...)
I don't like the idea of getting married yet.
Ill	with
The bass has been ill with bronchitis this week.
impressed with/by
I'm very impressed with, by your work.
increase เท activity, output, etc (noi of)
I'd like to see a big increase เท productivity.
independent, independence of or from
She got a job so that she could be independent of her parents.
When did India gel its independence from Hritain?
insist on (not to)
George's father insisted on paying.
interest/intcrestcd in (not for)
When did your interest in social work begin?
Not many people are interested in grammar.
interested to do /in doing something: ► 105.16
kind to (not with)
People have always been wry kind to me.
lack of
Lack of time prevented me from writing.
|to| be lacking in
She is lacking in tact.
Bin (to) lack (no preposition)
Your mother lacks tact.
laugh at
I hate being laughed at.
laugh about
We'll laugh about this one day.
leave from somewhere (talking about the place)
Does the plane leave from Liverpool or Manchester?
leave somewhere (talking about the action of leaving)
I left London early, before the traffic got too heavy.
listen to
If you don't listen to people, they won't listen to you.
look at l- point one's eyes at)
Stop looking al me like that.
look after (- take care of)
Thanks for looking after me when I was HI.
grammar «213 prepositions after particular words and expressions
look ior (t try to find)
Can you help me look for my keys?
make, made of/from: ► 522.
marriage lo; get, be married Io (not with)
Her marriage co Philip didn't last very long.
How long have you been married to Hannah?
mrr marry somebody (no preposition)
She married her childhood sweetheart.
near (to): ► 531.
nice to (xoI with)
You weren't very nice to me last night.
operate on a patient
They operated on her yesterday evening.
pay for something that is bought (not pay something)
Excuse me, sir. You haven't paid for your drink.
pleased with somebody
The boss is very pleased with you.
pleased with about at something
I wasn’t very pleased with.about al my exam results.
polite to (not with)
Try to be polite to Uncle Richard for once.
prevent... from .. .ing (noi to)
The noise from downstairs prevented me from sleeping.
proof of (not (or)
I want proof of your love. Lend me some money.
reason for (not of)
Nobody knows the reason for the accident.
remind of (and ► 568)
She reminds me of a girl I was at school with.
responsible responsibility for (not OÍ)
Who’s responsible for the shopping this week?
rude to (not with)
Peggy was pretty rude to my family last weekend.
run into (- meet)
I ran into Philip al Victoria Station this morning
search for (- look for)
The customs were searching for drugs at the airport.
search (without proposition) (ะ look through; look everywhere in/on)
They searched everybody ’s luggage.
They searched the man in front of me from head to foot.
shocked at/by
I was terribly shocked at/by the news of Daniel's accident.
shout at (aggressive)
If you don Ί slop shouting at me. I'll come and hit you.
shout to (= call to)
Emily shouted to แร to come in and swim.
grammar · 213 prepositions after particular words and expressions
Prepositions
Section 18
smile al
If you smile al me like that. I’ll Rive you anything you leant.
sorry about something that has happened (not the speaker’s fault)
I'm sorry about your exam results.
sorry for/about something that one has done (apologising)
I'm sorry for. about breaking your window.
sorry for a person (sympathy)
เ feel really sorry for her children.
speak to; speak with (especially AmE)
Could I speak to/with your father for a moment?
suffer from
My wife is suffering from hepatitis.
surprised at/by
Everybody was surprised at by the weather
take part in (not el OR of)
I don't want to take part in any more conferences.
think of about (not think to)
I 'm thinking of studying medicine.
I've also thought about studying dentistry.
the thought of (nut the thought to)
I hate the thought of going back to work.
throw... at (aggressive)
Stop throwing stones at the cars.
throw... to (in a game, etc)
If you gel the ball, throw it to me.
translate into (NOT เท)
Could you translate this into Creek for me?
trip over
He tripped over the cat and fell downstairs.
typical III (not for)
The wine's typical of the region.
write: ► «.
wrong with
What's wrong with Rachel today?
For of nflrr drtrrmiiwn “เ» loar, ’noil. » section 11
214	expressions without prepositions
This is a list of some common expressions in which we do not use prepositions,
or can leave them out.
1 discuss, emphasise, enter, marry, lack, resemble and approach
These verbs are normally followed by direct objects without prepositions.
We must discuss your plans, (not .. .discuss about your plans.)
The Minister emphasised the need for secrecy, (not . > . emphasised on
ไ —
mv	· · · f
grammar · 214 expressions without prepositions
Conversation stopped as UM· entered the church (not .. entered inf Io)
//ft* t hit ft A I
She married a friend of her sister's, (not ... married with . ..)
He's clever, hut he lacks experience, (not .. .lacksof...)
The child docs not resemble either of แร parents, (wt ... resemble Io...)
The train is now approaching Paddington, (not ... approaching to. ..)
Note that the related nouns must have prepositions before complements:
discussion of emphasis on entry into experience of
resemblance to approach to marriage to
2	next, last, etc
Prepositions are not used before a number of common expressions of time
beginning next, last, this, that (sometimes), one. every, each, some, any (เท an
informal style), all.
See you next Monday (not ... oh next Monday.)
The meeting's this Ihursday. We met one Tuesday in August.
I'll never forget meeting you that afternoon.
(ome any day you like. The party lasted all night.
Note also tomorrow morning, yesterday afternoon, etc.
3	days of the week
เท an informal style, we sometimes leave out on before the names of the days of
the week.
Why don’t you come for a drink (on) Monday evening?
4	a meaning each'
No preposition is used in expressions like three times a day. sixty miles an hour,
eighty pence a kilo.
Private lessons cost £20 an hour.
to* per in rvruiom like thrw. . 332.2.
5	What time etc
We usually leave out at before what time.
What time does Granny's train arrive? (More natural than At what time...?)
เท an informal style, we can also leave out on before what/which day(s).
What day is your hair appointment?
Which day do you have your music lesson?
6	about
เท an Informal style, at is often dropped before about t time expression.
I'll see you (al) about three o'clock.
7	'how long'
เท an informal style, for is often left out in expressions that say how long
something lasts.
I've been here (for) three weeks now.
How long are you staying (for)?
grammar · 214 expressions without prepositions
Prepositions
Section 18
8	measurement expressions, etc after be
Expressions containing words like height, weight, length, size, shape, age. colour
are usually connected to the subject of I lie clause by the verb be, without a
preposition.
He is just the right height to be a police officer.
She’s the same age as me. His head's a funny shape.
I'm the same weight as / was twenty years ago.
What shoe size are you?
What colour are her eyes? (not of what colour . ..?)
9	(in) this way, etc
We often leave out in (especially เท informal speech) เท expressions like (in) this
way, (เท) the same way, (in) another way, etc.
They plant corn (in) the same way their ancestors used to 500 years ago.
10 home
We do not use to before home (► 489).
เท informal English (especially American), ar can be left out before home.
Is anybody home?
11	place
เท an informal style, to can be dropped เท some expressions with the word place.
This is normal in American English.
let"ร go (to) some place where it's quiet.
I always said you'd go places. (- become successful)
12	infinitive structures
Prepositions can sometimes be dropped เท the structure noun ♦ infinitive ·
preposition (► 102.5).
She has no money to buy food (with).
We hate an hour to do It (in).
This is particularly common with the noun place.
We need a place to Hue (in). She had no place to go (to).
grammar · 214 expressions without prepositions
Section 19 Basic Clause Types
INTRODUCTION
Simple (one-dause) sentences come in four main types from (he point oi view
of structure:
•	declarative clauses: typically used for making statements (positive or
negative)
Your hair looks nice. The government haven Ί done it.
•	interrogative clauses: typically used for asking questions
Does my hair look OK?	What haivn Ί they done this time?
•	imperative clauses: typically used for giving instructions, making
suggestions, etc
Try cutting it a hit shorter. Write to your MP about it.
•	exclamatory- clauses: typically used (naturally) for exclaiming
What a good idea! How optimistic you are!
Structure and meaning don't always go together.
Your coat’s on the floor. (■ ‘Pick up your coat.' - declarative for instruction)
What do you take me for? (- I'm not stupid.' interrogative for statement)
English has fairly fixed word order, especially in formal writing and speech,
lire main points are summarised in 215. Other entries in this Section deal
separately with the structures used in questions, negatives, imperatives and
exclamations. Ihe grammar of more complex clauses and sentences is covered
เท Sections 20-24. Some Structures typical of very formal usage (e g. academic
writing) are illustrated in 208; some structures mainly found in informal speech
are discussed in 299.
English word order can cause problems for learners whose languages move
grammatical elements around more freely. เท many languages, sentences
frequently start with the topic - what is being talked alwut - whether or not this
is the grammatical subject. English, especially formal English, prefers to combine
topic and grammatical subject in the same noun phrase, and to put this first in
a declarative clause. Informal speech can separate topic and subject
more easily. ► 299.
grammar - Section 19 Basic clause Types
Do you know what's wrong with these, and why?
o The train stopped not. >215.5
A 1'.!!'“· much mushrooms. > 215.6
Q When you are leaving? ► 216.1
2	1'??'·" Tean' 'periphrastic'? · 216.2
Q What does the boss wants? > 216.4
2	ร!- wcnl ehmbing last weekend? ► 216.1
Q Mien was made your reservation? » 216 5
2	ร-ใ.,!.^.,*° ^oriels. Which does cost more? > 216.6
fj I like not this soup. >217.1
® I didn't thought it mattered· >217.1
Q Expect not quick results. >217.2
o It’s important to don't worry. > 217.3
2	.น01 Geo'RC came< hut his brother. >217.4
2	■1'?ฯ"? y "n"cn 1๐ Emily? ‘Yes, I haven’t/ > 218.4
Ο I don’t hope it rains tomorrow. > 2192
Q I opened the door, but I couldn't see nobody. > 220 I
g How it is cold! > 223.1
g What nice dress! > 2232
G What a beautiful weather· > 223.2
2 ?'haI.a beautiful smile has your sister! > 223.2
g They’re so kind people! > 223 3
g Anybody don’t say a word, OK? > 224.5
G Remember always what I told you. > 224.7
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
215	sentence structure: basic
word order
216	questions: basic rules
217	negative structures: basic rules
218	negative questions
219	negative structures with think,
hope. รพ·ห. etc
220	multiple negatives: I couldn't
221	ambiguous negatives
222	non affirmative words: anybody,
223	exclamations
224	imperatives
225	let introducing imperatives
grammar . Section 19
Clause Types
215	sentence structure: basic word order
1	subject - verb - object/complement
The basic word order of English clauses in positive statements is
Subject - Verb - (Complement Object),
Anna smiled. Sam is a doctor. .พุ»1 parents live in North Wales.
lite boss has bought another neu· car.
เท a few affirmative structures the verb can come before the subject
(e g. So can I. เท came Mrs Parker, ► 270-271).
For sentences that begin with the object (e g. Those people I can't stand), ► 272.
เท informal language, especially· speech, word order often departs from the basic
pattern. ► 299.
2	preparatory it and there
When the subject or object is an infinitive phrase or clause, we often put it at the
end of a sentence, and use ir as a preparatory subject or object (► 260-269).
It's difficult to understand what he wants.
She made it clear that she disagreed.
There can be a preparatory subject for an indefinite expression (► 20).
There is a big spider in the bath.
3	direct and indirect objects
Indirect objects can come before direct objects (without a preposition) or after
direct objects (with a preposition).
She sent the nurse some flowers. She sent some flowers to the nurse.
Sol dcialH. » ร.
4	questions: auxiliary before subject
Most written questions, and many spoken questions, have the order auxiliary
verb - subject - main verb.
Have you seen Andrew? Where was she going? Did Emily phone?
Indirect questions (► 260) has* the subject before the verb.
Do you know where she was going ?
5	negatives: auxiliary + not
Negative structures have not after an auxiliary verb.
The train did not stop, (not The train Slopped not.)
For word order in negative questions (e g. Why didn’t she come? / Why did she
not come?), » 218.
6	adverbiais: possible positions
Different adverbiais can go in different places in a sentence: at the beginning,
with the verb, or at the end. For details, ► 196-202.
Suddenly I had a terrible thought.
I he children hail probably gone home.
I was Iflaying badly.	i'll see you al the club on Tuesday.
An adverbial cannot normally come between a verb and its object.
I like mushrooms very much, (mji ' Me eery math mushroom» )
grammar . 215 sentence structure: basic word order
Basic Clause Types
Section 19
7	subordinate clauses (who ..after..., if.... because ..
that.... etc)
Relative clauses usually follow the nouns that they modify (► 233).
The woman who phoned wanted to speak to the manager.
Other kinds of clause have various positions, depending on their function and
the overall sentence structure.
How you do it is your business.
Everybody agreed that they were wasting their time.
More than one position is often possible.
If you need help, call me. Call me if you need help.
For details, » Sections 20-24.
8	prepositions: in what. . . / what. . . in
In an informal style, a preposition can be separated from its object in certain
structures. For details, » 209. Compare:
In what hotel did the President stay? (formal)
What hotel did the President stay in? (informal)
For ways of arranging the information in a sentence, ► 267.
For word order in exclamations (e.g. How kind you are!), ► 223.
For word order with phrasal verbs (e.g. She put out the cat / She put the cal out), ► 12.4.
For structures like the older 1 get. . .1 ► 206.5. For structures like cold as/though she was, ► 255.
For structures like sol how strange an experience, ► 137. For the position and order of adjectives, ► 184.
For the position and order of determiners, ► Sections 12-13. For quite a ... and rather a . . ► 564-565.
For word order with enough, ► 450.
216 questions: basic rules
These rules apply to most ordinary spoken and written questions. For
declarative questions (e.g. This is your car?), ► 302. For rhetorical questions
(e.g. What’s the use of asking her?), ► 303. For echo questions (e.g. She’s invited
how many?), ► 304. For reply questions (e.g. Did you, dear?), ► 307 For question
tags, ► 305-306.
1	auxiliary verb before subject: Have you . . .?
In a question, an auxiliary verb normally comes before the subject.
When is Oliver leaving? (.MH When Ohverisleaemg?)
Have you received my email of June 17? (nu I You have received ■?)
Why are you laughing? (not Why you are laughing?)
What are all those people looking at? (not WhttTaUihosepeople are
looking at?)
How much does the room cost? (not How much the room <¥๙’๙)
How much the room costs?)
2	do: Do you like . . .?
If there is no other auxiliary verb, we use do, does or did to form a question.
Do you like Mozart? (.MH Eike you MozarI?)
What does ‘periphrastic’ mean? (not What means 'periphrastic'?)
Did you wash the car today?	-»
grammar - 216 questions: basic rules
3	do not used with other auxiliaries
Do is noi used together with other auxiliary verbs or with be.
Can you tell me the time? (not Do you can Ml me the lime?)
Have you teen lack? (not Do you have seen lack?)
Are you ready?
4	infinitive after do: What does he want?
After do, we use the infinitive (without to).
What does the boss want? (not What sloes ihMtoss wants?)
Did you go climbing last weekend? (not ‘Myouwem.. .ton IM you
5	only auxiliary verb before subject
Only the auxiliary verb goes before the subject, not the whole of the verb phrase.
It your mother coming tomorrow? (not is-emnmgymw-mmhcr tomorrow?)
เร your daughter having a lesson today? (not h having your daughter ..?)
When was your reservation made? (not When WHS made your reservation?)
This happens even if the subject is very long.
Where are the President and his family staying? (not Where are staying the
President...?)
6	Who phoned? / Who did you phone?
When who. which, what or whose is the subject (or pan of the subject), do is not
normally used. Compare:
- Who phoned? (Who is the subject.)
Who did you phone? l Who is the object.)
What happened? (What is the subject.)
What did she say? (what is the object.)
More examples:
Which costs more - the blue one or the grey one? (.NOT Whkh does eml
Which type of battery lasts longest? (sot Mdch type of battery does last
How many people work in y<our office? (not How many people do work ...?)
Hut do can be used after a subject question word for emphasis, to insist on an
answer.
Well, tell us - what did happen when your father found you?
So who did marry the Princess in the end?
Fur qMCMKim 14c Mo dท you Ulf* à youd matrifdT, ► 2M.
า indirect questions: Tell me when you are leaving.
เท an indirect question, we do not put an auxiliary before the subject, and we do
not use a question mark. For details, ► 260.
Tell me what you want. (Mir led me what do you น·,เท!?)
grammar *216 questions: basic rules
Basic Clause Types
Section 19
8 prepositions: What are you talking about?
Prepositions often come at the end of questions, separated from their
objects. (For details, ► 209.)
What arc you talking about? (nor About what are you talking')
Who did you buy the ticket from f What dill you clean the floor with'
lo< negative «เท»ท! ► 2IH l or eHlp«i> เท qoeMKin» (eg .Seen hut' Coming	» 777.
217	negative structures: basic rules
1	negative verb forms: auxiliary + not
We make negative verb forms by putting not after an auxiliary verb.
We have not forgotten you. Il was not raining She can't swim
Do is normally used if there is no other auxiliary verb.
I like the salad, hut I don’t like the soup, (not I like not the soup.)
Do is followed by the infinitive without to.
I didn't think, (not tdfdn'ito4hink. OR I didn’t thinking. M I dfdH t thought.)
Do is not used with another auxiliary verb.
You mustn’t worry, (not You don't must worry.)
Do is not normally used with be (even when be is not auxiliary).
The supper isn't ready, (noI The supper doesn't be ready,)
lor die dulc<t form ain't, » M7.4.
lor nr®ruvr% «about do เท older I ngjuh (eg. I life *ห net). » JIB. 10
lor nrgarlve uibfunrdm (eg If I UnpanMl à Λ>· nor be atturbnfí. » 70.2.
2	imperatives: Don't worry.
Negative imperatives are made with do not / don’t · infinitive (► 224).
Ito not expect quick results, (not Expect "ธ· .,.)
Don't worry - I'll look after you. (not Worry not...)
Do not. don't is also used to make the negative imperative of be.
3	infinitives and -ing forms: It's important not to worry.
We put not before infinitives and ing forms. Do is not used.
It’s important not to worry, (not ... Hr don't worry.)
The best thing about the weekend is not working
4	Other parts of a clause: not his wife, not before six
We can put not with other parts of a clause, not only a verb.
Ask lake, not his wife. Come early, but not before six.
H's working but not well.
We do not usually begin a sentence with not · subject. Instead, we use a
structure with it ('cleft sentence’. ► 273).
It was not George that came, but his brother, (not Not George came·...)
For the dlBererxe between nor and no with noum » SM.
grammar . 217 negative structures: basic rules
5	other negative words: never, seldom, etc
Other words besides not can make a clause negative. Compare:
He's not at home.	He‘ร never at home.
He's seldom rarely hardly ever at home.
We do not normally use the auxiliary do with these other words Compare:
He doesn't work.
He never works, (not He does never work.)
He seldom rarely hardly ever works. They refuse to listen to reason.
The soup lacks salt.	We re unhappy about your decision.
However, do can be used for emphasis or contrast.
I never did like her.
6	question tags: You don't ...1 do you?
After negative clauses, question tags (► 305-306) are not negative.
You don't work on Sundays, do you?
You seldom work on Saturdays, do you? (not Youseldom work ON .Saturdays.
don t you?}
She never smiled, did she?
rhe same thing happens after clauses with little and few (► 168).
I here's little point in doing anything about it. is there? (wit.. . isn't there?)
He has few reasons for Slaying, has he?
7	'non-affirmative' words: any, etc
We do not usually use some, somebody, etc in negative clauses. Instead, we use
the 'non affirmative' words any, anybody, etc (► 222). Compare:
Tve found some mushrooms.	I haven't found any mushrooms.
218	negative questions __________________________________
1 structure: Doesn't she understand? / Does she not understand?
Contracted and uncontracted negative questions have different word order.
[Uncontracted negative questions arc usually formal.)
auxiliary verb · n't · subject...
Doesn Ί she understand? Why haven Ί you reserved your flight yet?
auxiliary verb · subject « not..,
Does she not understand? Why have you not reserved the flight yet?
Non-auxiliary have (in British English) and be go in the same position as
auxiliary verbs.
Hasn Ί she any friends to help her?	Aren Ί you ready?
Have they not al least a room to Slay in? Is Mrs Allen not at home?
grammar - 218 negative questions
Basic Clause Types
■ction 19
2	two meanings
Negative questions can have two different kinds of meaning. It is usually clear
from the situation and context which kind of question is being asked.
a 'It's true that.... isn't it?'
A negative question can ask for confirmation of a positive belief. เท this case the
question expects the answer Yes, and means It's true that..isn't it?’
Didn't you go and see Ella yesterday? How is she? (ะ I believe you went and
saw Ella yesterday ...)
Expressions of opinion and suggestions can be made less definite by expressing
them as negative questions (so that they ask for agreement).
Wouldn't it be belter to switch the lights on?
Negative questions of this kind are common in exclamations (► 223) and
rhetorical questions (► 303).
Isn't It a lovely day.'
'She's growing up to be น lovely person.'' Yes. isn't she?
Isn’t the answer obvious? (= of course the answer is obvious.)
b Is it true that... not ...?'
A negative question can also ask for confirmation of a negative belief. เท this
case the question expects the answer No. and means ‘Is it true that... not.. X
Don't you feel well? l Am I right in thinking you don't fee! well?)
Oh, dear. Can't they come this evening?
This kind of negative question can show that the speaker is surprised that
something has not happened or is not happening.
Hasn’t the mail come yet?
Didn't the alarm go off? I wonder what's wrong with it.
3	polite requests, invitations, offers, complaints and criticisms
Pressing invitations and offers often begin Won't you ...?. Wouldn't you .. .f or
Why don't )<ou ...?
Won't you come in for น few minutes?
Wouldn't you like something to drink?
Why don’t you come and spend the weekend with US?
Why don't you .. .?can also introduce aggressive suggestions.
Why don't you shut up?
But in other cases we do not usually use negative questions to ask people to do
things. This is done with ordinary questions, or with negative statement «
question tag (especially British English).
l-tcuse me, can you help me for a moment? (ordinary question, used as a
request)
You can’t help me for a moment, can you? (negative statement - question tag,
common in informal requests)
BUT NO I Can't you help me for a moment?
Negative questions may be understood as complaints or criticisms.
Can't you lend me your pen for a minute? (- something like ‘Are you too
selfish to lend me ...?’)
Don't you ever listen to what I say?	-»
grammar · 218 negative questions
4	yes and no
เท a reply to a negative question, Zes suggests an affirmative verb, and No
suggests a negative verb. Compare:
-	'Haven't you written to Emily?' 'Yes.' (ะ 1 have Mitten to her.)
'Haven't you told her about US?' 'No.' l- I haven’t told her about US.)
-	'Didn't Dan call this morning?’ 'Yes, he did.'
'Didn't he give you a message for me?" 'No, he didn't.'
219	negative structures with think, hope,
seem, etc
1	I don't think ...
When we introduce negative ideas with think, believe, suppose, imagine and
words with similar meanings, we usually make the first verb (think, etc)
negative, not the second.
I don't think you've met my wife. (More natural than I think you haven’t met
my wife.)
I don't believe she's at home. (More natural than I believe she isn't at home.)
However, surprise is often expressed with I thought * negative.
'Would you like a drinkτ Ί thought you'd never ask.'
Hello? I thought you weren't coming
2	I hope that... not...
This does not happen with hope.
I hope it doesn 't rain, (not I don't hope it rains.)
3	short answers: / suppose not.
เท short answers, most of these verbs can be followed by not (► 585).
‘Are we going to see Luke again?’ 7 believe/suppose/hope not.'
Another possible short answer construction is I don't... so (► 585).
‘Do you think it'll snow?' Ί don’t believe/suppose think so.‘
Hope is not used in this structure.
I hope not. (not I don't hope so.)
I don't think so is more common than I think not, which is rather formal.
4	verbs followed by infinitives
Many verbs can he followed by infinitives (► 97). เท an informal style we often
prefer to make the first verb negative rather than the infinitive, although this
may not change the meaning at all. This happens, for example, with appear,
seem, expect, happen, intend Λ nd want.
Sibyl doesn’t seem to like you. (less formal than Sibyl seems not to like you.)
I don't expect to see you before Monday. (More natural than I expect not to
Angela and I were at the same university, but we never happened to meet.
(Less formal than ...we happened never to meet.)
I don't want to fail this exam, (not I want HOI to fad...)
I never want to see you again. (More natural than / want never to see
you again.)
grammar · 219 negative structures with think.
. seem, etc
Basic Clause Types
Section 19
220	multiple negatives: / couldn't see nobody.
1	English and other languages
เท some languages, a negative idea is expressed both by the verb and by
accompanying pronouns or adverbs. เท standard English, one negative word is
normally enough.
I opened the doo’, bill I couldn't see anybody ' I could see nobody
(not .. bitt I íOü/f/ft 7 MV ftòbôffyi)
Tell them nothing. I SO' Don i tell fkerH-mnMng.)
Your suggestion will help neither of us. (not . . . won 't help nether . ..)
Nothing matters now - everything's finished, (noi Nothing doesn't matter...)
I've never understood what she wants, (not I haven't never understood...)
2	nobody and not anybody, etc
Nobody, nothing; never, etc are rather emphatic. We often prefer to use not
anybody, not anything, not ever, etc. Note that anybody, anything, ever, etc are
not themselves negative words (► 222) - they have to be used with not to give a
negative meaning.
I opened the door, but I couldn't see anybody, (not ...but! could
Don Ί tell them anything.	Your suggestion won't help either of US.
At the beginning of a clause, only nobody, nothing, etc are used.
Nothing matters. (Nor Not anything matters.) Nowhere is safe.
3	double and multiple negatives and their meaning
Two or more negative words can be used เท one clause, but then both words
normally have their full meaning. Compare:
Say nothing. (= Be silent.)
Don’t just say nothing. I'ell US what the problem is. (= Don't be silent...)
Multiple negatives are sometimes used instead of simple positive structures for
special stylistic effects. This is rather literary; เท spoken English it can seem
unnatural or old-fashioned.
Not a day passes when I don't regret not having studied music in my youth.
(More natural: Every day I regret not having studied music when I was
younger. OR I wish I had studied music when I was younger.)	-Í
grammar · 220 multiple negatives: I couldn't see nobody
4	dialects
เห many British. American and other dialects, two or more negatives can be used
with a single negative meaning.
/ ain't seen nobody. (Standard English: I haven't seen anybody.)
I ain't never done nothing to nobody, and I ain't never got nothing from
nobody no time. (American song by Bert Williams)
lor inoac เท*>1m.tlon tboui aint » JJ7.4.
5	... I don't think, etc
เท informal speech, expressions like / don't think or I don't suppose are often
added after negative statements. เท this case, the extra negative makes no
difference to the meaning of the statement.
She hasn't got much chance of passing the exam, I don't think.
IVe won’t be back before midnight, I don't suppose.
6	extra negative in expressions of doubt
เท informal speech, a negative verb (without a negative meaning) is sometimes
used after expressions of doubt or uncertainty.
I shouldn't he surprised if they didn't get married soon. (· ... if the) got
married soon.)
I wonder whether I oughtn't to go and see a doctor - I'm feeling a bit funny.
(ร.,. whether I ought to ...)
221	ambiguous negatives
เท a negative structure, not can refer to different parts of a sentence. Compare:
Adam didn't write to Emma yesterday - he phoned her.
Adam didn't write to Emma yesterday - he wrote to Anna.
Adam didn't write to Emma yesterday - he wrote this morning.
The exact meaning is shown เท speech by stress and intonation, and even in
writing it is usually clear from the context and situation. However, confusions
sometimes arise. They can usually be avoided by reorganising the sentence.
Compare:
The car crash didn't kill him. (Did he live, or did something else kill him?)
It wasn’t the car crash that killed him. (Only one possible meaning.)
Negative sentences with decouse clauses are often ambiguous.
I didn't sing because Amy was there.
This sentence could mean 'My reason for not singing was that Amy was there' or
■My reason for singing was not that Amy was there’. The first meaning could be
shown clearly by putting the because clause at the beginning.
because Amy was there, I didn't sing.
grammar · 221 ambiguous negatives
Basic Clause Types
Seclion 19
222	non-affirmative words: anybody, ever,
yet, etc
1!ฯ*,,1“ไLTZÍ .".l?,cn?.'-o"cn	๒ affirmative sentences - for
*“■ \yhen ** ·«™ or assert (that is, when we say
W n“"nal’y Other Xds - for exampie IX.
somebody, once, sometimes, already Compare:
Somebody telephoned.
Did anybody telephone?
-	I've bought you something
I haven’t bought you anything.
-	She's already here.
Is she here yet ?
-	I sometimes go to the theatre.
y°'· «■พ· go to the theatre?
-	' "ft the Prime Minister once.
Have you ever met the Prime Minister?
^°?'âarc inmmon OOI only เท questions and negative
for"eiX'lP ๓	afflrmatíve staíements -
^J^?LJ-Í-Íuses· comparisons, and together with advertis, verbi
p	and àrrnfoers that have a negative Wnd of meaning.
I.ei me Know if you hair any trouble.
luonder if she found anything
She writes better than anybody I know.
He seldom says anything
I've hardly been anywhere since Christmas.
He denied that he had ever seen her.
Please forget that I ever told you anything about it.
I d rather do it without anybody's help.
It s digitult to understand anything he says.
Few people have ever seen her laugh.
^*™'*°" à" '-"-à	«á fh«4 „ lhe เท^ find .he entHe. ,« .he «0,d.
grammar - 222 non affirmative words: anybody, ever, yet. etc
223	exclamations
faclamations are often constructed with how and what or with so and such;
negative question forms are also common.
1	exclamations with how
These are often felt to he a little formal or old fashioned.
how · adjective
Strawberries! How nice!
how * adjective,’ adverb · subject - verb
How cold it is! (พ Wow· it i, «oMO
How beautifully you sing! (sot How you sing beautifully!)
how · subject * Serb
How you've grown!
2	exclamations with what
what atari (. adjective) · singular countable noun
ll'li/vf it tt lilti· nutnUvm
What a nice dnss! (not M,at owe dress!)
What a surprise!
what(· adjective) * uncountable/plural noun
What beautiful weather! (noi Mud a beautiful weather!)
What loveiyflowers! What fools!
what · object * subject « verb (note word order)
What a beautiful smile your sister has! (noi .. . bat your sister!)
3	exclamations with so and such
so · adjective
You're so kind!
such a!an (· adjective) · singular countable noun
He's such a nice boy! (not .. - H-suih nice boy!)
grammar » 223 exclamations
Basic Clause Types
Section 19
such (· adjective) * uncountable/plural noun
They talk such cubbish! (not .. such ct-tubbtsh!)
They're such kind people' (not ... so kind people·")
4	negative question forms
Isn Ί the weather nice!	Hasn t she grown!
Americans and some British speakers may use ordinary (non-negative) question
forms เท exclamations.
Boy. am I hungry' Wow. did she make a mistake!	Was I furious!
224	imperatives
1	forms and use
เท sentences like Come here. Be quiet. Have a drink or Don't worry about it. the
verb forms come, be, have and don't worry arc called ‘imperatives’. Affirmative
imperatives have the same form as the infinitive without to; negative imperatives
arc constructed with do not (don't).
Imperatives are used, for example, to tell or ask people to do things, to make
suggestions, to give advice or instructions, to encourage and offenand to
express wishes for people's welfare.
Look in the mirror before you drive off.
Please do not lean out of the window.
Tell him you're not free this evening.
Try again you nearly did it. Have some more tea.	Enjoy your break.
An imperative followed by and or or can mean the same as an -/ clause.
Walk down our street any day and you'll see kids playing. (= If you walk ..,)
Shut up or I'll lose my temper. (■ If you don't shut up ...)
Don’t do that again or you'll he in trouble.
2	emphatic imperative: Do sit down.
We can make an emphatic imperative with do (mainly BrE).
Do sit down. Do be more careful. Do forgive me.
3	passive imperative: Get vaccinated.
To tell people to arrange for things to he done to them, we often use
get · past participle.
Gel vaccinated as soon as you can.
4	do(n't)be
Although do is not normally used as an auxiliary with be (► 19), this happens in
negative imperatives.
Don't be silly!
Do he can begin emphatic imperatives.
Do be quiet!
grammar . 224 imperatives
5	subject with imperative: Somebody answer the phone.
The imperative does not usually have a subject, but we can use a noun or
pronoun <0 make it clear who we are speaking to.
Emily come here - everybody elie slay where you are.
Somebody answer the phone. Relax. everybody.
You before an imperative can suggest emphatic persuasion or anger.
You just sit down and relax for a bit.
You take your hands off me!
Note the word order เท negative Imperatives with pronoun subjects.
Don't you believe it. (not »... don't believe it)
Don't anybody say a word, (sot Anybody don't say. ..)
6	question tags
After imperatives, common question tags (► 305-306) are will you?, would you?,
can you? and could you?
Give me a hand, will you? Wait here for a minute, would you?
Gel me something to drink, can you?
Can't you and won’t you are more emphatic.
Be quiet, can’t you? Sit down, won't you?
After negative imperatives, will )<ou? is used.
Don't tell anybody, will you?
า word order with always and never
Always and never come before imperatives.
Always remember what I told you. (sot Remember always...)
A'ever speak to me like that again.
225	let introducing imperatives
English verbs do not have a first person imperative (used to suggest that I or น»·
should do something), or a third-person imperative (for other people besides
the hearer). However, let can be used to construct a type of imperative.
1	first person plural imperative: let's ...
We can use let US (formal) or let's (informal) to make suggestions or to give
orders to a group that Includes the speaker.
trt us pray. Let's have a drink OK. let's all get moving.
Shall we? is used as a question tag (► 305-306) in British English for Let's; let’s
can be used as a short answer.
'Let's go for a walk, shall we? 'Yes. let's.'
Negatives are let US not / do not let US (formal); let's not i don't let's (informal).
If l us not despair, (formal)
Do not let US forget those who came before US. (formal)
I ft's not get angry, (informal)
Don’t let s stay up too late tonight, (informal)
grammar
let introducing imperatives
Basic Clause Types
Section 19
2	first person singular imperative: let me ...
tft me is used 10 'give instructions to oneseirะ the expressions ier me see and Lei
me think are very common
' Whai lime shall we leave? Let me think Yes, eight o'clock will be ok:
What's the best way to Manchester7 let me see - suppose I lake the Me
Let me just get my coat and ΙΊΙ be with you.
In a very informal style, let's is often used to mean let me (also ► 174.6).
Let's see. Suppose I take the M6...
3	third-person imperative: let him ...
Let can also introduce a suggestion or order for someone or something else, not
the speaker or hearer. Nils is common in formal and ceremonial language, but
informal uses are also possible.
Let the prayers begin.
Let our enemies understand that we will not hesitate to defend our territory.
‘Your boyfriend's going out with another girl: Let him. I don't care'
Note the structure with let - the Infinitive of there is.
Let there be no doubt in your minds about our intentions.
grammar · 225 let introducing imperatives
Section 20 Conjunctions, Sentences
and Clauses
INTRODUCTION
A sentence can have more than one clause, usually joined by a conjunction
which shows the relationship between them.
sentence
sentence
'll phone you when I gel home,
clause conjunction clause
It was getting late and I was h
clause conjunction clause
We brought the food and they supplied the drink, (addition)
She was poor but she was happy, (contrast)
We can go swimming, or we could stay here, (alternative)
People disliked her because she was so rude, (cause)
I'll phone you when I arrive, (time)
subordinate clauses
One clause can be subordinate to another. A subordinate clause with its
conjunction is a part ol the other (main) clause - for example an object or an
adverbial. For practical purposes, subordinate clauses can be divided into three
main groups: noun clauses, adverbial clauses and adjective (relative) clauses.
Noun clauses function rather like noun phrases:
Adverbial clauses function rather like adverbiais:
Relative clause* function rather like adjectives in noun phrases;
She told
funny story.
Examples of subordinating conjunctions: when1 after, how, that.
Some conjunctions are made up of two or more words, for example as soon as.
co-ordinate clauses
Co-ordinate clauses have equal weight: neither is subordinate to the other.
Dan cooked supper and loe washed the dishes
Die forecast was impressive but the results were disappointing
Examples of co-ordinating conjunctions: and. but, either... or.
grammar · Section 20 Conjunctions, Sentences and Clauses
no conjunction
Participles and infinitives can begin clauses (► Section 10). These are normally
connected to other clauses with no conjunction.
I rushed out of the house, slamming the door behind me.
He went up to his room, to find a dog asleep on his bed
this Section covers co-ordination (of phrases as well as clauses), and some
general points to do with subordination. Particular types of subordinate clause
are dealt with in Sections 22-25.
Do you know what's wrong with these, and why?
G Could 1 have some butter and bread? ► 226.2
G He doesn’t smoke and drink. ► 226.4
G He doesn’t smoke nor drink. ► 227.1
o The project was not successful in political terms and in economic
terms. » 227.1
G Jack isn’t here neither. ► 227.2
o Both he can borrow the flat and he can use the car. ► 228.1
G Neither he smiled nor he spoke. ► 228.3
o She was depressed because didn’t know what to do. ► 229.3
Q Although she was tired but she went to work. ► 229.5
o As you know, that I work very hard. » 229.5
o You'll find Coca-Cola wherever you will go. ►231.1
G lí I had lots of money, I would give some to anybody who would ask
for it. ► 231.6
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
226	putting things together and.
but, or
227	not... or, not... nor. and not
228	emphatic coordination: both ...
and. (ท)either... (n/or. not only
229	subordinate clauses: some
general points
230	who, which, what, etc
after prepositions
231	lense simplification เท
subordinate clauses
232	subjunctive: that she go.
that they be. if I were, etc
grammar · Section 20 Conjunctions, Sentences and Clauses
226	putting things together: and, but, or
1 and
And can join two or more grammatically similar expresstons, from single words
up to complete clauses.
bread and cheese the Prime Minister and his cabinet
You need to go home and have a good rest.
Her English IS good and her Japanese is not bad
With more than two expressions, we generally only put and before the last.
We drank, talked and danced.
He started as a cleaner, he worked his way up. and now he runs the company.
And is sometimes left out in a very literary or poetic style, but this is unusual.
My dreams are full of darkness, despair, death.
เท expressions joined by and. repeated words are often left out.
We need a saw. (a) hammer and (a) screwdriver.
She's worked in China, (in) Thailand and (in) Brazil.
l or details, ► 276.
For tuiKuUr and plural »«rl» after rub|e<t> with and » 1ร.
For and din try. «0๙. χη. I time. tv. » ห.
2 fixed expressions: bread and butter, hands and knees
Some common expressions with and have a fixed order which cannot be
changed. The shortest expression often comes first.
bread and butter (noi butter and bread}
hands and knees (not knees and hands)
young and pretty thunder and lightning	knife and fork
black and white cup and saucer
3 but
But can also join grammatically similar expressions.
They were poor but happy. There were some chairs but no tables.
Most often, but joins clauses.
We wanted to stay but we simply didn't have rime.
The film started well, but then it went downhill.

Or also joins grammatically similar expressions.
Would you like tea or coffee? We can meet today or wait until Thursday.
After a negative verb, we use or, not and.
He doesn't smoke or drink, (soi Me doesn't smoke anddnnk)
But or does not join negative adjectives or adverbs. Compare:
We were not comfortable or happy.
We were uncomfortable and unhappy, (not .. . uncomfortable or unhappy )
grammar · 226 putting things together and. but.
Conjunctions. Sentences and Clauses
Section 20
227	not... or, not... nor, and not
1	not used once for two negative ideas
When not (used once) refers (O two or more verbs, nouns, adjectives, etc. we
usually join them with or.
He doesn't smoke or drink (not He doesn't smoke nor dunk.)
She ««รท7 angry- or upset. It's not on the table or เท the cupboard
However, we can use nor after a pause, to separate and emphasise a second
verb, adjective, etc.
Our main need is not food, nor money. Il is education.
She didn't phone that day, nor the next day.
Note that neither cannot be used เท this way.
And cannot normally be used in this kind of structure.
The project was nor successful เท economic terms or in political terms.
(not The project tea» not successful in poMtcal terms and in economical terms )
This also happens after negative nouns or adjectives.
The country suffered from a lack of employment legislation or of an
independent labour union. (More normal than a lack of... and. ..)
Foe (be uie OÍ nrulwr... no. » foin ··«■ ท··พ!·· Uns (eg. Hr mttfm 1/»0น· nor	► 22» 3.
2	two separate negative clauses: not either
After using a negative verb เท one clause, we can mention a second negative
idea or fact in another clause with not... either.
Daniel isn’t here today, jack isn’t here either, (not h"k isn't heH-netfhef.)
Another way of expressing this is with neither nor ♦ be auxiliary * subject.
Daniel isn't here today. Neither is lack.
I can’t sing, and nor can any of my family.
For details of this and similar structures. ► 309.2.
Also, as well and too are not normally used with not เท this way.
You can't hair an apple, and you can’t half an orange either.
(not ... ami you can 't heme ftrt orange abo f พ» wrU - too.)
3	positive + negative: also / as well / too
After mentioning a positive (non-negative) fact or idea, we can add a negative
point by using not... also, not... as well or not... too.
You can half an apple, hut you can't half an orange too
He drinks too much, but at least he doesn't smoke as well.
228	emphatic coordination: both ... and;
(ก)either	(ก)or; not only
We may want to emphasise that both (or all) parts of a coordination have equal
weight. There are several common ways of doing this
1 both ... and
We often balance this structure, so that the same kind of words or expressions
follow both and and.	-*
grammar · 228 emphatic coordination: both ... and; เท/either__(n)or, not only
She's both pretty and clever. (adjectives)
I spoke to both the Director and her secretary, (nouns)
She both dances and sings, (verbs)
However, unbalanced sentences with both ... and are common. Some people
prefer to avoid them.
She both dances and she sings. (both * verb; and · clause)
I both play the piano and the violin.
noth cannot begin a complete clause in this structure.
He can both borrow the house and (he can) use the car. (kui sot Berth he can
2	either... or
We use either... or to talk about a choice between two or more possibilities.
I don't speak either Hussion or Polish.
You can either come with me now or walk home.
If you want ice cream there's either raspberry, lemon or vanilla.
We often balance this structure, so that the same kind of words or expressions
follow either and or.
You can have either tea or coffee, (nouns)
He's either เท London or in New York, (prepositional phrases)
Either you'll leave this house or I’ll call the police, (clauses)
However, unbalanced sentences with either... or are common.
You can cither have tea or coffee. He's either in London or New York.
You'll either leave this house or I'll call the police.
There is a prescriptive ’rule', found in some books, which says that either should
not introduce more than two alternatives (as in either raspberry, lemon or
vanilla). Olis rule is mistaken: it does not correspond to normal usage.
3	neither___nor
This structure is the opposite of both... and. It is usually rather formal.
I neither smoke nor drink, (less formal: I don't smoke or drink.)
I he film was neither well made nor well acted.
Sometimes more than two ideas are connected by neither... nor.
He neither smiled, spoke, nor looked at me.
Neither cannot begin a complete clause in this structure.
He neither smiled___nor... (nin Nor Neither he smiled...)
When singular subjects are connected by neither. .. nor, the verb is normally
singular, but it can be plural in a less formal style.
Neither lames nor Virginia was at home, (normal)
Neither lames nor Virginia were at home, (less formal)
As with either ...or, there is a prescriptive rule', found in some books, which
says that neither should not introduce more than two alternatives (as in He
neither smiled, spoke nor looked at me). This rule is mistaken.
4	not only... but also
เท the rather formal structure not only... but also, the expressions not only and
but also can go immediately before the words or expressions that they modify.
We go there not only in winter, but also in summer.
grammar · 228 emphatic coordination: both ... and; (ท)either... (n)or, not only
Conjunctions, Sentences and Clauses
Section 20
.Vol only the bathroom was flooded, but also the rest of the house.
The place was not only cold, but also damp.
Mid position with the verb (► 200) is also possible.
She not only sings like an angel, but also dances divinely.
She not only plays the piano, but also the violin.
Not only can be moved to the beginning of a clause loi emphasis. It is then
followed by auxiliary verb · subject; do is used if there is no other auxiliary
(for more about this word order, ► 270). But can be left out in this case.
Not only has she been late three times; she has also done no work.
Not only do they need clothing, but they are also short of water.
เท informal English not only... but also is not very common; other structures
are generally preferred.
We don't only go there in winter. We go in summer too.
229	subordinate clauses: some general points
เท most languages of European origin, clauses are joined together by
conjunctions in similar ways. However, students who speak other languages may
have some problems in using English conjunctions correctly.
1	position of subordinate clauses
Adverbial clauses can usually go either first or last in a sentence, depending on
the focus. Pulling a clause at the end can give it more importance.
While I was taking a shower, I slipped, (emphasises what happened)
I slipped while I was taking a shower, (emphasises when it happened)
If you need help. Just let me know.
hut let me know if you need help.
-	Although the bicycle was expensive, she decided to buy it.
She decided to buy the bicycle although it was expensive.
-	Because she was loo angry to speak. Anna said nothing.
Anna said nothing because she was loo angry to speak.
For the position of other kinds of clause. ► Sections 22-25.
2	punctuation
Commas are often used to separate longer or more complicated clauses. Shorter
pairs of clauses are often connected without commas. Compare:
They changed all their policies after they had won the election.
t hey made a large number of disturbing changes in their policies, after they
had won the election and settled in with a comfortable majority.
When a subordinate clause begins a sentence, it is more often separated by a
comma unless the sentence is very short.
When we opened the door, we saw waler running down the stairs.
When MV opened the door(,) we got a shock.
grammar · 229 subordinate clauses: some general points
3	leaving words out
Words for repealed ideas can often be left out in the second of two co-ordinate
clauses (► 276 for details), but not normally in a subordinate clause. Compare:
She was depressed and didn't know what to do. (- and she didn’t know what
She was depressed, because she didn't know what to do. (not She was
However, after if, when, while, until, once, unless and (al)though, a pronoun
subject and the verb be can often be dropped, especially เท common fixed
expressions like if necessary.
I'll pay for you if necessary. (ร... if It is necessary.)
If เท doubt, wail and see. (ร If you are in doubt...)
When in Home, do as the Romans do. Cook slowly until ready.
Once in bed. I read for twenty minutes and then turned out the light.
Many conjunctions that express lime relations (after, before, since, when1 while,
whenever, once and until) can often be followed by -Ing forms or past participles
Instead of subjects and full verbs (► II 5.6).
1 always feel belter after talking to you.
Some things are never forgotten, once learnt.
4	conjunctions in separate sentences
Normally a conjunction connects two clauses into one sentence. However,
sometimes a conjunction and its clause can stand alone. This happens, for
example, in answers.
’ When are you going to get up? ' Miwn I'm ready.'
'Why did you do thatr Because I felt like it.'
Writers' and speakers can also separate clauses for emphasis.
Illis government has got to go. Before it does any more damage.
Schoolchildren are sometimes told that it is wrong to write a one-clause
sentence beginning with a conjunction เท this way. เท fact, the structure เร
perfectly correct when used appropriately.
Afterthoughts may also begin with conjunctions.
OK, I did it. - But I didn't mean to.
5	one conjunction for two clauses
One conjunction is enough to Join two clauses we do not normally use two.
Although she was tired, she went to work.
She lias tired but she went to work.
(noi Although she tert» tired but she went io work.)
-	Because I liked him. I tried to help him.
I liked him. so I tried to help him.
(no. Re,WWW / liked him. so I tried Ur help him.)
-	As you know, I work very hard.
you know that I work very hard.
(not As you know, that I work very hard.)
However, we can use and or or together with a repeated conjunction.
We came back because we ran out of money, and because Anna got ill
She didn't write when I was ill, or when I got married.
grammar
subordinate clauses: some general points
Conjunctions, Sentences and Clauses
Section 20
6	relative pronouns
Relative pronouns (who, which and that, ► 233) also join clauses.
There'ร the girl who works with my sister.
A relative pronoun is the subject or object of the verb that comes after it. So we
do not need another subject or object.
I’ve got a friend who works in a pub. (not . . . who he works in a pub.)
The man (that) she married was an old friend of mine, (not I he TJmòPMM, tlia1 sflc
married-him. ..)
She always thanks me for the money that I give her. (not . . ■ the money that I
gwedter il.)
230	who, which, what, etc after prepositions
Interrogative conjunctions like who, which, what, where, whether can follow
prepositions.
We discussed the question of who to appoint as manager.
1 may be able to come: it depends on which day you are holding the meeting.
They were not at all interested in what I thought.
After common words like tell, ask, idea, prepositions are often dropped before
these conjunctions.
Tell me about your trip. BUT Tell me where you went.
Do you have any idea of the cost? BUT Do you have any idea what it costs?
Prepositions are not normally used before other conjunctions such as that.
Either they are dropped:
I knew about his problems. BUT I knew that he had problems, (not / knew
fluif	i
ΓΤ«”/Π· IrTffl rrv ||CN« Trf หทt/rix f
or the expression the fact is put between the preposition and that.
1 was not responsible for the fact that the documents were stolen, (not Dwas
not responsible for that the documents were stolen.)
For more details, ► 210.
231	tense simplification in subordinate clauses
1	reasons for tense simplification
If the main verb of a sentence makes it clear what kind of time the speaker is
talking about, it is not always necessary for the same time to be indicated again
in subordinate clauses. Compare:
-	This discovery means that we will spend less on food.
This discovery will mean that we spend less on food.
-	It is unlikely that he will win.
I will pray that he wins.
Verbs in subordinate clauses are often simpler in form than verbs in main
clauses - for example present instead of future, simple past instead of would +
infinitive, simple past instead of past perfect.
You'll find Coca-Cola wherever you go. (not .. . wherever you will go.)
He would never do anything that went against his conscience. (More natural
than . .. that would go against his conscience.)
I hadn't understood what she said. (More natural than... what she had said.) ->
grammar · 231 tense simplification in subordinate clauses
2	present instead of future: I'll write when I have time.
Present tenses are often used instead of will ♦ infinitive to refer to the future in
subordinate clauses. This happens not only after conjunctions of time like when,
until, after, before, as soon as, but in most other subordinate clauses for
instance after If, whether and on condition that, after question words and relative
pronouns, and เท indirect speech.
I'll write to her when I have time, (not .. . when I will have lime.)
I'll think of you when I'm lying on the Ireach. (nor.. .when/ wdl Ire lying...)
Will you slay here until the plane lakes off!
Il will Ire interesting to see whether he recognises you.
I'll have a good tinte whether I win or lose. I'll go where you go.
I'll lend it to you on condition that you bring it back tomorrow.
He says he'll give five pounds to anybody who finds his pen.
If she asks what I’m doing in her house, I'll say I'm checking the gas.
This can happen when the main verb is not future in form, but refers to the future.
Phone me when you arrive. Make sure you come back soon.
You can tell who you like next week, but not until then.
เท comparisons with as and than, present and future verbs are both possible.
She'll be on the same train as we are. will tomorrow.
We'll gel there sooner than you do will.
3	present perfect:... when I've finished
The present perfect is used instead of the future perfect, to express the idea of
completion.
I'll phone you when I’ve finished, (nor.. . when I will have finished.)
Al the end of the year there will be an exam on everything you've studied
(nor ... everything you unit have studied.)
4	future in subordinate clauses:... where she will be
A future verb is necessary for future reference in a subordinate clause if the
main verb does not refer to the future (or to the same time in the future).
I don't know where she will be tomorrow.
I'm sure I won't understand a word of the lecture.
I'll hide it somewhere where he'll never find it. (two different future times)
If she rings. I'll tell her that I'll ring back later, (two different future times)
I O' fumir vrrt- เท if	(e.R rug" you i too if If ->« >»(/> you m grf >,^น·} ►
5	in case, I hope. I bet, it doesn't matter, etc
Λ present tense is normally used with a future meaning after in case even if the
main verb is present or past. For details, ► 248.
I've got my tennis things in case we have lime for a game tomorrow.
เท an informal style, present verbs are often used with future meanings after
I hope (► 490) and I bet (► 401).
I hope you sleep well.	I bet he gels married before the end of the year.
Present tenses are also used with future reference after it doesn't matter, I don't
care, I don't mind, it's not important and similar expressions.
It doesn't matter where we go this summer.
I don't care what we have for dinner if I don't have to cook it.
grammar · 231 tense simplification in subordinate clauses
Section 20
Conjunctions, Sentences and Clauses
6	past instead of would...
Would, like พพ, Is avoided in subordinate clauses; instead, we generally use past
verbs. litis happens in (/-clauses (► 239), and also after most other conjunctions.
// / had lots of money, I would give some to anybody who asked for it.
(not Iff wvuM have... who would ask for ill)
Would you follow me wherever I went? (not ...	I would go?}
เท a perfect world, you would be able to say exactly what you thought.
I	\YTT	I
v’''1 · · · V* ·	" TVWlFUWTW ■'·>> ■»»· f
I would always try to help anybody who was in trouble, whether I knew them
or not.
7	simplification of perfect and progressive verbs
Simple past verb forms are used quite often เท subordinate clauses instead of
present perfect and past perfect tenses, if the meaning is clear.
I've usually liked the people l('vc) worked with.
For thirty years, he had done no more than he (had) needed to.
He probably crashed because he had gone to sleep while he was driving.
(More natural than ... while he had been driving)
Progressives arc often replaced by simple forms เท subordinate clauses.
He's working Hut at the same time as he works, he's exercising
(ok ... at the same time as he's working...)
8	exceptions
These rules do not usually apply to clauses beginning because1 although, since or
as (meaning because ), or to non identifying relative clauses (► 234).
I won't see you next week because I'll be in Canada.
I'll come to the opera with you, although I probably won't enjoy it.
You'll work with Mr Harris, who will explain everything to you.
Bor lenses เท indirect «perch, ► 259.
232	subjunctive: that she go, that they be,
if I were, etc
1	What is the subjunctive?
Some languages have special verb forms called ‘subjunctive’, which are used
especially in subordinate clauses to talk about ‘unreal’ situations: things which
are possible, desirable or imaginary. Older English had subjunctives, but in
modern English they have mostly been replaced by uses of should, would and
other modal verbs, by special uses of past tenses (► 46), and by ordinary verb
forms. English only has a few subjunctive forms left: third person singular
present verbs without (e)s, (e g. she see. he have) and special forms of be
(e g. I be, he were). Except for llhe/shelit were after if they are not
very common.
grammar · 232 subjunctive: that she go, that they be. if I
. etc
2	that 5he see
Ordinary verbs only have one subjunctive form: a third person singular present
with no (e)s (e g. she see). It is sometimes used in that clauses in a formal style,
especially in American English, after words which express the idea that
something is important or desirable (e g. suggest, recommend. ask. insist, vital,
essential, important, advice}. The same forms are used in both present and past
sentences.
It is essential that every child have the same educational opportunities.
It was important that lames contact Adam as soon as possible.
Our advice is that the company invest in new equipment.
The Judge recommended that Simmons remain in prison for life.
Do is not used in negative subjunctives. Note the word order.
We fell it desirable that he not lea IV school before eighteen.
With verbs that are not third person singular, the forms are the same as ordinary-
present tense verbs (but they may refer to the past).
I	recommended that you move to another office.
3	be
He has special subjunctive forms: / be, you be. etc.
It is important that Ella be present when we sign the papers.
The Director asked that he be allowed to advertise for more staff.
I were and he/she/it were, used for example after </(► 239.4) and wish (► 632) in
a formal style, arc also subjunctives.
If I were you I should stop smoking. 1 wish it were Saturday.
4	fixed phrases: as it were; so be it
Subjunctives are also used In certain fixed phrases. Examples:
God save the Queen! Inng live the King!
God bless you.	Heaven forbid.
He’s a sort of adopted unde, as it were. (ธ... ๒ a way.)
He that as it may ...(ธ whether that is true or not...)
If we have to pay C2.000, then so be it. (- We can I do anything to change it.)
5	Other structures
Most subjunctive Structures are formal and unusual in British English.
เท r/mr clauses, British people usually prefer should · infinitive (► 264.7),
or ordinary present and past tenses.
II	is essential that every child should hate the same educational opportunities.
(oh ... that every child has...)
It was important that lames should contact Adam as soon as possible.
(or ... that lames contacted...)
grammar
subjunctive: that she go, that they be. if I were, etc
Section 21 Relative Clauses
INTRODUCTION
What are relative clauses?
Clauses beginning with question words (e g. who. which, where) are often used
to modify nouns and some pronouns - to identify people and things, or to give
more information about them. These are called relative clauses
Do you know the people who live next door7
Then's a programme tonight which you might like.
He lives เท a village where there are no shops.
Leslie, who works with me. often babysits for แร.
When who, which, where, etc are used in this way, they arc called relative
pronouns', [hat can also he used as a relative pronoun.
There are two kinds of relative clause (► 234): those that typically say who or
what we are talking about ( identifying clauses ), and those that typically iust
give extra information ('non identifying clauses’).
I	Do you know what's wrong with these, and why?
G What’s the name of the tall man which just came in? ► 233.1
Q Is that all which is left? - 233.4
Q All what you say is true. ► 233.4
Q I’ve found the keys that you were looking for them. » 233.6
Ο I saw a girl whose her hair came down to her waist. » 233.7
o He got married again, what surprised everybody » 233.8,236,2
Ο I lorota, who does my hair is from Poland ► 234.2
Q I lent him The Old Man and the Sea’, that is easy to read. » 234.3
o This is Naomi, that sells the tickets. ► 234.3
θ I poured him a glass of wine, he drank at once. » 234.4
o We met a man of whom I've forgotten the name. ► 2352
o He’s married to a singer whose you may have heard. » 2353
o We need a house we can stay for a few days. » 237.7
o He liked the people with who he worked. ► 237.8
o The idea was interesting which she put forward. ► 237.12
Q You’re the one that know where to go. ► 237 13
Q I can’t think of anybody whom to invite. ► 237.14
® The children will have a garden which to play in. » 237.14
Q This is a letter from my father, whom we hope will be fully
recovered soon. » 237.17
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
233	relatives: basic information
234	identifying and non identifying
clauses: the tall man who. .,;
Mr Rogers, who...
235	whose
236	what
237	relatives: advanced points
grammar . Section 21 Relative Clauses
233	relatives^basic information
1	who. whom and which
The relative pronouns who and whom refer to people; which refers to things.
What’i the name of the tall man who just came in? (not .. Ihetall
ffttm tíViíc/t I
It's a boot which will interest children of all ages, (nor.. .a boot who...)
2	subject and object
Who and which can be the subjects of verbs in relative clauses.
I like people who smile a lot.
I his Is the back door key1 which also opens the garage.
who(m) and which can also he the objects of verta in relative clauses. Whom is
unusual in an informal style (► 626).
1>o you remember the people who we met เท Italy? l Who is the object of met.)
I forget most of the films which I see. (Which is the object of see.)
3	that = whofwhich
We often use that instead of who or which, especially in an informal style.
I like people that smile a lot. This is the key that opens the garage.
Do you remember the people that we met in Italy?
I forget most of the films that I see.
4	all that, only... that, etc
That is especially common after quantifiers like all, everything), some(thing),
anything), no(thing), none, little, few, much, only, and after superlatives.
Is this all that'ร left? (State natural than ... all which is left?)
Have you got anything that belongs to me?
(More natural than ... anything which ...)
rhe only thing that matters is to find our way home.
I hope the litlie that I've done has been useful.
It's the best film that'ร ever been made about madness.
Note that what (► 236) cannot be used in these cases.
All that you say is certainly true, (not All what you toy...)
5	leaving out object pronouns: the people we met
Object pronouns can often be left out.
Do you remember the people we met เท Italy?
I forget most of the flints I see.	All I want is your happiness.
This is not possible in all relative clauses: ► 234.
6	one subject or object is enough
As subjects or objects, who(m). which and that replace words like she, him or it:
one subject or object เท a relative clause is enough. Compare:
- He's got a new girlfriend. She works in a garage.
He's got a new girlfriend who works in a garage (not ... who she works
grammar
relatives: basic information
Relative Clauses
Section 21
-	this is Mr Rogers. You mel him Iasi year.
this is Mr Rogers, whom you met last year, (not ... whom you met him
last yntr.)
-	Here's an article. It might interest you.
Here's an article which might interest you. (wr .. . which แ might
)
Prepositional verbs, like others, only have one object.
Are there any papers that I can look air (พ ... that / can look al them!)
I've found the keys that you were asking about, (not ... that ymt were asking
abmtilhem.)
7	whose: a girl whose hair...
Whose is a possessive relative pronoun, used as a determiner before nouns.
It replaces his/her/its. For more details, ► 235.
I saw a girl whose hair came down to her waist, (not ... whost^her hair
comedown. ..)
8	which referring to a whole clause
Which can refer not only to a noun, but also to the whole of a previous clause.
Note that what cannot be used in this way.
He got married again a year later, which surprised everybody.
(	(4 f -	fxfidy I
She cycled from I andon to Glasgow, which is pretty good for a woman of 75.
(mu She cycled.... what is pretty good . ..)
9	relative when, where and why
When and where can introduce relative clauses after nouns referring to time and
place. They are used in the same way as preposition · which.
I'll never forget the day when I first met you. (ะ... the day on which ...)
Do you know a shop where I can find sandalsr (=___a shop at w hich ...)
Why is used in a similar way after reason.
Do you know the reason why she doesn't like mef
(=___the reason for which ...)
234	identifying and non-identifying clauses:
the tall man who ■.Mr Rogers, who ...
1	two Kinds of relative clause
Some relative clauses identify or classify nouns: they tell US which person or
thing, or which kind of person or thing, is meant. (เท grammars, these arc called
■identifying', 'defining· or 'restrictive' relative clauses.)
What's the name of the tall man who just came ini
People who take physical exercise live longer.
Mio owns the car which is parked outside'
Have you got something that will gel paint out of a carpet f
Other relative clauses do not identify or classify; they simply tell us more about
a person or thing that is already identified- (เท grammars, these are called
'non identifying', non defining or 'non restrictive' relative clauses.)	-*
grammar
identifying and non identifying clauses
This is Ms Rogers, who's joining the company next week.
In 1908 Ford developed his Model T car, which sold for $500.
There are several grammatical differences between the two kinds of relative
clause. There are also stylistic differences: non-identifying clauses are generally
more formal, and are less frequent in informal speech.
2	pronunciation and punctuation
Identifying relative clauses usually follow immediately after the nouns that they
modify, without a break. They are not separated by pauses or intonation
movements in speech, or by commas in writing. (This is because the noun
would be incomplete without the relative clause, and the sentence would make
no sense or have a different meaning.) Non-identifying clauses are normally
separated by pauses and/or intonation breaks and commas. Compare:
-	The woman who does my hair is from Poland.
Dorota, who does my hair, is from Poland.
-	She married someone that she met on a bus.
She married a very nice young architect from Belfast, whom she met
on a bus.
If an identifying clause is left out, the sentence may not give enough information
to make sense.
The woman is from Poland. (Which woman?)
She married someone. (!)
When a non-identifying clause does not come at the end of a sentence, two
commas are necessary.
Dorota, who does my hair, is from . . . (not Dorota, who does my
hair is from . . .)
3	use of that
That is common as a relative pronoun in identifying clauses. In non-identifying
clauses, that is unusual. Compare:
-	Have you got a book which/that is really easy to read?
I lent him ‘The Old Man and the Sea’, which is really easy to read.
(not . . . I he old Man and the Sea’, that is really easy Io remi)
-	Where’s the girl who/that sells the tickets?
This is Naomi, who sells the tickets, (not 1 his IS Naomt, that sells the livkeiS;)
4	leaving out object pronouns	This is Naorni> that sells the tickets.)
In identifying relative clauses, we often leave out pronouns if they are objects,
especially in an informal style. In non-identifying clauses this is not possible.
Compare:
-	I feel sorry for the man she married.
She met my brother, whom she later married. (Mil She-mef-myd&olhef; she
kuer married.)
-	Did you like the wine we drank last night?
I poured him a glass of wine, which he drank at once, (not IpoHfed-him
a glass of wine, he drattkaitmee^.)
For sentences like It was jack who told the police (‘cleft sentences'), ► 273.
grammar · 234 identifying and non-identifying clauses
Relative Clauses
Section 21
235	whose
1	relative possessive
Whose is a relative possessive word, used as a determiner before nouns in the
same way as Ms. her. its or their. It can refer hack to people or things. เท a
relative clause, whose ♦ noun can be the subject, the object of a verb or the
object of a preposition.
I saw a girl whose beauty took my breath away, (subject)
It was a meeting whose purpose I did not understand, (object)
Michel Croc, with whose help Whymper climbed the Matterhorn, was one of
the first professional guides, (object of preposition)
I went to see my friends the Forrests, whose children I used to look after when
they were small, (object of preposition)
Whose can be used เท both identifying and non identifying clauses.
2	things: of which; that. ..of
Instead of whose, we can use of which or that... o/(les$ formal) to refer to
things, and these arc sometimes preferred. The most common word order is
noun · of which or that ...of, but of which ... + noun is also possible.
Compare the following four ways of expressing the same idea.
He's written a book whose name I've forgotten.
He's written a book the name of which I've forgotten.
He's written a book that I've forgotten the name of
He's written a book of which I've forgotten the name.
We do not normally use noun · of whom in a possessive sense to talk about
people.
a man whose name I've forgotten (not ๗ man of whom i 've forgotten
the name}
3	only used as a determiner
Relative whose is only used as a possessive determiner, before a noun. เท other
cases we use of which/whom or that ...of.
He's married to a singer of whom you may have heard, ox .. that you may
have heard of. (sor ... a singer whose you may have heard )
4	formality
Sentences with whose arc generally felt to be rather heavy and formal; เท an
informal style other structures are often preferred. With (► 633) is a common
way of expressing possessive ideas, and is usually more natural than whose in
descriptions.
I've got some friends with a house that looks over a river. (Less formal than
... whose house looks over a river.)
You know that girl with a brother who drives buses? (Less formal than
... whose brother drives buses?)
She's married to the man over there with the enormous ears. (More natural
than ... the man over there whose cars are enormous.)
grammar - 235 whose
After way. in which can be replaced by that or dropped เท an informal style.
I didn't like the way (that) she spoke to me.
Do you know a way (that) you can earn money without working?
Hie same thing happens with ur/ry after reason.
The reason (that) you're so bad-tempered is that you're hungry.
8
position of prepositions
Prepositions can come either before relative pronouns (more formal) or at the
ends of relative clauses (more informal). Compare:
-	He was respected by the people with whom he worked, (formal)
He was respected by the people (that) he worked with. (Informal)
-	This is the room in which I was born, (formal)
This is the room (that) I was born เท. (informal)
I hat is not used after prepositions, and who is unusual.
... the people with whom he worked, (not ... with that he worked:
NOT USUALLY... with who he worked)
10
some of whom, none of which, etc
เท non-identifying clauses, quantifying determiners (eg. some, any, none, all,
both, several, enough, many, few) can be used with of whom, of which and of
whose. Ihe determiner most often comes before of which/whom, whose, but can
sometimes come after it in a very formal style.
They picked up five boat-loads of refugees, some of whom had been at
several months, (on ... of whom some...)
IVe'r* tested three hundred types of bool, none of which is completely
waterproof, (oh ... of which none ..)
They've got eight children, all of whom are studying music, (oe... of whom
all are studying.. .)
She had a teddy bear, both of whose eyes were missing
Ulis structure is also possible with other expressions of quantity, with
superlatives, with first, second, etc. and with last.
a number of whom	three of which
the ma)ority of whom the youngest of whom
whatever, whoever, etc
Whatever can be used rather like what, as noun · relative pronoun together.
Take whatever you want. (ะ... anything that you want.)
Other words that can lie used like this are whoever, whichever, where, wherever,
when, whenever and how.
This is for whoever wants it. (ะ... any person that wants it.)
I often think about where I met you. (« ... the place where ...)
We've bought a collage เท the country for when we retire.
(ะ... the time when ...)
Whenever you want to come is fine with me. (ะ Any day that...)
Look al how he treats me. (ะ... the way in which ...)
half of which
lhe tail of which
oí atflMNW 3nd mhr« word, ending
grammar · 237 relatives: advanced points
Relative Clauses
Section 21
11	reduced relative clauses: the girl dancing
A participle is often used instead of a relative pronoun and full verb.
Who’s the girl dancing with your brother? (ธ... that is dancing with
your brother?)
Anyone touching that wire will get a shock. (ธ___who touches ...)
Half of the people invited to the party didn't turn up.
(- ... who were invited ...)
I found him sitting at a table covered with patters. (ธ... which was covered
with papers.)
Reduced structures are also used with the adjectives available and possible,
Please send me all the tickets available. (ธ... that arc available.)
Tuesday's the only date possible.
12	separating a noun from its relative pronoun
Relative pronouns usually follow their nouns directly.
The idea which she put forward was interesting (rot I he idea WHS interesting
sAr pul	)
/ called in Mrs Spencer, who did our accounts. (Mil/ ndM Mn Spencer 4H
iriJut	..J.f /u < lUilili I
»ivr ·■■»·	พ» U	f
However, a descriptive phrase can sometimes separate a noun from its
relative pronoun.
I called in Mrs Spencer, the Manager's secretary, who did our accounts.
13	agreement of person
Most relative clauses have third-person reference; I who..you who... and
uv who... arc unusual, though they sometimes occur เท a very formal style.
Λ different kind of first- and second-person reference is common in the relative
clauses of cleft sentences (► 273). However, the verb is usually third person,
especially in an informal style.
It’s me that's responsible for the organisation. (More formal: It is I who am
responsible ... )
You're the one that knows where to go. (not .. . theoneikat knew·...)
14	relative + infinitive: a garden in which to play
When a noun or pronoun is the object of a following infinitive, a relative
pronoun is not normally used.
I can't think of anybody to invite, (not .. . anybody whom to invite.)
However, relative pronouns arc possible with preposition structures.
We moved to the country so that the children would have a garden
in which to play
He was miserable unless he had neighbours with whom to quarrel
This structure is rather formal, and it is more common to use infinitive ♦
preposition without a relative pronoun.
... so that the children would have a garden to play in.
(not... whxh to play in )
... unless he had neighbours to quarrel with, (not ... whom to quarrel wtth.) -»
grammar · 237 relatives: advanced points
15	relative clauses after indefinite noun phrases
The distinction between identifying and non-identifying clauses (► 234) is most
clear when they modify definite noun phrases like the car. this house, my father.
Mrs l ewis. After indefinite noun phrases like ต car, some nurses or friends, the
distinction is less clear, and both kinds of clause are often possible with slight
differences of emphasis.
He's got a new car that goes like a bomb, (or He's got a new car, which goes
like a bomb.)
We became friendly with some nurses that lack had met เท Paris.
(or Wt became friendly with some nurses, whom lack had met in Paris.)
เท general, identifying clauses arc used when the information they give is felt to
be centrally important to the overall message. When this is not so, non
identifying clauses arc preferred.
16	It was Alice who ..What I need is...
Relative clauses (including U'hal clauses) are used to structure ‘cleft sentences':
» 273-274 for details.
Il was Alia- who called the police. What I need is a long rest.
17	somebody I know you'll like
It is often possible to combine relative clauses with indirect statements and
similar structures, e g. I know/said/fed/hope wish (that)..., especially in an
informal style. Expressions like I know, I said, etc come after the position of the
relative pronoun.
We’re going to meet somebody (who/that) I know (that) you'll like.
It's a house(which/that) we feel (that) wr might want to buy.
That's the man (who/that) I wish (that) I’d married.
Note that the conjunction (the second that) is usually dropped เท this structure;
it must be dropped if the relative pronoun is a subject.
This is the woman (who/that) Anna said could show แร the church
(รพ Ibis A the woman (who/that) Anna said thafondd show แร...)
เท this structure, people sometimes use whom as a subject pronoun. This is not
generally considered correct.
This is a letter from my father, whom we hop.· will be fully recovered soon.
(More correct:... who we hope will be...)
Relative clauses can also be combined with (/-clauses in sentences like the
following.
I am enclosing an application form, which I should be grateful if you would
sign and return.
18	a car that I didn’t know how fast it could go, etc
We do not usually combine a relative clause with an indirect question structure.
However, this sometimes happens in informal speech.
I've just been to see an old friend that I'm not sure when I'm going
to see again.
There's a pile of paperwork that I just don't know how I'm going to do.
grammar · 237 relatives: advanced points
Relative Clauses
ccion 21
There is no grammatically collect way of doing this when the relative pronoun
is the subject of the relative clause. However, sentences like the following
(with added pronouns) arc also sometimes heaid in informal speech.
Some leal examples:
/ was driving a car that I didn't know how fast it could go.
It's ridiculous to sing songs that you don't know what they mean.
There's a control at the hack that I don't understand how it works
There's still one kid that I must find out whether she’s coming to the party
or not.
19	omission of subject
เท a very mfoimal style, a subject relative pronoun is sometimes dropped after
There's a man at the door wants to talk to you.
20	double object
Occasionally a relative pronoun acts as the object of two verbs. This happens
especially when a relative clause is followed by before.. .Ing, after.. .ing OI
without.. .ing.
We have water that it's best not to drink before boiling, (o·... boiling it.)
I'm sending you a letter that I want you to destroy after reading, (oh ... after
reading it.)
He was somebody that you could like without admiring.
(<*... admiring him.)
21	older English: who and that which
เท older English, who could be used in a similar way to what, as noun *
relative pronoun together, meaning the person who', 'whoever' or
'anybody who'. เท modern English, this is very unusual.
Who steals my purse steals trash. (Shakespeare, Othello) (Modem English:
Whoever Anybody who...)
That which used to be used in the same way as what. This, too, is very unusual
in modern English.
We have that which we need. (Modern English: We have what we need.)
grammar · 237 relatives: advanced points
Section 22 If
INTRODUCTION
uncertain events and situations
เท clauses alter if, we usually talk about uncertain events and situations: things
which may or may not happen, which may or may not be true, etc.
Ask lack if he's slaying tonight. (He may or may not be staying.)
/// see Annie. I'll güv her your love. (I may or may not see Annie.)
conditions
An -/-clause olten refers to a condition - something which must happen so that
something else can happen.
If you get here before eight. u<e can catch the early train.
Oil floats if you pour it on water
Clauses of this kind are often called 'conditional' clauses.
•first’, ’second’ and ’third’ conditionals; other structures
Some students' grammars concentrate on three common sentence structures
with if, which are often called the 'first', 'second' and third' conditionals.
'first conditional'
if · present	will * infinitive
If we play tennis,	ill win.
'second conditional*
if· past	would * Infinitive
If we played tennis,	I would win.
'third conditional’
if . past perfect	would haw · past participle
If we had played tennis. I would have won.
These are useful structures to practise. However, students sometimes think that
these are the only possibilities, and become confused when they meet sentences
like If she didn't phone this morning then she's probably away (What's this?
A fourth conditional?·). It is important to realise that if is not only used in special
structures with will and would; it can also be used, like other conjunctions, in
ordinary structures with normal verb forms. (A research study carried out in the
1990s found that less than 25% of //conditional sentences follow the traditional
‘first’, 'second' and 'third' patterns.)
grammar · Section 22 If
position of //-clause
An //-clause can come at the beginning or end of a sentence. When an //-clause
comes first, it is often followed by a comma.
Compare:
If you tai too much, you get fat	You get fat if you eat too much
·“uiTd ร?""*™’' 2,7 fo**"""ln,onm'""1'·*·" "mM/ihouU. ►'nu»8fi
How good are the rules?
The rules' given เท this Section arc intended to be useful for learners. They
describe what happens most of the time, and are generally valid for formal
speech and writing. However, usage is far from fixed, and educated speakers and
writers quite often mix structures. So if a sentence is crossed out in one of the
following explanations (e g. If I would know her name. I would fell you) this
means that it should be avoided in contexts like formal letters or examination
scripts. It may not strictly speaking be wrong.
Do you know what's wrong with these, and why?
Q I'll give her your love if I'll see her. ► 238.2
Q If you asked me, I had told you. ►241.1
o If I would know his address 1 would tell you. ► 239.2
o If 1 knew they had a problem, I could have helped them. ►241.2
o If I were to know his address, I would tell you. ► 244.2
Q Hadn't we missed the plane, we would all have been killed in
the crash. ► 244.5
o It would of been better if we had started earlier. ► 245.3
G If only I would know more people! ► 242
Ο I only she didn't tell the police, everything would have been
all right. ► 242
o I'll be surprised unless the car breaks down soon. ► 247.2
o I've bought a chicken in case your mother will stay to lunch. ► 248 I
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
238	ordinary structures	244
239	special structures with past	245
244	other points
245	other structures found in
tenses and would
240	if I were you
241	unreal past situations
242	if only
243	if... will
spoken English
246 other words and expressions
with similar uses
247	unless
248	เท case and if
grammar - Section 22 //
238	ordinary structures
If you didn't study physics al school, you won't understand this book.
I'll give her your love if I see her.
1	the same tenses as with other conjunctions
When we are not talking about 'unreal' situations (► 239), we use the same
tenses with if as with other conjunctions. Present tenses are used to refer to the
present, past tenses to the past, and so on. Compare:
-	Oil floats If you pour It on waler.
Iron goes red when it gets very hot.
-	If lack didn't come to work yesterday, he was probably ill.
As lack didn’t come to work yesterday, he was probably ill.
-	If you didn’t study physics at school, you won't understand this book.
Because you didn’t study physics at school, you won’t understand this book
2	present tense with future meaning
เท an «/-clause, we normally use a present tense to talk about the future.
This happens after most conjunctions (► 231). Compare:
-	I ’ll give her your love if I see her. (not ... if I wdl see her.)
I'll give her your love when I see her. (noΓ.. . when I wiU-serher.)
-	If we have fine weather tomorrow. I'm going to paint the windows.
As soon as we have fine weather, I'm going to paint the windows.
So. (f . nitl (e g ifn นฬ matr ■น brtut). · Ma
R» if . ->» in ..-ported tpeedt (e g. I <lonl	If in br rntrfA ' 2M1
239	special structures with past tenses
and would
If I knew her name. I would tell you.
What would you do if you lost your job?
1	unreal situations
We use special structures with if when we are talking about unreal situations -
things that Mil probably not happen, situations that are untrue or imaginary,
and similar ideas. เท these cases, we use past tenses and uould to ‘distance our
language from reality.
2	if ♦ past; would + infinitive
To talk about unreal or improbable situations now or in the future, we use
a past tense เท the //-clause (even though the meaning is present or future),
and uould * infinitive (without to) in the other part of the sentence.
If I knew her name, I uould tell you. (not If I know... OH IfI would know...
Ο* I เฬ// (dl you )
She uould be perfectly happy if she had a car.
What uould you do if you lost your job?
grammar - 238 ordinary structures
If
Section 22
This structure can make suggestions sound less definite, and so more polite.
Il would be nice if you helped me a bit with the housework.
Would it be all right if I came round about seven tomorrow?
3	would, should and 'd
After I and we. should is sometimes used with the same meaning as would.
This is now unusual in British English, and has almost disappeared from
American English.
If I knew her name. I should tell you (rare)
We use'd as a contraction (► 337).
We'd get up earlier if there teas น good reason to.
for thnuirf in (he (fclauM. » 244.1.
4	if I were, etc
We often use were instead of was after if. This is common in both formal
and informal styles. เท a formal style were is more common than terrs,
and many people consider it more correct, especially in American English.
The grammatical name for this use of were is subjunctive’ (► 232).
If I were rich, I would spend all my time travelling
if my nose were a little shorter. I’d be quite pretty.
5	Ordinary tense-use or special tense-use? If I come or if I came?
The difference between, for example, if I come and if I came is not necessarily a
difference of time. They can both refer to the future; but the past tense suggests
that a future situation is impossible, imaginary or less probable. Compare:
-	If I become president. I'll... (said by a candidate เท an election)
if I became President, I'd... (said by a schoolboy)
-	if I win this race. I'll... (said by the fastest runner)
if I won this race. rd... (said by the slowest runner)
-	Will it he all right if I bring a friend? (direct request)
Would it be all right if I brought a friend f (less direct, more polite)
6	could and might
We can use could to mean 'would be able to’ and might to mean would
perhaps’ or ’would possibly’.
If I had another £500. I could buy a car.
if you asked me nicely. / might get you a drink.

240	if I were you
1	advice
We often use the structure If I were you ... to give advice. British English has
should or would in the main clause; American English would.
I wouldn't/shouldn't worry if I were you.
grammar · 240 If I
you
238	ordinary structures_______________________
If you didn 't study physics at school, you won’t understand this book.
I'll give her your love if I see her.
1	the same tenses as with other conjunctions
When we are not talking about 'unreal' situations (► 239), we use the same
tenses with if as with other conjunctions. Present tenses are used to refer to the
present, past tenses to the past, and so on. Compare:
-	Oil floats if you pour it on water.
Iron goes red when it gets very hot.
-	If Jack didn't come to work yesterday, he was probably ill.
As Jack didn't come to work yesterday, he was probably ill.
-	If you didn't study physics at school, you won't understand this book.
Because you didn't study physics at school, you won't understand this book.
2	present tense with future meaning
In an if-clause, we normally use a present tense to talk about the future.
This happens after most conjunctions (► 231). Compare:
-	I’ll give her your love if I see her. (not . . . if! win see her.)
I’ll give her your love when I see her. (not . . . น4tettd-wdl-see-her,)
-	If we have fine weather tomorrow, I'm going to paint the windows.
As soon as we have fine weather, I'm ร0^ησws-
For if + will (e.g. if it will make you feel better), ► 243.
For if + will in reported speech (e.g. 1 don't know if I'll be ready), ► 260.3.
239	special structures with past tenses
and would
________________________
If 1 knew her name, I would tell you.
What would you do if you lost your job?
1	unreal situations
We use special structures with if when we are talking about unreal situations -
things that will probably not happen, situations that are untrue or imaginary,
and similar ideas. In these cases, we use past tenses and would to 'distance' our
language from reality.
2	if + past; would + infinitive
To talk about unreal or improbable situations now or in the future, we use
a past tense in the r/-clause (even though the meaning is present or future),
and would + infinitive (without to) in the other part of the sentence.
Iff knew her name, I would tell you. (not If J know . . . OR If I would know . . .
OR..	-/ฟ/ๅyet*)
She would be perfectly happy if she had a car.
What would you do if you lost your job?
...................................
grammar · 238 ordinary structures
If
Seaion.
This structure can make suggestions sound less definite, and so more polite.
Il would be nice if you helped me a bit with the housework.
Would it be all right If I came round about seven tomorrow?
3	would, should and'd
After I and we. should is sometimes used with the same meaning as would.
This is now unusual in British English, and has almost disappeared from
American English.
If I knew iter name, I should tell you. (rare)
We use'd as a contraction (► 337).
We'd get up earlier if there was a good reason to.
4	if I were, etc
We often use were instead of was after if. Illis is common เท both formal
and informal styles. เท a formal style were is more common than นพ,
and many people consider it more correct, especially in American English.
The grammatical name for this use of were is subjunctive' (► 232).
If I were rich, I would spend all my time travelling.
If my nose were a little shorter, I’d be quite pretty.
5	Ordinary tense-use or special tense-use? If / come or if I came?
The difference between, for example, if I come and if I came is not necessarily a
difference of time. They can both refer to the future; but the past tense suggests
that a future situation is impossible, imaginary or less probable. Compare:
If I become President, I'll... (said by a candidate in an election)
If I became President. I'd... (said by a schoolboy)
If I win this race, I'll.,. (said by the fastest runner)
If I won this race. I'd... (said by the slowest runner)
- Will It be all right if I bring a friend? (direct request)
Would it be all right if I brought a friendf (less direct, more polite)
6	could and might
We can use could to mean 'would be able IO and might to mean would
perhaps* or 'would possibly’.
If I had another £500.1 could buy a car.
If you asked me nicely. I might get you a drink.

240	if I were you
1	advice
We often use the structure If I were you ... to give advice. British English has
should or would in the main clause; American English would.
I wouldn't/shouldn't worry if I were you.
grammar » 210 if I were you
If I were you. I'd get that car serviced.
If I was you is also possible. Some people consider it incorrect (► 239.4).
2	/ should/would...
Sometimes we leave out If I were you. and just use I should. .. (British English)
or I would... to give advice.
I shouldn Ί uòrry.	I would gel that car serviced.
เท this case. I should·'would is similar to you should.
241	unreal past situations
If you had worked harder, you would have passed your exam.
1	if + past perfect; would have ♦ past participle
To talk about past situations that did not happen, we use a past perfect tense in
the //-clause, and would have * past participle in the other part of the sentence.
If you had asked me. I would have lold you. (not If you would have
asked me . <· If you asked me... I» ... I had fold you.)
If you had worked harder, you would have passed your exam.
I'd have been เท bad trouble if Megan hadn 't helped me.
2	could have ... and might have ...
We can use could have · past participle to mean 'would have been able to ..
and might have - past participle to mean 'would perhaps have ... ■ or 'would
possibly have ..
If he'd run a bit faster, he could have won.
If I hadn't been so tired. I might have realised what was happening.
3	present use: situations that are no longer possible
We sometimes use structures with would have — to talk about present and
future situations which are no longer possible because of the way things have
turned out.
Il would hair been nice to go Io Australia this winter, but there's no way we
can do it. (or It would be nice...)
1/ my mother hadn Ί met my father at a party thirty years ago, I wouldn't have
been here now. (or ...I wouldn't be here now.)
242	if only
We can use If only.. .1 to say that we would like things to be different. It means
the same as I wish ... (► 632), but is more emphatic; The clause with if only
often stands alone, without a main clause. Tense use is as follows:
a past to talk about the present
If only I knew more people.'	If only I was betterlooking'
We can use were instead of was (► 239.4).
If only your father were here!
grammar · 241 unreal past situations
If
Section 22
b would ♦ infinitive (without to) to talk about the future
IJ only it would stop raining, we could go Old.
IJ only somebody would smile!
c past perfect to talk about the past
If only she hadn't told the police, everything would hair been all right.
243	if... will
I'll give you [100 if it will help you to get home.
If Anna won't be here, we’d better cancel the meeting.
I don’t know if I’ll be ready in lime.
If you will come this way...
If you will eat so much —
We normally use a present lense with //(and most other conjunctions) to refer
to the future (► 231).
I'll phone you if I have time, (not ...if! MU have lime,}
But เท certain situations we use if... will.
1	results
We use will with if to talk about what will happen because of possible future
actions - to mean ‘if this will be the later result’. Compare:
I'll give you £100 if I win the lottery, (winning the lottery is a condition -
it must happen first.)
I'll give you £100 if it’ll help you to get home. (The return home is a result -
it follows the gift of money.)
- We 'll go home now if you get the car. (condition)
We 'll go home now if it will make you feel belter, (result)
2	'If it is true now that..
We use will with if when we are saying if it is true now that...' or ‘if we know
now that..
If Anna won’t be here on Thursday, we'd belter cancel the meeting
If prices will really come down in a few months. I'm not going to buy one now.
3	indirect questions: / don't know if...
We can use will after if in indirect questions (► 260.3).
I don't know if I'll be ready in time, (not ... if I'm ready in lime.)
4	polite requests: If you will come this way...
We can use if. will in polite requests. เท this case, will is not a future auxiliary;
it means are willing to‘ (► HO.I).
If you will come this way. I'll show you your room.
If your mother will complete this form, I'll prepare her ticket.
Would can be used to make a request even more polite.
If you would come this way...
grammar
if... will
5 insistence: If you WILL eat so much ...
Stressed will can be used after if to criticise people’s habits or choices.
1/you WILL cal so much, it's not surprising you feel ill. l- 'If you insist on
eating so much ..
244	other points
1	if... happen to
We can suggest that something is unlikely, or not particularly probable, by using
... happen to... after if.
If I happen to run into Daniel, I'll tell him to call you.
If you happen to pass a supermarket, perhaps you could pick up some eggs.
Should can be used after if in British English with a similar meaning, but this is
now unusual.
If I should run into Daniel...
2	if___was/were to
Ibis is another way of talking about unreal or imaginary future events.
If the boss was/ were to come เท now, we’d be in real trouble.
(= If the boss came ...)
What would we do if I was/were to lose my job?
It can be used to make a suggestion sound less direct, and so more polite.
If you were to move your chair a bit. we could all sit down.
This structure is not normally used with verbs like be or know, which refer to
continuing situations.
If I knew her name... (not If I were พ.**™-(twwffle...)
lor the (MlnriKr brt-rrn mil .ml am slut 1/. » 2ÍS 4
3	if it was/were not for
This structure is used to say that one event or situation changes everything.
If it wasn't/weren't for his wife’s money he’d never be a director.
(- Without his wife’s money·,...)
If It wasn't/ weren't for the children, we could go skiing next นพ*.
To talk about the past we use If it had not been for.
If it hadn't been for your help, I don't know what I'd have done.
Hut for can he used to mean if it were not for’ or if it had not been for .
Hut for your help, I don't know what I'd have done.
4	leaving out if·, conversational - You want to get in, you pay.
If is sometimes left out at the beginning of a sentence เท a conversational style,
especially when the speaker is making conditions or threats.
You want to gel เท, you pay like everybody else. (= If you want...)
You touch me again. I'll kick your teeth in.
grammar
other points
If
Section 'c
5	leaving out if', formal inversion structures - Had I realised...
เท (urinal and literary styles, if can be dropped and an auxiliary verb put before
the subject. 1’his happens mostly with were, had and should.
Were she my daughter,... (ธ If she were my daughter...)
Had I realised what you intended,... (= If I had realised ...)
Should you change your mind,... (x If you should change ...)
Negatives are not contracted.
Had we not missed the plane, we would all have been killed in the crash.
(not Hadn't we missed. ..)
6	leaving out words after if
We sometimes leave out subject * be after if. Note the common fixed
expressions if necessary, if any, if anything, if ever, if in doubt.
I'll uork laic tonight if necessary. (- ... If it is necessary)
There is little if any good evidence for flying saucers.
I'm not angry. If anything I feel a little surprised.
He seldom if ever travels abroad.
If in doubt, ask for help. (■ If you are เท doubt...)
If about Io go on a long journey, try to hate a good night's sleep.
7	if so and if not
After if, we can use so and not instead of repeating a whole clause.
Are you free? If so, let's go out for a meai I- . .7lf you are free ...)
I might see you tomorrow. If not. then it'll be Saturday, l- ... If I don’t see
you tomorrow ...)
8	extra negative: / wonder if we shouldn't...
An extra not is sometimes put into i/ clauses after expressions suggesting doubt
or uncertainty.
I wonder if we shouldn’t ask the doctor to look at Emily. (- I wonder if we
should ask ...)
/ wouldn't he surprised if she didn't get married soon, l- ... if she got
married soon.)
9	if... then
We sometimes construct sentences with if... then to emphasise that one thing
depends on another.
If she can't come to แร, then we'll have to go and see her.
10	if meaning 'even if*
We can use if to mean ‘even if (► 452.4).
I'll finish this job if it takes all night.
I wouldn't marry you if you were the last man in the world.
11	admitting facts with if
An r/clause can be used to admit a fact when giving a reason for it.
If I'm a bit sleepy, it’s because I was up all night.
grammar
other points
12	If meaning 'I'm saying this in case'
//-clauses are quite often used to explain the purpose of a remark - to suggest
I IN saying this in case ..
7	here's some steak in the fridge if you’re hungry
If you want to go home, Anne's got your car keys.
13	//meaning'although'
เท a formal style. If can be used with a similar meaning to although. This is
common in the structure if · adjective (with no verb), if is not as definite as
although; it can suggest that what is being talked about is a matter of opinion, or
not very important.
His style, if simple, is pleasant to read.
The profits, if a little lower than last year's, are still extremely healthy.
Ihe same kind of idea can be expressed with may... but.
His style may be simple, but it is pleasant to read.
245	other structures found in spoken English
1	would in both clauses
Conditional would is sometimes used in both clauses of an (/-sentence. This is
very informal, and quite common in speech. It is not usually written, and is
incorrect เท formal writing.
It would be good if we'd gel some rain.
How would we feel if this would happen to our family ?
2	'd have ...'๘ have; would have ... would have
เท informal spoken English, (/-clauses referring to the past are sometimes
constructed with'd have. Illis, too. is very informal, bill it occurs quite often
in speech. It is not usually written, and is incorrect in formal writing.
if I’d have known. I'd have told you.
It would have been funny if she'd have recognised him.
You wonder what the attitudes of both players would hat e been if Nadal
would have gone on and won that second set. (from a tennis commentary)
3	had've and would've
Instead of the contracted'd in these structures, full forms are sometimes used
for emphasis or in negatives. Both had and would occur. Tile following are
genuine examples taken from conversation.
I didn't know. But if I had've known ...
We would never hate met if he hadn't have crashed into my car.
If I would've had a gun, somebody might have got hurt.
if you wouldn't have phoned her, we'd never have found out what
was happening.
Confusion about this structure sometimes leads people to write would of instead
of would have (they are pronounced the same: '"พบdav in normal speech).
grammar · 245 other structures found in spoken English
แ
Seaion 22
4	mixed tenses
Sometimes a simple past tense is used with if where a past perfect would be
normal. This is more common เท American English.
// / knew you were coming, I'd have baked a cake.
If I had the money with me, I would have bought you one.
If I didn't have my walking boots on, I think I would have really hurt my foot.
246	other words and expressions with
similar uses
Many words and expressions can be used เท similar ways IO if, and often with
similar structures. Some of the commonest are imagine (that), suppose (that),
supposing (that) (used to talk about what might happen), and providing (that),
provided (that), as/so long as, on condition (that) (used to make conditions).
Imagine we could all fly’. Wouldn Ί that be fun ’
Supposing you'd missed the train. What would you have done?
You can borrow my bike providing/provided you bring it back.
I'll give you the day off on condition that you work on Saturday morning.
You're welcome to stay with US as/so long as you share the expenses.
Ka Mi(K«nont wall urppou. supposing and ·Μ tj. » 599
247	unless
1	meaning
Unless has a similar meaning totf... not. เท the sense of 'except if.
Come tomorrow unless I phone, l- ... if I don’t phone except if I phone.)
I'll lake the job unless the pay is loo low. (- ... if the pay Isn’t too low /
except if the pay is too low.)
I'll be back tomorrow unless there's a plane strike.
let's have dinner out - unless you're too tired.
I'm going to dig the garden this afternoon, unless it rains.
2	when unless cannot be used
Unless means 'except if; it is not used with other meanings of ‘if... not’.
Compare:
- OK. So we'll meet this evening at 7.0ก - unless my train's late. (=..1 except if
my train's late.)
If my train isn't late it will be the first lime this week, (nut Unless my train's
kite if win be the first lime this week. The meaning is not 'except if.)
I'll drive over and see you. unless the car breaks down. (ร... except if the car
breaks down.)
I'll be surprised if the car doesn't break down soon, (not I'U be surprised unless
fhetar breaks down soon,)	-»
grammar · 217 unless
3	tenses
เท clauses with unless, we usually use present tenses to refer to the future
(►23ΪΚ
HI be in all day unless the office phones (mb .. wtfctM the office trUI phone.)
248	in case and if
1	precautions
เท British English, in case is mostly used to talk about precautions - things
which we do in order to be ready for possible future situations.
I always lake an umbrella tn case it rains. (ะ... because it might rain.)
To talk about the future, we use a present tense after in case (► 231).
I've bought a chicken in case your mother stays to lunch, (koi ... Mt «พ.)·*
mother wM stay ..)
2	in case ... happen to
We can use the expression happen to after in case to emphasise the meaning of
'by chance'.
I've bought a chicken in case your mother happens to slay to lunch.
We took our swimming things in case we happened to find a pool.
Should can be used in the same way in British English, but this is no longer
very common.
... in case your mother should slay to lunch.
3	in case and if
เท British English, in case and if are normally used in quite different ways.
Do i\ in case B happens* means 'Do A (first) because B might happen later’.
Do A ,/B happens means 'Do A if B has already happened'. Compare:
Let's buy a bottle of wine in case George comes. (« I .el's buy some wine now
because George might come later.)
Let’s buy a bottle of wine if George comes. (ะ We’ll wait and see. If George
comes, then we’ll buy the wine. If he doesn't we won’t.)
-	I'm taking an umbrella in case it rains.
I'll open the umbrella if It rains, (mh / พ open the umbrella เท case it rains.)
-	People insure their houses เท case they catch fire, (not ... if they catch fire.)
People telephone the fire brigade if their houses catch fire.
เท American Elfish, เท caseis"often Ed in a similarly to if.
เท case you're free this evening, give me a call, (less typical of British English)
4	เก case of
rhe prepositional phrase in case of has a wider meaning than the conjunction
{ท case, and can he used in similar situations to if in both American English and
British English.
เท case of fire, break glass. (- If there is a fire ...)
grammar
in case and if
Section 23 other Adverbial Clauses
INTRODUCTION
This Section deals with some conjunctions and clause structures which may
cause grammatical problems for learners, less problematic conjunctions
le g because, although, until) are included เท Section 31; see the Index for their
exact place.
Do you know what's wrong with these, and why?
Ο I passed the exam, after it was easier to gel a good job. > 249.1
Q I'll call you after I'll arrive. > 249.2
Õ As I was a child I lived in 1-ondon. >251.2
o His parents died while he was twelve. > 251.2
Q I’ll take whichever tent you’re not using it. > 252
o No matter what you do is fine with me. ► 253
o As much I respect your point of view, I can't agree. > 255
Q He worries more than it is necessary. > 256.1
o We've got food for as many people as they want it. > 256.1
o I’m sending you the bill, as it was agreed. > 256.1
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
249	after, conjunction
250	before: conjunction
251	as, น·hen and while.
simultaneous events
252	whoever, whatever, etc
253	no matter who, etc
254	whether... or...
255	«ร and though: special
word order
256	than- and as clauses: leaving out
subjects, etc
grammar - Section 23 Other Adverbial Clauses
249	after: conjunction
after · clause, » clause
clause · after · clause
1	use and position
After and its clause can come either before the main clause (often with a
comma) or after. Putting it at the end can give it more importance in
information structure (► 267).
After I moved to Scotland. I changed jobs.
I changed jobs after I moved to Scotland
Note the time relations: เท both cases the speaker moved to Scotland first and
then changed jobs. Compare:
I moved to Scotland after I changed jobs. (The speaker changed jobs first.)
2	present with future meaning
We use after with a present tense to talk about the future >231).
I'll telephone yon after I arrive, (not .. .after I will arrive.)
3	perfect tenses
เท clauses with after, we often use present and past perfect tenses to show that
one thing is completed before another starts (► 54.1).
I usually go straight home after I’ve finished work.
After lara had finished school she went to America.
We use a present perfect, not a future perfect, to talk about the future with after.
I'll call you after I've seen lake, (not .. . after IU have seen lake.)
4	after.. ,ing
เท a formal style, we often use the structure after · ing,
After completing this form, give It to the secretary.
After having t past participle IS also possible when talking about the past.
He wrote his first book after returning / having returned from Mongolia.
250	before: conjunction
before ♦ clause, * clause
clause . before · clause
1	use and position
before and its clause can come either before the main clause (often with a
comma) or after. Putting it at the end can give it more importance in
information structure (►267).
before I have breakfast. I go for a walk.
I go for a walk before I hate breakfast
grammar · 249 after, conjunction
Note the time relations: in both eases the speaker goes for a walk first and then
has breakfast. Compare:
I have breakfast before I go for a u>alk. (lite speaker has breakfast first.)
grammar «251 as. when and while: simultaneous event
4	whenever = ‘every time that'
Whenever can suggest repetition, เท the sense of ‘every time that'.
Whenever I see you I feel nervous.
I stay with Monica whenever I go to London.
5	whoever, etc ... may
May can he used to suggest ignorance or uncertainty.
He's written a book on the philosopher Matilda Vidmi. whoever she may be.
She's just written to me from Llandyfrdwy, wherever that may be.
6	leaving out the verb: whatever his problems
เท a clause like whatever his problems are, where whatever is the complement of
the verb be. it is possible to leave out the verb.
Whatever his problems, he has no right to behave like that.
Λ serious illness, whatever แร nature, is almost alums painful.
After however t adjective, we can leave out a pronoun » be.
A grammar rule, however true (it is), is useless unless it can be understood.
7	informal uses: short answers
เท an informal style, these conjunctions arc sometimes used as short answers.
‘When shall we start? 'Whenever.' (ะ Whenever you like.)
'Potatoes or rice? 'Whichever' (- I don’t mind.)
Whatever is often used to mean I don’t care’ or ’I’m not interested'. This can
sound rude.
■ What would you like to do? We could go and see a film, or go swimming.'
’ Whatever.
Or whatever can mean or anything else'.
Would you like some orange juice or a beer or whatever ?
If you play football or tennis or whatever, it does lake up a lol of time.
8	whatever meaning 'at all'
After any and no, whatever can be used in Stilish English to mean 'at all.
Don't you have any regrets whatever?
I can see no point whatever in buying it.
เท American English, whatsoever is preferred in this sense; เท British English it is
a formal alternative.
Rir oltwr น*·» ๗ uMMlrrrr «I»! เพท"1 พ » dictionary
grammar · 252 whoever, whatever, etc
Other Adverbial Clauses
Section
253	no matter who, etc
1	conjunction
1Vo matter can be used with U'ho, whose, what, whUh, where, when anil hour.
These expressions are similar to conjunctions, and introduce adverbial clauses.
The meaning IS similar to it is not important who/what, etc'.
I'll love you no matter what you do.
No matter where you go. I'll follow you.
We use a present tense with a future meaning after no matter (► 231).
No ma tter where you go, you 'll find people who love music.
You'll be welcome no matter when you come
2	no matter who, etc and whoever, etc
The expressions no matter who/what, etc are used rather like whoever,
whatever, etc (► 252). Compare:
No matter what you say, I won't believe you.
Whatever you say, I won't believe you.
Call me when you arrive, no matter how late it is.
Coll me when you arrive, however late it is.
However, clauses with whoever,1 whatever/whichever can be used as subjects or
objects. Clauses with no mailer who. etc cannot he used in this way.
Whatever you do is fine with me. (but SOI Nomattrr -whafytNrdvn fine
with »พ์ )
You can have whichever you like, (but SOI You can have NO mailer which
you Me.)
3	no matter and it doesn't matter
Because no matter who, etc act like conjunctions, they must be used with
two clauses.
No matter when you come, you'll be welcome, (mu SOI No matter when
you come.)
To introduce just one clause, we can use It doesn't matter.
It doesn’t matter when you come.
4	no matter what
No matter what can be used at the end of a clause, without a following verb.
I'll always love you. no matter what. ( ... no matter what happens.)
grammar · 253 no matter who. etc
254	whether... or...___________________________
We can use whether ... or ... as a double conjunction, with a similar meaning
to It doesn't matter whether ... or.. .
The ticket will cost the same, whether we buy it now or wait till later.
Present tenses are used to refer to the future.
Whether we go by bus or train, it'll take at least six hours.
Several structures are possible with whether ... or not.
Whether you like it or not, . . . Whether or not you like it, . . .
Whether you like it or whether you don't, . . .
For whether and if, ► 261.
255	as and thoughะ speciah/vord order
adjective/adverb/noun + as + clause
As and though can be used in a special structure after an adjective or adverb.
In this case they both mean 'although', and suggest an emphatic contrast.
(In American English only as is normally used like this; though is unusual.)
Cold as/though it was, we went out. (= Although it was very cold, . . .)
Bravely as/though they fought, they had no chance of winning.
Much as/though I respect your point of view, I can't agree.
Strange as/though it may seem, I don't like watching cricket.
After a noun, though can be used in this way (but not as).
Scot though she was, she supported the English team.
Occasionally, the structure with as can be used to give a reason.
Tired as she was, I decided not to disturb her. (- Because she was so tired . . .
In American English, as ... as is common.
As cold as it was, we went out.
For the word order in structures like 1 did as good a job as / could, ► 187.
256	than- and as-clauses: leaving out
subjects, etc
1 subjects: more than is necessary; as happened
Than and as can take the place of subjects in clauses (rather like relative
pronouns).
__________________________
______________
He worries more than they came lastyeaft). more than^t/whab-is necessary.)
There were a lot of people at the exhibition - more than came last year.
(not . . . mine than they airne Mtyear.)
The train might be late, as happened yesterday, (not . . . as if happened
yesterday.)
_____
We've got food for as many people as want it. (not . . ■ as they-want il·.)
Common expressions with as in place of a subject: as follows; as was expected;
as was agreed; as is well known.
............	.
grammar · 254 whether ... or .
Other Adverbial Clauses
Section -
I haw prepared a new plan, as follows. (not...
They lost money, as was expected, (not ... HS It WHS expected.)
I am sending you the bill, as was agreed, (not .. . as if was agreed )
As Is well known, smoking is dangerous, (noI As it is wed known ...)
2	objects and complements: as / did last year
than and as can also lake the place of objects and complements.
They sent more vegetables than I had ordered (not .. . than I had
Don 7 lose your passport, as I did last year, (not ... MS I did it last year,)
You're as tired as I am. (not ...eslam rt.)
Some English dialects use what after as and than in these cases.
They sent more paper than what I had ordered, (non standard)
You're as tired as what I am. (non-standard)
grammar
than- and as clauses, leaving out subjects.
Section 24 Noun Clauses, Direct and
Indirect Speech
INTRODUCTION
uses of noun clauses
Clauses can ad as subjects, objects or complements, just like noun phrases.
Clauses used like this are called ‘noun clauses'. Compare:
-	The departure date doesn't matter, (noun phrase subject)
When เพ leave doesn't matter, (noun clause subject)
-	I told them a lie. (noun phrase object)
I told them that I knew nothing about it. (noun clause object)
-	The main thing is your happiness (noun phrase complement)
The main thing is that you’re happy, (noun clause complement)
Noun clauses begin with that and with question words like when, where or who.
They are common in indirect speech, where they can also begin with if
and whether.
direct and indirect speech
When we report people's words, thoughts, beliefs, etc, we can give the exact
words (more or less) that were said, or that we imagine were thought. This kind
of structure is called ‘direct speech' (though it is used for reporting thoughts as
well as speech).
So he said, 7 want to go home.' and just walked out.
She asked. ‘What do you wantr
And then I thought. ‘Does he really mean itr
We can also make somebody's words or thoughts pan of our own sentence,
by using conjunctions with noun clauses, and changing pronouns, tenses and
other words where necessary. This kind of structure is called 'indirect speech’
or 'reported speech'.
So he said that he wanted to go home, and just walked out.
She asked what I wanted.
And then I wondered whether he really meant it.
These two structures cannot normally be mixed.
She said to me, 'I've lost my keys'.
OR She said to me that she had lost her keys.
(■ท NOT She mid to me that I have lost my keys.)
rules for indirect speech
เท many languages, indirect speech structures follow special rules and may have
special tenses or verb forms. เท English, the tenses in indirect speech are mostly
the same as in other structures. Compare:
He was happy and he didn't want to go home.
He said he was happy and didn't want to go home.
He stayed out because he was happy and didn't want to go home.
grammar · Section 24 Noun Clauses, Direct and Indirect Speech
So there is no need for learners to memorise complicated rules for the 'sequence
of tenses' in indirect speech, or to practise converting direct speech to indirect
speech. (Native speakers don’t do this when they arc reporting what people say
or think.) เท a few cases tense use follows special rules: ► 263.
This Section deals with direct speech, indirect speech and other uses of
noun clauses.
Do you know what’s wrong with these, and why?
o You monster! screamed she. » 257.2
o lames wanted to go home liecause he doesn't like that party. ► 258.4
Õ She told me that It has been a wonderful trip. ► 259.2
o He wanted to know what did I need. ► 260.1
Õ We asked where the money was? ► 260.2
Q I am not certain if I sec her tomorrow. ► 260.3
Q The driver said whether I wanted the town centre. ► 260.4
Õ There was a big argument about if we should move. ► 261.2
o They can't decide if to get married. ► 261.3
Q 'Are you happy? If I'm happy?' » 261.5
õ I suggested him to try a different approach. ► 262.3
o The secretary said me not to park there. ► 262.3
Õ The Greeks thought that the sun goes round the earth. ► 263.2
Q That she was foreign made it difficult for her to get a job. » 264.3
fj lhe judge paid no attention to that she had just lost her husband
Q Who do you think that is outside? » 264.8
Õ He replied he was feeling betier. ► 265.1
Q He disagreed with Copernicus' view the earth went round the รนท.
► 265.3
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
257	direct speech: reporting verbs
and word order
258	indirect speech: introduction
259	indirect speech: tenses
260	indirect speech: questions
and answers
261	whether and if
262	indirect speech: infinitives
263	indirect speech: advanced points
264	ฝเ๙·clauses
265	leaving out that
266	interrogative (question-word)
clauses
grammar · Section 24 Noun Clauses, Direct and Indirect Speech
257	direct speech: reporting verbs
and word order
1	informal spoken reports: said, thought
When we repeal people's words or thoughts, we normally use say or think. They
can go before sentences or at other natural breaks (c.g. between clauses or after
discourse markers).
So I said. ‘What are you doing in our bedroom?’ ‘I'm sorry.’ he said. Ί thought
it นพ my room.' Well. I thought. that’s funny, he's got my handbag open.
If that's the case. ’ I said, ‘what are you doing with my handbag?'
2	literary direct speech: ask, exclaim, suggest...
In novels, short stories, etc, a much wider variety of reporting verbs are used: for
example ask, exclaim, suggest, reply, cry. reflect, suppose, grunt, snarl, hiss,
whisper. And reporting verbs arc often put before their subjects (‘inversion’,
►271)
'Is this Mr Rochester's house?' asked Emma
'Great Heavens’ cried Celia. 'Is there no end to your wickedness? I implore
you - leave me alone’ 'Never,' hissed the Duke..,
Inversion is not normal with pronoun subjects.
‘You monster’ she screamed, (not ... screamed sfie.)
เท literary writing, reporting expressions often interrupt the normal flow of the
sentences quoted.
‘Your information.' I replied, 'is out of date.'
3	I was like ...
In recent years the structure be like, meaning 'say*, has become common in
informal speech as a reporting formula, especially when describing people’s
attitudes.
I was like, ‘Why don't you come out with us?', and she was like. ΌΚ. cool,
what time?'
Originally used mostly by young Americans, the structure is now common in the
speech of many people of all ages in both Britain and North America.
I didn't want to be like. 'Please be quiet'. (A university teacher talking about
students chatting in lectures.)
258	indirect speech: introduction
1	change of situation
Words that are spoken or thought เท one place by one person may be reported
in another place at a different time, and perhaps by another person. Because of
this, there are often grammatical differences between direct and indirect speech
Compare:
JAMES (on Saturday evening): I don't like this Itarty I want to go home now.
IACKIE (on Saturday evening): lames says.'said he doesn't like the party, and
he wants to go home.
grammar · 257 direct
: reporting verbs and word order
Noun Clauses, Direct and Indirect speech
Section 24
DANIEL (on Sunday morning): lames said that he didn't like the party, and he
wanted to RO home.
These differences are mostly natural and logical, and it is not necessary to learn
complicated rules about indirect speech in English.
2	pronouns
Λ change of speaker may mean a change of pronoun.
เท the above example, lames says I to refer to himself. Jackie and Daniel, talking
about what lames said, naturally use he.
lames said that he didn't like... (noi lames said thatI dM'Tt like...)
3	'here and now’ words
A change of place and time may mean changing or dropping words like here,
this, now, today. Daniel, reporting what James said, does not use this and now
because he is no longer at the party.
lames said that he didn't like the party,.. I'OI tames said that he didn't like
p<ift¥ I
... he wanted logo home. (.NOT .. . to gr» home now.)
Some other ’here and now' words: next, last, yesterday, tomorrow. Compare:
INDIRECT: she said she'd be back the next week, bat I never saw her again.
-	DIRECT: Anna got her licence last Tuesday.
INDIREC Γ: He said Anna had got her licence the Tuesday before
-	DIRECT: I had an accident yesterday.
INDIRECT: He said he'd had an accident the day before.
DIRECT: We'll be there tomorrow.
INDIRECT: They promised to be there the next day.
4	tenses
A change of time may mean a change of tense.
lames said that he didn't like the party... (not /antes said tint I he doesréfddte
the party... - when Daniel is talking, the party is finished.)
5	dropping that
I he conjunction that is often dropped, especially after common reporting verbs
(c.g. พ/9 think) in informal speech. Por more details, ► 265.
She said (that) she'd had enough. I think (that) you're probably right.
259	indirect speech^tenses
1 past reporting verbs: He said he didn't like the party.
When we report what somebody said or thought, it is usually natural to use
different tenses from the original speaker (because we arc most often talking at a
different time).
JAMES (on Saturday evening): I don’t like this party. I want to go home now.
(present tenses)
DANIEL (on Sunday morning): lames said that he didn't like the party, and he
wanted to go home, (past lenses)	·*
grammar
indirect
tenses
It would be strange for Daniel to say on Sunday ■lames said that he doesn't like
the party', just as it would be strange for Daniel to say, on Sunday, "lames doesn't
like the party yesterday and goes home’. Nie tenses used in indirect speech arc
usually just the tenses that arc natural for the situation. Compare:
lames didn't like the party. lames said he didn't like the party.
lames wanted to go home because he didn't like the party.
The second sentence is an example of indirect speech, but it uses exactly the
same tense as the other two: the one that is natural.
2	examples of natural tense changes after past reporting verbs
simple present -> simple past
DIRECT: I need help.
INDIRECT She thought she needed help.
present progressive -> past progressive
DIRECT: My English is getting belter.
INDIRECT: I knew my English was getting belter,
present perfect -> past perfect
DIRECT:	This has been a wonderful trip.
INDIRECT: She told me that It had been a wonderful trip.
past -» past perfect
DIRECT: Anna grew up in Kenya.
INDIRECT: I found out that Anna had grown up in Kenya.
will > would
DIRECT: The exam will be difficult.
INDIRECT: They said that the exam would be difficult.
can -> could
DIRECT: I can fly!
INDIRECT: Poor chap - he thought he could fly.
may might
DIRECT: IVe may come back early.
INDIRECT: They said they might come back early.
Past perfect tenses do not change.
DIRECT: I arrived late because I had lost the address.
INDIRECT: He said he had arrived late because he had lost the address.
3	would, could, etc: no change
Past modal verbs are usually unchanged in indirect speech.
DIRECT: Il would be nice if u>e could meet.
INDIRECT: He said it would be nice if น'·· could meet.
grammar · 259 indirect speech: tenses
Noun Clauses, Direct and Indirect Speech
Section 24
4	/ told them I was British.
After past reporting verbs, we usually change the original tenses even if the
things the original speaker said are still true.
-	DIRECT: I'm British.
INDIRECT: I told the police I was British. (The speaker is still British.)
DIRECT: You can use my car today.
INDIREC I: Your mother said I could use her car today. Have you got the keys?
-	DIRECT: How old are youใ
INDIRECT: Didn’t you hear me? I asked how old you were.
-	DIRECT: That Is my seat.
INDIRECT: Sorry, I didn't realise this was your seat.
However, it is often also possible to keep the original speaker's tenses
Didn Ί you hear me? I asked how old you are.
For dei.iU, ► Λ3.2
5	No tense change after He says, I'll tell her, etc
After present, future and present perfect reporting verbs, tenses are usually the
same as in the original (because there is no important change of time).
-	DIRECI: I don Ί want to /day any more.
INDIRECT: Hr toys he doesn't want to /day any more.
-	DIRECT: We need some help.
INDIRECT: I'll tell her you need some help.
-	DIRECT: Taxes will be raised.
INDIRECT: The government has announced that taxes will be raised.
260	indirect speech: questions and answers
1 word order: / asked where Alice was.
เท reported questions the subject normally comes before the verb in standard
English, and auxiliary do is not used.
-	DIRECT: where’s Alice?
INDIRECT: I asked where Alice was. (not USUUCY ,.. where was Alice.}
DIRECT: When are you leaving?
INDIRECT: He wanted to know when I was leaving, (not USUAUY ... when was
I leaving.)
-	DIRECT: What do I need?
INDIRECT: she asked what she needed, (noi ... what did she need.)
-	DIRECT:	Where are the President and his wife staying?
INDIRECT: I asked where the President and his wife were staying
(NOI IVJkYr <41 Tf*	,I
The same structure is used for reporting the answers to questions.
I knew how they felt, (sol... น' did they feel.)
Nobody told me why I had to sign the paper.
(not ... why did I have Io sign ...)
She explained what the problem was.
They haven't told me where I'm going to work.	-4
grammar
indirect speech: questions and answers
เท very informal speech, indirect questions sometimes have the same word
order as direct questions:
He asked when was I leaving.
We’re wondering will we get to Cardiff on time, will we be able to park.
2	no question marks
Question marks are not used in reported questions.
We asked where the money was. (not ... where the money was?]
3	yes/no questions: He âsked if...
Yes/No questions are reported with if or whether (for the difference, » 261).
The driver asked if/whether I wanted the town centre.
I don't know if/whether I can help you.
เท reported questions, we do not use a present tense after if to talk about
the future.
I'm not sure if I'll see her tomorrow, (not ... if I see her tomorrow.)
4	say and tell: answers, not questions
Say and teU arc not used to report questions.
B น tMyandUUcmWi troduoT
Please say whether you want the town centre.
He never says where he's going	/ told her what time it was.
Ihe
Mfrence betuern idy «nd ârn. > 572
261	whether and if
1	indirect questions
Whether and if can both introduce indirect questions.
I'm not sure whet her! if I'll have time.
I asked whether If she had any messages for me.
After verbs that are more common in a formal style, whether is preferred,
We discussed whether we should close the shop. (More normal than
We discussed if...)
เท a formal style, whether is usually preferred in a two-pan question with or.
The Directors have not decided whether they will recommend a dividend or
reinvest the profits
If an indirect question Is fronted (► 272), whether is used.
Whether I'll have time I'm not sure at the moment.
2	prepositions
After prepositions, only whether is possible.
there was a big argument about whether we should move to a new house.
I haven't setd^d'rhe^u^t!^ of'whether I'll go back home.
3	infinitives
Whether, but not if, is used before to- infinitives.
They can't decide whether to get married now or wail, (not
if พ»พ married.. 1)
grammar · 261 whether and if
Noun Clauses, Direct and Indirect Speech
Section 24
4	subject, complement and adverbial clauses
When a question-word clause is a subject or complement, whether
is normally preferred.
Whether we can stay with my mother Is another matter, (subject)
The question is whether the man can be trusted, (complement)
The question is tf... is also possible, but less common.
The question is if the man can be trusted.
5	not used in echo questions
If and whether are not normally used in 'echo questions' (► 304).
‘Are you happyr 'Am I happy? No!' (sot ... If'Whether I’m happy' ..)
262	indirect speech: infinitives
1	He promised to write.
Speech relating to actions (e g. promises, agreements, orders, oilers, requests,
advice and suggestions) is often re|X>rted with infinitives.
He promised to write. She agreed to wait for me.
Anna has offered to babysit tonight.
Object ♦ infinitive is common with ask, advise, tell and order (but not normally
with offer).
I told Andrew to be careful
The landlady has asked US to be quiet after nine o'clock.
I advise you to think again before you decide.
The policeman told me not to pari there.
Ill	FT SVร r 4 |>Mz> J1/1 c esfí.urzul
mri	riniiw m·»’ irnvri*· WJIWMVTTTI
2	He asked her how to ...
The structure question word ' infinitive เร common (► Ill) It often
corresponds to a direct question with should.
He asked her how to make a white sauce. ('How should I make
a white sauce?')
Don't tell me what to do.	I've forgotten where to put the keys.
I didn't know whether to laugh or cry.
3	suggest, say: infinitives not used
We do not use infinitive Structures after suggest (► 598) or (usually) after say.
Homer, after these and many other verbs, we can report instructions, etc with
that clauses, usually with modal verbs.
/ suggested that he should try a different approach.
(\x) 7 f	him to try )
The secretary said that I mustn’t park there. (Mil The secretary said me not to
I told Andrew that he ought to be careful.
Subjunctives (► 232) and -ing forms are also possible after some verbs,
e g. suggest. Subjunctives are particularly common เท American English.
I suggested that he try a different approach.
I suggested trying a different approach.
for the mixtures chat are poMlbte alter particular >eà we a ®»a (liethHun
grammar · 262 indirect
: infinitives
263	indirect speech: advanced points
1	reporting past tenses
เท indirect speech, a speaker's past tenses are often reported using past
perfect tenses.
-	เหRUT: I’ve just written to lack.
INDIRECT: She told me she had just written to lack.
-	DIRECT: I saw Penny at the theatre a couple of days ago.
INDIRECT: เท her email, she said she'd seen Penny at the theatre a couple of
days before.
However, past perfect tenses are not always used, especially if the time
relationships are clear without a change from past to past perfect.
This man on TV said that dinosaurs were a round for 250 million years.
(not ... that dinosaurs Wtaff around ...)
I told you lack (had) phoned this morning didn't /?
We were glad to hear you (had) enjoyed your trip to Denmark.
2	reporting present and future tenses
If somebody talked about a situation that has still not changed - that is to say. if
the original speaker's present and future are still present and future - a reporter
can often choose whether to keep the original speaker's tenses or to change
them, after a past reporting verb. Both structures are common.
-	DIRECT The earth goes round the รนท.
INDIRE( T: He proved that the earth goes went round the รนท.
-	DIRECT: How old are you?
IN DIRK T: Are you deaf? I asked how old you are, were.
-	DIRECT: It will he windy tomorrow.
INDIRECT: The forecast said it will, would Ire windy tomorrow.
We are more likely to change the original speaker's tenses if we do not agree
with what he she said, if we are not certain of its truth, or if we wish to make it
clear that the information comes from the original speaker, not from ourselves.
The Greeks thought that the รนท went round the earth. (ร»T.. .-dtM-dte-SHH
Sheftst°sauishe was thirty! I don’t believe her for a moment.
He announced that profits were higher than forecast.
3	modal verbs in indirect speech
lhe modals would, should, could, might, ought and must are usually unchanged
after past reporting verbs in indirect speech. This is also true of needn't (► 532)
and had better (► 77).
-	DIRECT: It would be nice if I could see you again.
INDIRECT: He said it would be nice If he could see me again.
-	DIRECT: Il might Ire too late.
INDIRECT: I was afraid that it might he loo late.
-	DIRECT II must be pretty late. I really must go.
INDIRECT: She said it must be pretty’ late and she really must go.
-	DIRECT You needn't pretend to be sorry.
INDIRECT: I said he needn't pretend...
grammar
indirect speech: advanced points
Noun Clauses, Direct and Indirect speech
Section .
first-person shall and should may be reported as would in indirect speech
(because of the change of person).
DIRECT; We shall should be delighted to come.
INDIRECT: t hey said they would be delighted to come.
4	reporting ‘Shall I..
There are different ways of reporting questions beginning Shall
depending on whether the speaker ■ร asking for information or making an offer.
-	DIRECT: Shall I be needed tomorrow? (BrE, information)
INDIRECT: He wants to know if he will be needed tomorrow.
-	DIRECT. Shall I carry your bag? (offer)
INDIRECT: He wants to know if he shouidcan could carry your bag.
5	conditionals
After past reporting verbs, sentences with if and would are usually unchanged.
DIRECT: It would be best if we started early.
INDIRECT: He said it would be best if they started early.
However, //-sentences that refer to ‘unreal’ situations can change as follows.
DIRECT: If I had any money Cd buy you a drink.
INDIRECT She said If she had had any money, she would hate bought me
a drink, (or She said if she had any money, she would buy...)
b negative questions
Negative questions often express emotions such as surprise or enthusiasm
(» 218), and these are usually reported in special ways.
-	DIRECT: Don't the children like ice cream?
INDIRECT: She was surprised that the children didn't like ice cream.
(SOI She asked if the cMdrea <Mnl Me He ram)
-	DIRECT: Isn't she lovely!
INDIRECT: I remarked how lovely she was. (sor > asked if shew»tat hwely.)
7 word order with what, who and which
Questions beginning who,'what'which ♦ be can ask for a subject or
a complement. Compare:
Who is the best player here? (This asks for a subject: a possible answer is lack
is the best player here.)
What is the lime? (This asks for a complement: a possible answer is The time
is '/	SJQI *10 //ft* /fFA/f* I
Mien we report the first kind of question (where who! what.'which » be asks for
a subject), two word orders are possible.
-	DIRECT: Who’s the best player here?
INDIRECT: She asked me who was the best player.
She asked me who the best player was
-	DIRECT: what's the matter?
INDIRECT: I asked what was the matter.
I asked what the matter was.	-»
grammar · 263 indirect speech: advanced points
- DIRECT: Which is my seat?
INDIRECT: she wondered which was her scat.
She wondered which her seat was.
nils docs IKK normally happen when who! what/which asks for a complement,
except in very informal speech.
DIRECT: what's the lime?
INDIRECT: she asked what the lime was (informally also She asked what was
the time.)
8	She's written I don't know how many books.
Complicated structures can be produced in informal speech when reporting
expressions arc put into sentences with question-word clauses or relatives.
She's written I don't know how many books.
lie’s none I don’t know where.
This is the man who Anna said would tell US about the church.
For mo·’ about rmhnkllnR (dm inUdr rlauM-i) เท «’ท’,al. » MS ร.
9	indirect speech without reporting verbs
เท newspaper, radio and TV reports, reports of parliamentary debates, records of
conferences, minutes of meetings, etc, the indirect speech construction is often
used with very few reporting verbs. The use of tenses is enough IO make it clear
that a text is a report.
The Managing Director began his address to the shareholders by summarising
the results for the year. Profits on the whole had been high, though one or
two areas had been disappointing. It was, however, important to maintain
a high level of investment, and he was sure that the shareholders would
appreciate...
เท literary narrative, similar structures are common. The reported speech
may be made more vivid by using direct question structures and ‘here
and now words.
At breakfast. Daniel refused to go to school why should he spend all his time
sitting listening to Idiots? What use was all that stuff anyway? If he stayed at
home he could read hooks, lie might even learn something useful. His father,
as usual was unsympathetic. Daniel had to go to school, by damn, and he had
belter get moving now, or there’d be trouble.
264	that-clauses
1	that as a connector
That is a conjunction with little real meaning. Il simply functions as
a connector - it shows that a clause forms part of a larger sentence. Compare:
I understood. He was innocent, (two separate sentences)
I understood that he was innocent. (The clause he was innocent has become
the object of the verb in the larger sentence.)
grammar
that-clauses
Noun Clauses, Direct and Indirect Speech
Section 24
that-clauses in sentences
A that clause can be the subject of a sentence, (litis is very formal and unusual.)
That she should forget me so quickly was rather a shock.
Il can be a complement after be.
The main thing is that you're happy.
Many verbs can have dial-clauses as objects.
We knew that the next day would be difficult.
I regretted that I was not going to be al the meeting.
And many nouns and adjectives can be followed by that-clauses.
I admire your belief that you are always right.
The Minister is anxious that nothing should gel into the papers.
the fact that...
It is unusual for that clauses to stand alone as subjects. I hey are more often
introduced by the expression thi fact.
The fact that she was foreign made it difficult for her Io get a job. (not Thai she
The fact that Simon had disappeared didn 't seem to worry anybody.
(More natural than That Simon had disappeared didn't...)
The fact also introduces ài-clauses after prepositions (//wz-clauses cannot
follow prepositions directly).
The judge IMid no attention to the fact that she had just lost her husband.
(not . . paulmraHentimeH^haidwTuul fust...)
He held her completely responsible for the fact that she took food without
payingfor it. (not .โ . fesfumsMejm that she tooA- ..)
เท spite of the fact that she had three small children, he sent her to prison for
six months, (not ht-spHeoffhai she had...)
preparatory it
It is often used as a preparatory subject or object for a r/wz-dause (► 266 269).
It surprised me that he was still in bed. (More natural than That he was still
in bed surprised me.}
She made it clear that she UMS not interested, (not She made that she UMS not
interested dear.)
that·clauses after verbs, nouns and adjectives
Some verbs, nouns or adjectives can be followed by àz-clauses; some cannot.
(Compare:
-	I hope that you will haw a wonderful time.
I want you to haw a wonderful time, (not / uwathatyoH '4Thave ..)
I understood his wish that we should be there.
I understood the importance of our being there, (not ... die importance that
MV should be there.)
-	It's essential that you visit the art museum.
It's worth your visiting the art museum, (noi k+wofdethai you Visit...)
Unfortunately, there is no easy way to decide which nouns, verbs or adjectives
can be followed by l/rOT-clauses. It is best to check in a good dictionary.
grammar · 264 that-clauses
6	should in thaf-dauses: It's important that... should
เท formal Bntish English, should can lx· used in dull-clauses after adjectives and
nouns expressing the importance of an action le g. important, necessary, vital,
essential, eager, anxious, concerned, wish).
Il's important that somebody should talk to the police.
Is it necessary that my uncle should he informed7
I'm anxious that nobody should be hurt.
Il is his wish that the money should be given to charity.
This also happens after some verbs expressing similar ideas, especially เท
sentences about the past.
lit insisted that the contract should be read aloud.
I recommended that she should reduce her expenditure.
เท a less formal style, other structures arc preferred.
It’s important that she talks to me when she gets here.
Was it necessary to tell my uncle?
เท American English, this use of should is unusual; subjunctives may
be used (► 232)7
It's important that somebody talk to the police.
Was it necessary· that my unde be informed7
I recommend that she reduce her expenditure.
7	should in that-clauses: It's surprising that... should
Should is also used in subordinate clauses after words expressing personal
judgements and reactions, especially to facts which are already known or have
already been mentioned. (This use, too, is more common in British than
American English. It is not particularly formal.)
It's surprising that she should say that to you.
I	was shocked dull she shouldn't have invited Phyllis.
I'm sorry you should think I did It on purpose.
Do you think it's normal dull the child should Ise so tiredI
เท American English, would is more usual in this kind of sentence.
II	was natural that they would want him to go to a good school.
(BrE... that they should...)
Sentences like these can also be constructed without should. Subjunctives
cannot be used.
It's surprising that she says said that sort of thing to you.
8	Who do you wish (that) you'd married?
Λ u /r question usually refers to the main clause which starts with the question
word. However, questions can also refer to subordinate i/mt clauses after verbs
like wish, think or say.
Who do you wish (that) you’d married, then7
How long do you think (that) we should wait7
What did you say (that) you wanted for Christmas7
grammar
à,-clauses
Noun Clauses, Direct and Indirect Speech
Section 24
That is usually dropped in cases like these; it must be dropped when the
question word refers to the subject of the subordinate clause.
Who do you think is outside? (not
What do you suppose will happen now? (not What do you suppose that will
happen now?)
9	compound conjunctions
Some conjunctions are made up of two or more words, including that. Common
examples: so that, in order that, provided that, providing that, seeing that, given
that, now that.
I got here early so that we could have a few minutes alone together.
I'll come with you providing that James doesn't mind.
OK, I'll help you, seeing that you asked so nicely.
Given that I'm free on Monday, we could go to Scotland for the weekend.
For the relative pronoun that, ► 233.
265	leaving out that
We can often leave out the conjunction that, especially in an informal style.
1	indirect speech: He said (that) . . .
That can be left out informally after many common reporting verbs.
James said (that) he was feeling better.
I thought (that) you were in Ireland.
The waiter suggested (that) we should go home.
That cannot be dropped after certain verbs, especially verbs that are normally
intransitive - e.g. reply, email, shout.
James replied that he was feeling better, (not James replied he was ■ . .)
She shouted that she was busv. (\t)i	yht* นุ·แ* Ihmv 'i
(not Srb& snouted she was busy.)
2	after adjectives: I'm glad you're all right.
We can leave out that in clauses after some common adjectives.
I'm glad (that) you're all right.	It’s funny (that) he hasn't written.
We were surprised (that) she came.
3	not dropped after nouns
That is not usually dropped after nouns.
I did not believe his claim that he was ill. (More natural than ... his claim he
was ill.)
He disagreed with Copernicus' view that the earth went round the รนท.
(not . . . Copernicus' view the earth went. . .)
4	conjunctions
That can be left out in an informal style in some common two-word
conjunctions, such as so that, such . . . that, now that, providing that, provided
that, supposing that, considering that, assuming that.
Come in quietly so (that) she doesn't hear you.
I was having such a nice time (that) I didn’t want to leave.	-»
grammar · 265 leaving out that
The garden looks nice now (that) we've got some /lowers out.
You can borrow it provided (that) you bring it back tomorrow.
Assuming (that) nobody gels lost, well all meet again here at six o'clock.
5	relative structures
We can usually leave OUI (he relative pronoun that when it is the object in a
relative clause (► 234.4).
l ook! There are the people (that) we met in Brighton.
Do it the way (that) I showed you
266	interrogative (question-word) clauses
besides (heir use เท indirect speech, clauses beginning with question-words
(who, what, where, etc) can act as subjects, complements or adverbiais.
This structure is often rather informal (especially with hou'· clauses, ► 492).
11710 you invite is your business. A hot bath is what I need.
Where we slay doesn't matter. this is how much I’ve done
I'm surprised at how fast she can run.
You can eat it how you like, (very informal)
The 'preparatory if stnicture is often used with subject clauses (► 268).
It's your business who you invite.	It doesn't matter where we stay.
For who, which, etc in relative clauses (e g. the woman who teaches me
Spanish), ► 233; for relative what (e.g. 1*714๙ she said made me angry). ► 236.
grammar · 266 interrogative (question-word) clauses
Section 25 Information Structure
INTRODUCTION
Sentences arc not usually isolated: they mostly fit into longer pieces of
communication, for example written texts or spoken exchanges. So the way we
choose to organise the information in a clause or sentence will parity depend on
things outside the sentence: for example what has been said before, or what is
already known, or what the speaker or Witter wants to emphasise. This is a
complicated area of grammar in all languages. This Section looks at ways เท
which English allows speakers and writers to arrange information เท sentences
effectively, both by using normal sentence structure and by varying the normal
order. The structure of longer texts and exchanges Is looked at เท Sections 26-27.
Do you know what's wrong with these, and why?
o He made that he was not interested clear. ► 267.4
Q It is not comfortable to Sil on this chair. ► 268.7
o It was given the impression that travel expenses would be paid. ► 268.7
ο 1 cannot bear it to see people crying. ► 269.1
Q 1 would appreciate if you would send me a receipt. ► 269.3
o Under no circumstances we can accept late payment. ► 270.7
o Hardly 1 had arrived when trouble started. ► 270.7
Õ Here Freddy comes! ►271.1
Q Here your keys arc. ► 271.1
Q It were the students that were angry. ► 273.1
Õ It’s Greek that her husband is. ► 273.1
o She didn't know where she was when woke up. ► 276.3
Õ Poor little! ► 278.1
Q The most important is to keep calm. ► 278.1
o 'Let's go for a walk’ Ί don’t want.' ► 280.3
Õ There are more flowers here than there used to. ► 280.1
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
267	information structure: normal
order and variations
268	preparatory if. subject
269	preparatory it·. object
270	inversion: auxiliary verb
before subject
271	inversion: full verb
before subject
272	fronting: This question ue have
already discussed.
273	cleft sentences: Il was my
secretary who...
274	cleft sentences: What I need is
275	ellipsis (leaving words out):
introduction
276	ellipsis with and, but and or
277	ellipsis at the beginning of
a sentence
278	ellipsis in noun phrases
279	ellipsis after auxiliary verbs
280	ellipsis: infinitives
grammar . Section 25 Information Structure
267	information structure: normal order
and variations
1	normal order: important new information last
Most often, a clause or sentence moves from ‘known* to 'new': from low to high
Information value. So we often choose as the subject a person or thing that is
already being talked about or that has already been mentioned, or something
that the speaker and hearer are both familiar with, or even some new
information that is not the main point of the message. The important new
information generally comes at the end of a clause or sentence.
‘How's loe these days? Oh. fine. He's just got married to a very nice girl '
(More natural than ...A very nice girl's Just got married to him.)
My lather was bitten by a dog last week. (More natural than A dog bit my
father last week.)
Our dog bit somebody this morning (More natural than Somebody was bitten
by our dog this morning.)
Ί can't find my clothes.' ‘Well, your shirt'ร under my coat:
(More natural than ... My coat's on your shin.)
To avoid immediately beginning a clause with a completely new element, we
can often use the there is structure. Tor details, ► 20.
There's a cat on the roof. (More natural than A cat's on the roof.)
2	choosing the right verb
We can often get the most suitable subject by choosing the right verb. Compare:
- The furniture factory employs 7.000 people.
7,000 people work for the furniture factory.
He led the children through the silent streets.
The children followed him through the silent streets.
3	choosing the right structure
เท many situations, there is an agent' (the person or thing who does something)
and a patient' (the person or thing that something is done to). If we want to
make the agent the subject, we can usually do this by choosing an active
verb form (► 2).
The gale blew Charlotte's roof off.
Somebody's dropped ketchup all over the floor.
if we want to make the patient the subject, we can usually do this by choosing
a passive verb form (► 57).
Charlotte’s roof was blown off by the gale.
Ketchup has been dropped all over the floor.
If we want to make something else the subject, we can often do this by using
a structure with have · object · past participle (► 109.3).
Charlotte had her roof blown off by the gale.
The floor has had ketchup dropped all over it.
grammar
information structure: normal order and variations
Information Structure
Section 25
Structures with have are often used to 'personalise' a situation by making a
person the subject.
I’ve got the house full of children. (instead of The flout·· Is full of children.
OH There are children all over lhe houve.)
4	end-weight: It worried me that she hadn't been เท touch.
longer and heavier structures usually come last เท a clause or sentence.
(These usually have die highest information value' in any case.)
Children are sometimes discouraged by the length of time it takes Io learn a
musical instrument (More natural than lite length of time It takes to learn
a musical instrument sometimes discourages children.)
Because of this, we often use a structure with preparatory” it in order to move a
clause subject or object to the end of a sentence. For details. » 268-269.
It worried me that she hadn’t been in touch for so long (More natural than
That she hadn’t been in touch for so long worried me.)
It’s important to tell US everything you know. (More natural than lo tell US
everything you know is important.)
lie made it clear that he was not เท the least interested. (Mil He-mnde dmi he
Adverbiais do not normally separate the verb from the object เท an English
clause (► 196.1). However, a very long and heavy object may come after a
shorter adverbial. Compare:
She plays the violin very well (s«T She plays very well the violin)
She plays very well almost any instrument that you can think of and several
dint you can’t.
End weight can also affect the word order of indirect questions. Compare:
I’m not sure what the point te-
rm not sure what is the point of spending hours and hours discussing this.
5	changing the order; inversion and fronting
II we move to the end ol a sentence something that does not normally belong
there, this can draw extra attention to it. Fronting (► 272. 299.3) has this effect.
This question we have already discussed.
People like that I just can j stand. He’s a funny guy, old Fred.
Inversion (putting the verb before the subject: ► 271) is not only used for
forming questions. It can also help to structure the flow Ilf information.
Along the road came น strange procession, (highlighting a strange
procession')
6	separating out what is important: cleft sentences
Cleft sentences (► 273-274) separate out one part of a clause for special
attention and put it at the beginning or end. The rest is moved Into the
background, in a relative clause.
It was your child who broke the window, (highlighting your child )
What I need is a good rest (highlighting a good test )
7	dropping what is unimportant: ellipses
If we leave out unnecessary words, this puts more emphasis on the rest, helping
to show what is important. This can happen in various ways in speech and
writing, ► 275- 280.
grammar · 267 information structure: normal order and variations
268	preparatory it: subject
1	It's nice to talk to you.
When the subject of a clause เร an infinitive expression, this does not normally
come at the beginning. We usually prefer to start with the 'preparatory subject'
it, and to put the infinitive expression later (long or complicated items are often
put towards the end of a sentence, ► 267). Preparatory it is common before
be ♦ adjective noun
It's nice to talk to you. (More natural than To talk to you is nice.)
Il was good of you to phone.
It was stupid of you Io leave the door unlocked.
It’s importam Io reserve in advance.
It's my ambition to run น three-hour marathon.
It was a pleasure to listen to her.
Il upsets me to hear people arguing all the time.
Il can also be a preparatory- subject for for · object ♦ Infinitive (► 113).
It will suit me best for you to arrive al about ten o'clock.
It's essential for the papers to be ready before Thursday.
2	It'S probable that we'll be late.
We also use preparatory แ when the subject of a clause is itself a clause
beginning with that, what, how, etc.
It’s probable that we'll be a little late.
It docsn T interest me what you think.
It’s surprising how many unhappy marriages there are
It’s exciting when a baby starts talking.
3	It was nice seeing you.
It can be a preparatory subject for an ing form. This is usually informal.
It was nice seeing you.	It's crazy her going off like that.
It's north going to Wales tf you have the time.
It's no use trying to explain - I'm not interested.
Il surprised me you not remembering my name.
t-or ทน*!· Information about structure Ultfi น*»เท » sir
For rfcr/r Μ Λ preparatory Mibircf Mich any. KO USK. ► 20 2.
4	It takes ... + infinitive
Note the common use of this structure to say how much time
is necessary (► 602).
Il look me months to gel to know her.
How long does it lake to get to London from here?
5	if, as if and as though
It is used to introduce some clauses with if. as if and as though.
Il looks as if we're going to have trouble with Anna again.
Il's not as if this was the first lime she's been difficult.
It will be a pity if we have to ask her to leave.
Hut it looks as though we may have to.
grammar
preparatory it: subject
Information Structure
Section
6	It's amazing the way they work together.
Il is not normally used as a preparatory subject for noun phrases.
lhe new concert hall is wonderful, (not It's woHderfid-lhe-HeHfeoneerf-htM )
But in an Informal style. It can be a preparatory subject for noun .
relative clause,
It's wonderful lhe enthusiasm that lhe children show.
This is very common with the way...
Il’s amazing the way (that) they work together.
It's strange the way you know what I'm thinking.
lor p*Mtvc urvcturn Mith it a* a picparatory subject ► 63.
preparatory it not possible for complements
It can be used as a preparatory subject, or as a preparatory object (► 269), but
not as a preparatory complement.
This chair is comfortable to sit on. Bur NOT It is comfortable to sit O" this chair,
(to sit on is lhe complement of comfortable.)
The impression was given that travel expenses would be paid. Bin MH if wm
given fhe tmpcessioH fhm irHvelestrenses wmM beirmd (that travel
expenses ... is lhe complement of the impression.)
269	preparatory it: object
1	I find it difficult to talk to you.
We can sometimes use it as a 'preparatory object'. This happens when the
object of a verb is an infinitive or a clause, and when this has an adjective or
noun complement. For example, instead of saying Ί find to talk to you difficult',
we prefer 7 find it difficult to talk to you'.
subject · verb · it · complement » infinitive/clause
We found It tiring to listen to him. My blister made it a problem to walk.
I thought it strange that she hadn't written.
George made it clear what he wanted.
It is quite often dropped from make (it) clear that...
The Prime Minister has made clear that he will not allow a free vote.
Note that this structure is not normally used when there is no adjective or noun
complement after the verb.
I cannot bear to see people crying, (noi I carmoi beGr-iffosee-people crymg)
I remember that Ute were very happy, (not l-remember- iifhat...)
But note the structure / like/love/hate it when ...
I love it when you sing. I hate it when s trangers use my first name.
Note also the idiom I take it dull .. l- I assume that...).
I take it that you won't be working tomorrow.
2	I found it Strange being .,.
This structure is also possible with trig form objects.
I found it strange being in her house.	-»
grammar · 269 preparatory it: object
3	I would appreciate it if...
It is used as a preparatory object for an if-clause after would appreciate.
I would appreciate it if you would keep me informed, (noi I would appreciate
if you would...)
4	owe and leave
Note the structures owe it to somebody to... and leave it to somebody to...
We owe it to society to make our country a better place.
I'll leave it to you to decide.
270 inversion: auxiliary verb before subject
We put an auxiliary verb (and non auxiliary have and be) directly before the
subject of a clause in several different structures.
1	questions
//«tv your father and mother arrived? (not Hare arrwed your father and
Where is the concert taking place? (not พ*พ is taking place the com eft?
o· พ*พ the concert It taking place?)
Spoken questions do not always have this word order (► 302).
You’re coming tomorrow?
Indirect questions do not usually have this order (► 260).
I wondered what lime the film was starting (not .. what lime was
the film star Mg )
11 owe ver, in formal «'riling inversion is sometimes used with be in indirect
questions alter how. especially when the subject is long.
I wondered how reliable was the information I had been given.
2	exclamations
Exclamations (► 223) often have the form of negative questions (►218).
Isn't it cold? Hasn 't she got lovely eyes?
เท spoken American English, exclamations often have the same form as ordinary
(non-negative) questions (but with different Intonation).
Have you got a surprise coming!	Was I mad!
เท a rather old-fashioned literary style, inversion is sometimes found in
exclamations after how and what.
How beautiful are the flowers!	What a peaceful place is Skegness'
3	with may
May can come before the subject in wishes.
May all your wishes come true!
4	after so, neither, nor
เท 'short answers’ and similar structures, these words are followed by auxiliary
verb . subject.
‘I'm hungry.' 'So am /.	7 don't like opera.' 'iVeithcr/Nor do /.’
grammar · 270 inversion: auxiliary verb before subject
Information Structure
Section .
5	after as, than and so
Inversion sometimes happens after as, than and so in a literary style.
She นพ very religious, as were most of her friends.
City dwellers have a higher death rate than do country people.
So ridiculous did she took that everybody burst out laughing
6	conditional clauses: Were she my daughter...
เท formal and literary conditional clauses, an auxiliary verb can he put Indore
the subject instead III using (/(► 244 5)
Were she my daughter .. (- If she were my daughter...)
Had I realised what you intended... (■ If I had realised ...)
Negatives arc not contracted in this case.
Had we not spent all our money already,... (nor Hadn't we spent...)
7	after negative and restrictive expressions: At no time was he ...
If a negative adverb or adverbial expression is put at the beginning of a clause
for emphasis, it is usually followed by auxiliary verb · subject. These structures
are mostly rather formal.
Under no circumstances can we accept late payment.
At no time นพ the President aware of what was happening
Not until much later did she learn who her real father was.
The same structure is possible after a complete clause beginning not until...
Not until he received her letter did he fully understand her feelings.
Inversion is also used after restrictive words like hardly (เท BrE), seldom, rarely,
little and never, and after only ♦ time expression. This is formal or literary.
Hardly had I arrived when trouble started. (BrE)
Seldom have I seen such a remarkable creature.
Little did he realise the danger he faced.
Never... นพ so much owed by so many to so few. (Churchill)
Only then did I understand what she meant.
Only after her death was I able to appreciate her.
Not only did we lose our money, but we were nearly killed.
Not a single word did he say.
Inversion is not used after not far... and not long...
Not far from here you can see foxes, (nor Notfaf-fromdteeecany&u. ..)
Not long after that she got married.
271	inversion: full verb before subject__________________
1 after adverbial expressions of place: Along the road came ...
When an adverbial expression of place or direction comes at the beginning of a
clause, intransitive verbs arc often put before their subjects. Ihis happens
especially when a new indefinite subject is being introduced. The structure is
most common in literary and descriptive writing.
Under a tree was lying one of the biggest men I had ever seen.
On the grass sat an enormous frog
Directly in front of them stood a great castle.
Along the road came a strange procession.	-<
grammar » 271 inversion: full verb before subject
This structure is often used เท speech with here, there and other short adverbs
and adverb panicles.
Here comes Freddy', (no I Here Freddy Cowes')
there goes your brother.
I stopped the car, and up walked a police officer.
the door opened and out came Angela's boyfriend.
If the subject IS a pronoun, it goes before the verb.
Here she comes, (sot Here comes sb»)	Off we go’.
Inversion is normal in here!there ts/are___
Here are your keys, (not Here your keys are.)
l.ook - there'ร the bus.
เท Informal speech, here's and there's often introduce plural subjects (► 130.6).
Here’s those papers you wanted.
2	reporting: 'What do you mean?' asked Henry.
In story telling, the subject often comes after reporting verbs like said, asked,
suggested, etc when these follow direct speech.
'What do you mean?’ asked Henry, (or ... Henry asked.)
Ί lore you, ’ whispered less.
If the subject is a pronoun, it usually comes before the verb.
‘Mint do you mean?’ he asked.
272	fronting: This question we have
already discussed.
1	People like that I just can't stand.
.Affirmative sentences most often begin with the grammatical subject.
I just can’t stand people like that.
If we begin a sentence with something else (‘fronting’), this is often to make it
the topic the thing we are talking about even though it is not the
grammatical subject. This can also move the main new information to the end -
its most natural position (► 267).
this question we have already discussed al some length.
All the other information which you need I am sending today.
(from a business letter)
Any video in our catalogue we can supply, if available, (notice เท music shop)
Fronting is particularly common in speech.
People like that I just can Ί stand.	These books I’m just going to give away.
(A) fat lot of good that does me. (- That doesn’t do me much good', hut
putting strong emphasis on me.)
Question-word clauses (► 266) are often fronted.
Mint I’m going to do next I just don’t know.
How she got the gun through customs we never found out.
2	Very good lesson we had.
Fronting words in short sentences can also give them extra emphasis.
This happens mostly in speech.
Strange people they are'	Very good lesson we had yesterday.
grammar - 272 fronting: this question we have already discussed.
Information Structure
Section 25
last for ever these shoes will
เท a few exclamatory expressions, a noun is fronted before that, but this is
uncommon เท modern English.
Fool that I was.'
3	adverbs, etc: Off we go!
•Many adverbs and adverbial expressions can go at the beginning of a clause
(► 196-198). This often happens when we are using the adverbs to structure a
piece of narrative or a description.
Once upon น time there were three little pigs. One day... Then ... Soon after
that... After dark....
Inside the front door there is... Opposite the living room is... On the right
you can see... At the top of lite stairs ...
Adverb panicles are often fronted when giving instructions to small children.
Off we go!	Down you come!
Inversion (► 270-271) is necessary after some emphatic fronted adverbs and
adverbial expressions
Under no circumstances can tickets be exchanged, (not Under no
hound the corner came Mrs Porter.
4	fronting with as or though
f ronted adjectives and adverbs arc possible เท a structure with as
or though (► 255).
Young as I was. I realised what um happening.
Tired though she was, she went on working.
Fast though she drove, she could not catch them.
Much as I respect his work, I cannot agree with him.
à 'ท»'·** on	»«<i orótf (» 2,5). normal«ml «.ruoon. (· 2»?). •ร)»«เทe 0๙ UtfonnMon
prcrh(»2M.I).Ufti(»2M3) and deft >«MtncM(»2?3-27«)
273	cleft sentences: It was my secretary who .. .
We can emphasise particular words and expressions by putting everything into a
๒ทd of relative clause except the words we want to emphasise: this makes them
stand out. These structures are called ‘deft sentences’ by grammarians (deft
means divided). They are useful in writing (because we cannot use intonation
for emphasis เท written language), but they are also common in speech,
rhe emphasis is often contrastive - to contradict a false belief or expectation.
1	preparatory it
เท one kind of cleft sentence, we use preparatory it is!was (► 268). The words to
be emphasised are usually joined to the relative clause by that.
Compare:
My secretary sent the bill to Mr Harding yesterday.
It was my secretary that sent the bill to Mr Harding yesterday.
(not somebody else)	·♦
Ϊ2 ί
grammar. 273 cleft sentences: It was my secretary who
It was the bill that my secretary sent to Mr Harding yesterday.
(not something else)
It was Mr Harding that my secretary sent the bill to yesterday.
(not to somebody else)
It was yesterday that my secretary sent the bill to Mr Harding.
(not another day)
Negative structures are also possible.
It wasn't my husband that sent the bill. . .
Who is possible instead of that when a personal subject is emphasised.
It was my secretary who sent. ..
When a plural subject is emphasised, the following verb is plural (but it is /was
remains singular).
It is the students that are angry, (not . . ,-d that is พ1//1?·)
It was his parents who paid the fees, (not It were his parents . . .)
The verb cannot be emphasised with this structure: we cannot say It was sent
MMM MÉa À'u	Im Λ II
rrriTi ΠΓΤ “ไ miff γ ΓΠΓ Trnt.
Nor can a complement be emphasised: we cannot say It's Jenny that Mr
Harding's secretary^
2 It is I who . ..; It is me that.. .
When an emphasised subject is a pronoun, there are two possibilities. Compare:
-	It is I who am responsible, (formal)
It's me that'ร/who's responsible, (informal)
-	It is you who are in the wrong, (formal)
It's you that's in the wrong, (informal)
To avoid being either too formal or too informal in this case, we could say, for
example, I'm the person / the one who's responsible.
274	cleft sentences: What I need is a rest
1 What I need is ...
In this kind of cleft sentence, the words to be emphasised are connected to a
what-dause (or similar structure) by is/was.
A rest is what I need.
A motorbike is what Emily kept in the garden shed.
The words to be emphasised are often put last: this gives them even more force.
What I need is a rest.
What Emily kept in the garden shed was a motorbike.
This structure can be used to emphasise a complement.
The secretary is what Jake is, actually, (or Actually, what Jake is
is the secretary.)
To emphasise words that refer to people, we use structures like the person who.
The person who kept a motorbike in the garden shed was Emily.
Instead of what or the person, we can use less general expressions.
'Casablanca' is a film (that) I watch again and again.
You're the woman (that) I always see in my dreams.
grammar · 274 cleft sentences: What I need is a rest.
Information Structure
Section 25
A whatdaนse is normally considered to be singular; if it begins a cleft sentence
it is followed by is/waร. But a plural verb is sometimes possible before a plural
noun in an informal style.
Whal ur want israre some of those cakes.
the place where ..the day when ..the reason why ...
We can use these expressions to emphasise a place, time or reason.
-	fake spent Tuesday IN LONDON.
London was the place where lake spent Tuesday.
The place where lake spent Tuesday was London.
-	lake went to London ON TUESDA Y.
Tuesday was the day when that lake went to London.
The day when lake went to London was Tuesday.
-	lake went to London TO SET. TOM.
To see Tom was the reason why lake went to London.
The reason why lake went to London was to see Tom.
The place, the day or the reason can be dropped in an informal style, especially
เท the middle of a sentence.
Spain'ร where we're going this year.
Why I'm here is to talk about my plans. (More formal: The reason why I'm
here is...)
emphasising verbs: What he did was...
When we want to emphasise a verb (or an expression beginning with a verb), we
have to use a more complicated structure with what.. .do. Infinitives with and
without to are possible.
What he did was (to) scream. What she does is (to) write science fiction.
Instead of an infinitive, we often use subject + verb in an informal style.
Whal she does is, she writes science fiction.
What I'll do is. I'll phone lack and ask his advice.
เท a very informal style, is/was may be dropped.
What I'll do, I'll have a word with Dan.
แ hat they did, they took his money and then just vanished.
emphasising a whole sentence: What happened was that...
A whole sentence can be given extra emphasis by using a cleft structure with
what and the verb happen. Compare:
The car broke down.
What happened was (that) the car broke down.
Other structures
All (that), and expressions with thing, can be used in cleft sentences.
All I want is a home somewhere. All you need is love.
All (that) I did was (to) touch the window, and it broke.
The only thing I remember is a terrible Isain in my head.
The first thing was to make some coffee.
My first journiy abroad is something I shall never forget·	-*
grammar · 27'1 cleft sentences: What I need is
Time expressions can be emphasised with แ นพ not until... and It was only
when...
It was not until I met you that I knew real happiness.
It was only when I read her email dull I realised what was happening.
At the beginning of a cleft sentence, this and that often replace emphasised here
and there. Compare:
You pay here.
This is where you pay. (oe Here is where you pay.)
- We live there.
Dial's where we live, (on There's where we live.)
quratNXVH'ird ebut
il information about
(hr atrangrm
275	ellipsis (leaving words out): introduction
We often leave out words to avoid repetition, or in other cases when the
meaning can be understood without them. This is called ‘ellipsis'.
1	replies
เท replies we usually avoid repealing information that has just been given.
■ What time are you comingT ‘About ten.' (More likely than ‘I'm coming
about ten'.)
' Who said thatT 'lack.' (More likely than 7ack said that".)
How many chairs do you needT 'Three.' (More likely than Ί need
three chairs'.)
'She’s out this evening?'' Yes, working.' (More likely than 'Yes, she's working
this evening.)
2	structures with and, but and or
Repeated words are often dropped เท co-ordinate structures (► 276).
a knife and fork (ะ a knife and a fork)
She was poor but happy. (=...but she was happy.)
3	at the beginning of a sentence
เท informal speech, unstressed words are often dropped at the beginning of a
sentence, if the meaning is clear. For details, ► 277.
Seen Lucy? (= Have you seen Lucy?)
Doesn't know what she's talking about. (- She doesn’t...)
4	at the end of a noun phrase
Il is sometimes possible to drop nouns after adjectives, noun modifiers and/or
determiners. For details, ► 278.
Do you uant large eggs?’ 'No. I'll haw small' ( ... small eggs.)
My car isn't working, i'll have to use Emily's (=.1. Emily's car.)
We're going to hear the London Philharmonic tonight. (ะ... the London
Philharmonic Orchestra.)
Which shoes arc you going to wearT 'These.' (ะ These shoes.)
grammar » 275 ellipsis (leaving words out): introduction
Information Structure
Section 25
5	at the end of a verb phrase
Auxiliary verbs are often used alone instead of full verbs. For details, ► 279.
7	haven't paid.' Ί haven't either.’ (-...! haven’t paid either.)
She said she'd phone, hut she didn't. (ะ:... didn't phone.)
This type of ellipsis can include complements that follow the verb.
I was planning to go to Paris next week, but I can't. (-___I can't RO to Paris
next week.)
The same structures are possible with non auxiliary be and hal f.
I thought she would be angry, and she was.
He says he hasn't any friends, but I know he has.
6	infinitives
We can use to instead of repeating a whole infinitive. For details, ► 280.
‘Are you and Gillian getting marriedI" 'We hope to.' (- We hope
to get married.)
I don't dance much now, but I used to a lot.
Sometimes a whole infinitive, including to. is left out.
Come when you want. (- ... when you want to come.)
‘Have a good time.' 'I'll try.' (- i’ll try to have a good time.)
7	comparative structures with as and than
We can leave out words after as and than, if the meaning is clear.
The weather isn’t as good as last year. (ะ... as It was last year.)
I found more blackberries than you. (=..1 than you found.)
8	question-word clauses
Clauses can be dropped after question words.
Somebody has been stealing our flowers, but I don't know who. (ะ... I don’t
know who has been stealing our flowers.)
Become a successful writer. This book shows you how.
9	that and relative pronouns
In an informal style, the conjunction that is often dropped (► 265); object
relative pronouns can also be dropped (► 234.4).
I knew (that) she didn't want to help me.
this is the restaurant (which) I was talking about.
10	reduced relative structures: the tickets available, etc
We can sometimes leave out a relative pronoun and the verb he before
participles, or adjectives such as available, possible. For details. ► 237. II.
Who's the girl dancing with your brother? (ะ___who IS dancing...)
It will not be possible to finish the job เท the time available
[ร... that is available.)
11	be after conjunctions
Subject pronouns with forms of Ire can be left out after certain conjunctions,
especially เท a formal style.
Start when ready. (=.1. when you are ready.)
grammar · 275 ellipsis (leasing words out): introduction
Though intelligent, he was very poorly educated.
(= Though he was intelligent...)
When ordering please send ε I.so for postage and packing.
Phone me if (it is) necessary.	He had a small heart attack white asleep.
Leave in Olfen until browned on top.
12	prepositions
In an informal style, prepositions can be dropped in a few time expressions
(► 214.2-214.6).
See you (on) Monday night.
We're staying here (for) another three months.
What lime shall I come? (More natural than At what lime.. .?)
13	pronouns after prepositions
เท British English, pronoun objects can sometimes be dropped after
prepositions. This happens, for example, when have or with are used in
descriptive structures.
My socks have got holes in (them).
I’d like a piece of toast with butter on (It).
14	abbreviated styles
เท certain styles, many or all non-essential words can be dropped.
For details, ►291.
Take 500g butter and place in small saucepan.
Single man looking for flat Oxford area.
DOG FINDS HOMAN TREASURE
276	ellipsis with and, but and or
1	various kinds of word left out
When expressions are joined by and. but or or, we often leave out repeated
words or phrases of various kinds.
a knife and (a) fork	antique (furniture) or modern furniture
these men and (these) women เท France. (เท) Germany or (เท) Spain
ripe apples and (ripe) pears She can read, but (she) can t write.
The Minister likes golf but (the Minister) hates fishing
We drove (across America), rode (across America), flew (across America) and
walked across America.
She was poor but (she was) happy.
The food (is ready) and the drinks are ready.
lake (washed the dishes) and Sophie washed the dishes.
We can sometimes drop a verb that is repeated in a different form.
I hate always paid my bills and I always will (pay...).
grammar · 276 ellipsis with and. but and
Information Structure
Section 25
2	word order
Note that when two verbs, objects, etc are the same, it is not always the second
that is left out. We may have to leave out the first to avoid confusion, or to
produce a simpler word order and sentence structure.
Cats (catch mice) and dogs catch mice, {not < >๗:· ettfehtmeeurn!	)
I can (go) and will go.
เท informal speech and writing, ellipsis does not usually interrupt the normal
word order of a clause or sentence. Sentences like the following are typical of a
more formal style.
Daniel planned and Megan paid /or the trip, (less formal: Daniel planned the
trip and Megan paid for it.)
Kevin likes dancing and Annie athletics, (less formal: Kevin likes dancing and
Annie likes athletics.)
The children will carry the small boxes and the adults the large ones
Megan went to Greece and Alice to Home.
You seem, and she certainly is ill.
3	other conjunctions
Ellipsis is not normally possible after other conjunctions besides and. but and or.
She didn’t know where she was when she woke up. (not ... when woke up )
However, ellipsis of subject pronouns with forms of be it possible in some cases
(eg. if possible, when arriving). ► 115.6, 244.6, 251.5.
4	(and) then
เท an informal style, ellipsis is sometimes possible after then, even if
Daniel started first, (and) then Tom (started).
For tlngubr or ptur.ll verbs «her e«prc»ions with and or or. ► I» 4.
For tinguUr and plural verbi with nrtihff ΛΟΓ, » 22·.
277	ellipsis at the beginning of a sentence
1	words that can be left out
เท informal spoken English we often leave out unstressed words at the beginning
of a sentence if the meaning is clear without them. Words that can be left out
include articles (the. a/an). possessives (my. your, etc), personal pronouns
(/, you. etc), auxiliary verbs (am, have, etc) and the preparatory subject there.
Car's running badly. (= The car's...)
Wife's away. (ท My wife’s ...)
Couldn't understand a word. (- I couldn't...)
Must dash. (- I must dash.)
Won't work, you know. (- It won’t work ...)
Seen )oe?(= Have you seen loe?)
Keeping well, I hope?(a You're keeping well...)
Nobody at home. (= There’s nobody at home.)
Careful what you say. (- Be careful...)	■*
grammar · 277 ellipsis at the beginning of a sentence
Catch up with you later, l- I’ll catch up ...)
Leave al half past? ( Should we leave ...?)
Soon as I wake up, I check my messages. (= As soon as...)
This structure IS common ill advertisements. Two real examples:
Dunking of postgraduate study? Call for a Idace now. (ะ Are you thinking...?)
Speak a foreign language' Speak it better. I- 1)0 you speak ...?)
2	unstressed forms of be, will, would, have
We do not usually drop words so as to begin sentences with unstressed forms of
เพ, will, would or auxiliary' have (though this sometimes happens in messages,
diary entries and other kinds of very informal writing).
I’m coming tomorrow, on (Àiming tomorrow, (not Am coming tomorrow.
Am is not stressed.)
I’ll see you soon. OH See you soon, (not Mil see you soon. Will is not stressed.)
Haven't seen him. (sin NOT Have seen him. Have is not stressed.)
3	before pronouns: You ready?
Auxiliary verbs can be left out before personal pronouns except I and it.
You ready? (ะ Are you ready?)
She want something? (= Does she want something?)
nut NOT I late? li raining?
4	Dutch, aren't you?
ellipsis is very common in sentences that have some son of tag (► 305, 306,
► 299) on the end. especially tn British English.
CanΊ swim, myself. Like a cigar, I do Dutch, aren’t you?
Gelling in your way, am I? Going camping your kids?
278	ellipsis in noun phrases
1	ellipsis after adjectives: boiled, please
A repeated noun can sometimes be dropped after an adjective, if the meaning is
clear, especially when one is talking about common kinds of choice.
'What kind of potatoes would you like?''Hoiled (potatoes), please.'
We haven Ί got any hrown sugar. Only white (sugar).
This often happens after superlatives.
I think I'll buy the cheapest.
fat other Mrutturrs เท which ad|c<Q.et are นพง wwhout ททนท,. . lea
2	ellipsis after this, numbers, possessives, etc
Nouns can also be dropped after most determiners (► Sections 12-13), if the
meaning is clear.
this ts Ella's coat, and that (coat) is mine.
this also happens after numbers, nouns with possessive 'ร. own and (anfather.
I'm not sure how many packets I need, hut I'll take two (packets) to start with.
Our train'ร the second (train) from this platform.
You lake Dan 's car. and I'll take Susie's (car).
'Can I borrow your penT 'No, find your own (pen).'
' Ihat beer went down fast.' ‘Have another (เพer).’
grammar · 278 ellipsis in noun phrases
Information Structure
Section 25
3	well-known names
The last words of well-known names are often dropped.
She's playing the Beethoven with the Scottish National tomorrow night.
(-... the Beethoven violin concerto with the Scottish National Orchestra ...)
He’s staying at the Hilton. . the Hilton Hotel.)
We're going to see ‘Hamlet at the Mermaid, {- ... the Mermaid Theatre.)
When we talk about people's homes, and about shops and offices, possessives
are often used without following nouns.
We spent the weekend at lack and Emily's.
Could you pick up some chops from the butcher’s'
I'm going to call in at the doctor’s on the way home.
4	Other situations
Note that nouns are not normally dropped in other situations.
Poor little boy.1 (not Poor littleÓ
The most important thing is to keep calm, {not The most important K to...)
279	ellipsis after auxiliary verbs _____________________
1	auxiliary instead of complete verb phrase
We can avoid repetition by using an auxiliary verb instead of a complete verb
phrase, if the meaning is dear. The auxiliary verb usually has a 'strong·
pronunciation (► 315), and contractions (► 337) are not normally used
except in negatives
'Get up.' 7 am ΐχπν: (- I am getting up.)
He said he’d write, but he hasn't. (-... hasn't written.)
I 'll come and see you when I can. (■ ... can come and see you.)
'Shalt I tell him what I think?' 7 wouldn't if I were you.'
Do can be used before ellipsis if there is no other auxiliary to repeat.
I may come to London. I'll phone you if I do.
He said he would arrive before seven, and he did.
Other words, as well as the rest of the verb phrase, can be left out
after the auxiliary.
I can't see you today, but I can tomorrow. (- ... I can see you ...)
'l’ve forgotten the address.' 7 have too."
‘You're not trying very hard: Ί am.'
'You wouldn't have won if / hadn't helped you.' ‘Yes, I would (have):
This also happens after non auxiliary be and have.
'I'm tired: 7 am too.'	' Who’s the driverr 7 am:
'Who has a dictionary?1 7 have:
2	short answers, etc: Yes, I have.
Ellipsis is used regularly in short answers (► 308), reply questions (► 307) and
question tags (► 305-306).
'Have you finished?' ‘Yes, I have.'
' I can whistle through my fingers.' 'Can you, dear?"
You don Ί want to buy a car, do you?
grammar · 279 ellipsis after auxiliary verbs
3	so am I, etc
Ellipsis also happens after so, neither and nor (► 309). Note the word order.
'I've forgotten the address.' 'So have I.'
She doesn't like olives, and neither do I.
4	ellipsis before complete form: If you tan, call me ...
Ellipsis normally happens when an expression IS used for a second time, after
the complete form has already been used once (see above examples). However,
it can sometimes happen the other way round. This is common in sentences
beginning with if.
If you can, call me when you arrive.
If you could. I'd like you to help me this evening.
If you prefer, lie can go tomorrow instead.
5	more than one auxiliary: I could have been.
When there is more than one auxiliary, ellipsis usually happens after the first.
‘You wouldn't have enjoyed the film.' 'Yes, I would: (=...! would have
enjoyed the him.)
However, more auxiliaries can be included. The first is stressed.
‘Could you have been dreamingτ 7 suppose I could COULD have / COULD
have been:
We often include a second auxiliary verb if it has not appeared before เท the
same form.
7	think Emily should be told: 'She has been." (More natural than ...She has.)
And we normally include a second auxiliary verb after a change of
modal auxiliary.
'Emily should be told: ‘She must be.' (More natural than ... She must.)
6	substitution with do: He might do.
เท British English, a main verb that is left out after an auxiliary can be replaced
by do. For details, ► 2».
7)0 you think he'll phoner ‘He might do.' (AmE ... He might.)
x>, 4o I«•พ
280	ellipsis: infinitives
1	to used instead of whole infinitive: We hope to.
We can use to instead of the whole infinitive of a repeated verb (and following
words), if the meaning is clear.
Are you and Gillian getting marriedr ' We hope to.'
'Let's go for a walk: 7 don 't want to.'
I don't dance much now, but I used to a lol.
Sorry I shouted at you. I didn't mean to
‘Somebody ought to clean up the bathroom.' 771 ask lack to.'
grammar · 280
ellipsis: infinitives
Information Structure
Section 25
Be and have (used (or possession) are not usually dropped.
7	here are more flowers than there used to be. (not ... than there used to.)
She hasn't been promoted yet. hut she ought to be. (not ... but she ought to.)
You've got more freckles than you used to have, (noi You've got more freckles
lhartyouusedlo.)
ellipsis of whole infinitive: I'll try.
In some cases the whole infinitive can be left out. This happens after nouns
and adjectives.
He'll never leave home; he hasn't got the courage (to).
You can't force him to leave home if he's not ready (to).
It also happens after verbs which can stand alone without a following Infinitive.
■Can you start the car? TH try (to).'
(would) like, want, etc
We cannot usually leave out to after would like! love! hate I prefer, want and
'Are you Interested In working abroadΎ ‘I'd like to. ' (not ... I'd like.)
My parents encouraged me to study art, but I didn't want to.
(ΚΥΎΤ	J diüin F UNinl ไ
V"*1 · · · ■ WW’« ■ พห»»»! f
However, to is often dropped after want, and almost always after like, when
these arc used after certain conjunctions - for instance àn. if, urhat. as.
Come when you want (to).	Hl do what I like.
Stay as long as you like.
grammar
ellipsis: infinitives
Section 26 Written Texts
INTRODUCTION
spoken and written language
Writers can pause, reflect, recast and revise, producing if they wish material with
a high level of complexity. Speakers, composing in real time, are limited by
working memory capacity· in their ability to build up and keep track of elaborate
structures Equally, readers are far better able than listeners to decode complex
material: one can read as slowly as one likes, backtracking as necessary, but one
cannot listen at one's own speed.
Because of this, writing tends towards 'architectural' structuring, with relatively
dense packaging of information, while speech favours more linear, chained
structures, with information-bearing elements more spaced out. The average
length of an English clause in speech is seven words; เท formal writing the
average can be double this. Written noun phrases can become very complex,
with determiners, adjectives, nouns and postmodifying structures all clustering
round a head noun. Spoken noun phrases generally contain few modifiers;
subjects most often consist of a single pronoun.
The gap between speech and writing has narrowed a great deal since the 19th
century. เท those days formal writing enjoyed very high prestige and could be
extremely elaborate, while informal speech was seen as a kind of low-level
badly-structured 'poor relation'. Since that time, grossing democratisation has
led to increased respect for the language of‘ordinary people'. Much modern
writing is far closer to speech in its structure and vocabulary, and the growth of
informal written communication through electronic media is helping to narrow
the gap still further.
Nonetheless, speech and writing are separate channels of communication and
each has its own necessary grammatical characteristics, l or people - both native
speakers of English and language learners - who need to be able to handle
formal written texts, the conventions of formal writing still have to be learnt.
This is especially the case for those who plan to use English เท a university-
setting - academic English has its own characteristics.
This Section deals with some of the more important elements of formal writing,
especially those which affect text construction and comprehension. Note that
some of what is said here naturally applies also to more formal types of spoken
text: for example the language of spoken reports, political speeches or lectures.
grammar
Section 26 Written Texts
Do you know what's wrong with these, and why?
Q Dad’s just cut Dad shaving. ► 282
Q Lucy told Alice she had made a bad mistake. ► 282.2
Q The wall. It needed painting. ► 282.3
o The results were disappointing for the third year running, consequently
it was decided to close three of the smaller branches. ► 283.1
o He confessed to 114 murders; the police did not believe, however, his
story. ► 283.3
o The banks have raised interest paid monthly rates. ► 285.1
o We planned wonderful plans. ► 287.1
o Dear Mr lames Carter,... ► 289 Note 6
Õ Dear Ms Williams, How are you getting on? ► 289 Note 13
Q She phoned me. As soon as she arrived. ► 293.1
Q I asked her what time it was? ► 293.3
o rhe standard of living of the dock workers, was slowly improving.
Q Many of them were able to begin buying, their own homes. ► 296.1
o The mainly foreign, labourers formed a large part of the work force.
Q Many commentators declared, that the economy was in serious
trouble. ► 296.6
o No one knew, how serious die situation would become. ► 296.6
Õ a green red and gold carpet ► 296.9
o Have you met our handsome, new, financial director? ► 296.9
Q The truck weighs 3.5 tons. ► 296.11
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
281	formality
282	pronouns and other proforms
283	linking with conjunctions
and adverbiais
284	discourse markers in writing
285	reading complicated structures
286	paragraphs
287	repetition
288	academic writing
289	correspondence: letters
289 correspondence: emails, text
messages, etc
291	abbreviated Styles
292	headlines
293	punctuation: full stop, question
mark and exclamation mark
294	punctuation: colon
295	punctuation: semi colon
296	punctuation: comma
297	punctuation: dash
298	punctuation: quotation marks
grammar - Section 26 Written Texts
281	formality
1	formal and informal language
Most people speak and write in different ways on different occasions. In some
languages, for example, there are very complicated rules about how to speak to
older or more Important people. English does not have a system of this kind.
However, there are some words and structures which are mostly used in formal
situations, when people are careful about how they express themselves: for
example in official notices, business letters or reports, meetings or conferences,
or polite conversations with strangers. And some words and structures are
mostly used in informal situations: for example in conversations with friends, or
emails to one's family. Writing is more often formal, and speech is more often
informal, but informal writing and formal speech are used when the situation
makes them preferable.
Customer toilets arc at the rear of the building, (printed notice in an
Oxfordshire petrol station)
The toilets are outside round the back, (handwritten notice เท the same petrol
station, put up perhaps because the manager felt this would be easier for
some of his customers to understand)
Most words and expressions are neither formal nor informal, but neutral -
English speakers do not have to know two ways of saying everything.
2	grammar
Some grammatical structures have different formal and informal versions.
For example, contracted auxiliary verbs and negatives (► 337) arc common in
informal speech and writing. Compare:
FORMAL- It has gone. It is not possible.
INFORMAL It’s gone. Il isn't possible.
Prepositions come at the end of certain structures in Informal language (► 209).
Compare:
FORMAL- เท which century did he live?
INFORMAL Which century did he live in?
Some relative structures arc different (► 234). Compare:
FORMAL: The man whom she married__
INFORMAI.: The man she married,..
Some determiners arc followed more often by singular verb forms in formal
language, and by plural forms in informal language (► 156.2, 157.2). Compare:
FORMAL Neither of US likes him.
INFORMAL Neither of us like him.
Subject and object forms of pronouns (e g. I and me) are used differently in
formal and informal language (► 174). Compare:
- FORMAI- Il was she who first saw what to do.
INFORMAL It was her that first saw what to do.
FORMAL Whom did they elect?
INFORMAL Who did they elect?
grammar · 281 formality
Written Texts
Section 26
Ellipsis (leasing out words, ► 275-280) เร more common เท informal language.
Compare:
-	FORMAL- Have you seen Mr Andrews?
INFORMAL Seen lack?
-	FORMAI.· We think that if is possible.
INFORMAL We think it's possible.
For WMm นพป เท point lequMM and qufMkinc » 310-312.
For ditrrvninjcory and offensive language, ► 335. For «lang ► 334
For lhe M of M.๗. due grammar and vtK JbUary in crnxmin and other situations. ► 3IH.I0
282	pronouns and other proforms
1	avoiding unnatural/ungrammatical repetition
When we refer again to a person or thing that has already been mentioned, we
normally use a pronoun (e g, he, she, it) instead of repeating the original noun
phrase. When the reference is very close to the original mention, repetition
(unless there is a special reason for it) is usually not only unnatural,
but ungrammatical.
AkM changed her job because she was unhappy with the conditions.
(More normal than ... because Rachel was unhappy with the conditions.)
The suggestion was understandably ignored: the management
disapproved õf it.
(More normal than ... the management disapproved of the suggestion )
there were times when Cartwright hated himself
(not . · ( art upright hail'd ( drtu 'fight)
This kind of thing happens with other wvrds besides nouns.
He did not smoke, but his wife did (More normal than ... hut his
wife smoked.)
they were not sure whether the road was open, but they believed so.
(More normal than ... they believed that the road was open.)
The Royal Hotel was highly recommended, so the party agreed to Slay there.
(More normal than ... to stay at the Royal Hotel.)
However, repetition is necessary and normal when alternatives are discussed.
She was offered potatoes or nee. and decided on rice.
The only options were to dance or to go for a walk: they went for a walk.
2	avoiding ambiguity
When pronouns such as he, she, it arc used, it is important to make sure the
reference is clear.
Lucy told Alice she had made a had mistake. (Who made the mistake?)
Here is a note from the Independent newspaper apologising for confusing
readers the day before.
grammar · 282 pronouns and other proforms
Pronoun soup again on Wednesday
CHRISTINA Patterson commenifd on a row between lain Duncan
Smith and George Osborne. "But lie did. according to one source,
tell the Chancellor that he was 'not prepared to tolerate' the ‘appalling*
way he treated his department, and that he should 'show more
respect’. His staff, he said, 'did not deserve to lie treated เท such an
arrogant way'."
Ihe words'he' and his' appear seven times. The first, second, fourth,
sixth and seventh times, they mean Mr Duncan Smith; the third and
fifth times, they mean Mr Osborne. More than once, the reader pauses
to work out who he' is. ·
Guy Krirny. the Independent (adapted)
for more about th' แพ ๙ toil'that and it ("Irering co thing. thac ha.» |u»t b»rn mention'd» ► 14$
3	avoiding duplication
In writing and more formal speech, English (unlike some languages) does not
normally use a pronoun to repeat a noun phrase that comes เท the same clause.
The wall needed painting, (not The ««'พ. it needed painting.)
Good morning, lack. I spoke to Professor Anson yesterday.
(More natural than ... Professor Anson. I spoke to him yesterday.)
However, this kind of repetition is common in informal speech, when people
announce a topic and then make a sentence about it (► 272).
that friend of your mother's - she's on the phone.
Your bicycle wheels - why don't we pul them in the garden shed?
283	linking with conjunctions and adverbiais
1	the difference
Conjunctions (► Section 2(1) make grammatical and meaning connections: they
join clauses into sentences, and show the relationship between them. Some
conjunctions:
and, but, or, so, before, after, when, as soon as, because, since, although,
if. that
When a conjunction comes between two clauses in writing, there is normally
either no punctuation (If the clauses are short) or a comma (1) before the
conjunction if they are longer.
The Minister paused briefly before he started to speak.
The results were disappointing for the third year running so It was decided to
close three of the smaller branches.
Adverbiais can make meaning connections, but they do not make grammatical
connections: they do not join clauses into sentences. Some adverbiais:
however, then, therefore, meanwhile, consequently, เท fact, also, as a result,
on the. other hand, indeed
grammar · 283 linking with conjunctions and adverbiais
Written Texts
Section 26
When an adverbial comes between two clauses, there Is normally either a full
stop (.) or a semi-colon (;) before it in careful writing, because the clauses are
still grammatically separate,
The Minister paused briefly; then he started to speak, (ox the Minister paused
briefly. Then he started to speak.)
the results were disappointing for the third year running; consequently, it was
decided to close three of the smaller branches, (ox The results were
disappointing for the third year running. Consequently, it น'ส.ร decided to
close three of the smaller branches.)
2	but and however
But is a conjunction; however is an adverbial. Note the difference in
punctuation before these words.
It was cold, but it was pleasant.
It was cold. However, it was pleasant. OR It was cold; however, it was pleasant.
(better than It was cold, however...)
Note that we also put a comma after however.
position
Conjunctions always begin clauses. Adverbiais can often go in different places เท
a clause (but not between the verb and the object). If an adverbial interrupts the
normal word order of a clause, it may be separated by two commas.
He confessed to 114 murders, but the police did not believe his story.
(mít m h fht* jxWftv / fini พ^ hi* )
He confessed to 114 murders; however, the police did not believe his story.
He confessed to 114 murders; the police, however, did not believe his story.
He confessed to 114 murders; the police did not, however, believe his story.
He confessed to 114 murders; the police did not believe his story, however.
(mu Mir ... I he police dui not believe, however, hisslory.)
Adverbiais expressing contrast often have commas after them.
They were becoming increasingly discouraged. However, they
continued walking.
Income is satisfactory'; on the other hand, expenditure has
increased alarmingly.
Yet is not usually followed by a comma.
It น-ส» cold, yet it was pleasant, (xoi.. ,-yetrit Utts phwanf )
one-clause sentences
Sometimes a single clause with a conjunction is written as a separate sentence.
Some people feel this is incorrect, but it is normal in queslion-and answer
sequences, or when a writer wishes to give extra emphasis to a clause.
Why are we เท financial trouble? Because the banks lent money
to the wrong people.
He Utts charming. But he was totally without a conscience.
grammar · 283 linking with conjunctions and adverbiais
284	discourse markers in writing
Discourse markers are words and expressions which help to structure spoken
exchanges and written text (e.g. first of all1 on the other hand, in any case,
to sum up). English has a very large number of these. Some are used in all kinds
of discourse, some mostly in formal writing, and others mainly เท informal
speech. those that are most common เท writing are discussed here; for
discourse markers in speech, ►SOI. Most discourse markers arc adverbs or
adverbial expressions; some are conjunctions. For differences in punctuation
and other points, ► 283.
Discourse markers can communicate several things:
•	‘What am I talking about?* Discourse markers can introduce or clarily a
topic, and show divisions and changes of topic.
•	'What am I doing?’ They can show the type of communication that is
going on-
•	attitude They can show a writer's attitude to what he or she is saying, or to
the reader's expectations.
1	What am I talking about?
Some discourse markers say what a writer is about to focus on, and may show a
link with previous discussion. Others show subdivisions and changes of topic.
focusing: with reference to; regarding; as regards; as far as.., is/are
concerned
With reference to your letter of 17 March, I am pleased to inform you ,,.
Regarding the proposal to reinvest all profits, it was felt that further discussion
was needed.
As regards other aspects of social policy, the government of the day was under
great pressure to improve health care
As jar as heart disease is concerned, saturated fats are considered to be a
principal danger.
subdividing: first of all; firstly, secondly, etc, in the first place;
before turning to; lastly; finally
Hrst of all. it is important to distinguish two main types of problem. Secondly,
solutions to troth need to be evaluated.
Before turning to the question of finance, the directors discussed minimum
staffing levels.
I inally, it is appropriate to mention the contribution of his family to his
success.
new subject: turning now to...
Turning now to his years in America, we will trace his gradual acceptance by
the scientific establishment.
returning to previous subject: to return to the previous point
To return to the previous point, it would he a mistake to overlook the basic
need for research.
grammar
discourse markers in writing
Written Texts
Section 26
summing up: in conclusion; to sum up; briefly; เท short
เท conclusion To sum up, it seems clear that none of the factors already
discussed contributed to the spread of the epidemic.
briefly, three senators have been accused of fraud, bribery and tax evasion in
the past three years, but they have all been cleared of these charges
by other senators.
เท short, the decision to invade was a disastrous error of judgement.
2	What am I doing?
Some discourse markers make it clear what kind of communication is going on.
generalising and exceptions: on the whole; to a great extent;
to some extent; เท general: เท all/most, many/some cases; broadly speaking;
apart from; except for
On the whole / เท general, people like to help others.
On the whole / เท general, the higher an individual is in the social strata the
less likely he or she is lobe arrested, prosecuted and (if prosecuted)
found guilty.
เท some cases, an unhappy childhood can lead to criminal behaviour.
To some extent, people's religious views tend to reflect those of their parents.
Broadly speaking trees can be divided into two groups: evergreen
ami deciduous.
Central European languages, except for / apart from Hungarian, are related to
showing a logical or causal connection: consequently, therefore;
as a result; so; then
Atmospheric pressure is lower at altitude. Consequently, climbers can find it
difficult to get enough oxygen.
Unfortunately, your examination marks did not reach the required standard,
therefore we are unable to offer you a place.
His first novel was a remarkable success. As a result, he was offered a contract
to write a sequel.
showing similarity: similarly; in the same way; just as
Russia relies on แร grain harvests to feed its population. Similarly ' เท the
same way. India and China are dependent on rice.
lust as some children have imaginary friends, others invent complicated past
events that never happened.
showing a contrast: nevertheless; nonetheless; despite this/that: yet;
however; เท spite of this, that
The Greeks and Romans had no symbol for zero. Nevertheless Nonetheless,
they made remarkable progress เท mathematics.
Their father died when they were small. เท spite of that Despite that, they
had a happy childhood.
England has occasional heavy snowfalls in lanuary and Eebruary. However,
most winters are relatively mild.
grammar · 284 discourse markers in writing
balancing contrasting points: on the one hand; whereas; while;
on the other hand
On the one hand, we need to reduce costs. On the other hand, investment in
research is a crucial priority.
Arranged marriage* are common in many Middle Eastern countries. เท the
West, on the other hand, they are unusual, (not ... oh thecontrary, they
ttre	► Ί28)
He liked the mountains, whereas.while his wife preferred the sea.
persuading: after all (► 361)
It is scarcely surprising that he chose a military career. After all, his father and
both his grandfathers were professional soldiers.
cont radii ting: on the contrary; quite the opposite
The violin is not easy to play well. On the contrary, it is one of the most
challenging instruments.
Do not be afraid that people will look down on you because of your regional
accent. Quite the opposite, in some professions your accent may be your
most interesting and valuable possession.
concession: it is true (that); certainly; granted; if; may; of course
counter argument: nevertheless; nonetheless; however; ท·en so; but; still;
These expressions are often used in a three stage argument structure:
1.	We say something that points in a certain direction.
2.	We agree (the concession) that there are facts that point in the other direction.
3.	But we finish (the counter-argument) by going back to the original position.
... cannot agree with colonialism. It is true that the British may have done
some good in India. Even so. colonialism is basically evil.
He was Incapable of lasting relationships with women. Certainly, several
women loved hint, and เพ was married twice. All the same, the women
closest to him were invariably deeply unhappy.
Very few people understood Einstein's theory. Of course, everybody had heard
of him. and a fair number of people knew the word 'relativity'. But hardly
anybody could tell you what he had actually1 said.
His poetry was popular, and. if difficult to understand, nonetheless had a good
deal of charm.
Note the use of certainly and of course เท the above examples. When they are
used in this way. an experienced reader knows that they will เพ followed by but,
all the same or a similar expression.
adding: moreover; furthermore; further; in addition; what is more;
also; besides
Air travel is tiring. Moreover/Furthermore, it is generally uncomfortable
and expensive.
grammar · 2M discourse markers in writing
referring 10 lhe hearer’s/reader's expectations: in fad; actually
These expressions introduce information that «ill contradict (usually) or
perhaps confirm what the hearer or reader thinks.
It น generally believed that Marquez died เท the civil war. เท fact / Actually,
recent research shows that he survived and fled to Rolivia, where___
4	reporting verbs showing attitude
Some reporting verbs can show the writer·ร altitude to what is being reported.
Suggest and imply make it clear that he/she is not reporting definite facts.
Claim often throws doubt on what follows.
These findings suggest imply that a cure for the common cold may be dose.
The Minister claims that the new working practices will increase efficiency
by 35%.
Allege is common in reports of unproved criminal accusations.
It is alleged that. during the night of lune 17th. Hawkins broke into the factory.
285	reading complicated structures
language learners (and many native speaker readers) can have trouble reading
long and complicated sentences. Certain kinds of structure, in particular, can
slow down unskilled readers, and perhaps cause them to get lost, so that they
lose sight of 'where a sentence is going'. This is often the case when sentences
begin with complex noun phrases.
1	complex noun phrases: premodification
Written noun phrases can be very elaborate, with various kinds of premodifier
(determiners, adjectives, participles and nouns) coming before the head noun.
The only efficient functioning X-Ray machine was in constant demand.
Premodifiers can ha«? their own premodifiers, which adds to the complexity.
lhe only really efficient fully-functioning high speed X-Ray machine was in
constant demand.
But note that premodifiers cannot usually be followed by their own
postmodifiers.
a broken promise
a cynically broken promise (wrr NOT a broken for-poMbal-rtflfwtmgepHmbe)
interest rales
short term interest rales (t»n SOT interest paid monthly rales)
2	complex noun phrases: postmodification
Postmodifiers (e g prepositional phrases or relative clauses) can make noun
phrases even more complex and difficult to process efficiently.
The only realty eff icient fully -functioning high-speed X-Ray machine in lhe
hospital that nurses could use was in constant demand.
The strikes on a number of airlines in recent months, which have caused
serious disruption to travellers, are likely to continue if agreement
is not reached.
grammar · 285 reading complicated structures
Written Texts
Section 26
nominalisation and coordination: Daniel's failure
Writing often nominates (expresses as nouns) elements which เท speech would
be expressed เท other ways, litis, too, makes for complex noun phrases.
Daniel's failure to gain a degree caused his parents considerable concern.
(six-word noun phrase as subject)
lite spoken equivalent might be, for example:
Daniel, you know, he didn Ί get a degree, and of course, his parents, they got
really worried, (one-word noun phrase as subject)
Co-ordination can make things even more complex.
Daniel's failure to gain a degree, and his subsequent refused to look for
work, caused his parents considerable concern, (founeen-word noun phrase
as subject)
Possible spoken equivalent:
Daniel, you know, he didn't get a degree, and then he wouldn't do anything
about gelling a fob, and of course, his parents, they got really worried.
clause subjects: getting up early
When the subject is a participle clause or a น1!iat-clause, this can also make the
overall structure more difficult to follow.
(letting up very early in the morning typic ally makes people feel quite
unnecessarily superior.
What Anna’s little sister wanted above everything else in the world was
Why do these structures make reading difficult?
breaking things up
Complex noun phrase structures can cause readers to lose sight of the basic
subject-verb relationship. This is particularly the case with heavy post
modification: the head noun may be separated from its verb by other nouns and
verbs, and a non fluent reader may struggle to see which noun goe s with
which verb.
The strikes on a number of airlines in recent months, which have caused
serious disruption to travellers, are likely to continue if agreement is not
reached, (five other nouns and another verb between the head noun
and its verb)
That picture of the children standing in front of the palace talking to the
Prime Minister impressed everybody. (It was not the children, the palace or
the Prime Minister that impressed everybody.)
Pasteur’s discovery that microscopic bacteria caused diseases revolutionised
medicine. (It was not the bacteria or the diseases that revolutionised
medicine.)
Λ Liverpool man who lives alone except for his cat has Just won the lottery.
(The cat has not won the lottery.)
These structures can create confusing looking pairs of verbs.
A bus which ran downhill out of control after its brakes failed c rashed into a
factory wall, damaging the premises and slightly injuring several passengers.
grammar · 2H5 reading complicated structures
Unlike speech (► 299.1), formal writing docs not allow subjects to be repeated
by pronouns.
ilÍMiaiag. ÚJ11UU
Ι’ίίπυπ Γ, II rrnwr

6 leaving out that: people Martin knew well
When rtar (or another relative pronoun) is left out, this can cause further
problems for readers who are riot used ill formal written texts, especially if their
language does not work in tile same way. For example, it can bring two noun
phrases together เท confusing ways.
Several people Martin knew well when he was al university years before hail
now become prominent members of the government. (ะะ___people that
Manin knew...)
The man the terrorists bought the guns from was an undercover police officer.
Extra difficulty can lie caused when relative clauses end in prepositions.
The spanner the service engineer was attempting to tighten the windscreen nuts
with was the wrong size.
Dropping the conjunction that can also make the structure of a sentence
less Clear.
Ihe woman insisted she thought the police officer understood she was tost.
(that omitted three rimes)
7 reduced relative clauses: the objects recovered
Reduced relative clauses (► 237.10) can make sentences particularly
hard to read.
Many of the objects recovered by the police were found to hate been stolen
from homes in the neighbourhood. (-'... the objects that
were recovered ...)
Two wolves seen roaming in the New Forest arc believed to han· escaped from
a nearby private zoo. (ะะ'— wolves that have been seen ...')
Regular past participles look the same as past tenses, and this can
cause confusion.
Λ number of the children asked for comments on the proposals to expel some
immigrants told the police they disagreed. (The children didn’t ask for
comments: the meaning is '... the children who were asked ... told ..
8	embedded adverbial clauses
Sometimes an adverbial clause is put into the middle of another clause,
separating the subject from its verb.
she finally managed logo to slcep.(ha<l}a series of bad dreams.
Ihe governments if recent reports can be trusted,
interest rates.
ided not to raise
เท these structures, confusingly, a noun may not be the subject of a verb that
comes just after it.
Mr Andrews, when he saw the police officer, started running as fast as
he could. (It was not the police officer who started running.)
grammar · 285 reading complicated structures
Written Texts
Section 26
The Managing Director, after he had completed his discussions with the bank
manager, drew a large sum of money out of the bank and caught the next
plane to Paris (A learner might think that it was the bank manager who
took the money and went to Paris.)
9	heavy indirect object
A heavy indirect object can create a large gap between the verb and its direct
object, which can also make the structure difficult to follow.
She gave all the people who had helped her with her research copies
of her hook.
10	complicated negative structures
เท both speech and writing, putting together several negative items can
cause confusion.
Il	was not that Emily didn't believe that lack had not been telling the truth.
(Did she think he had or not?)
There is no sound basis for denying reports that no members of the expedition
failed to reach their goal. (Did they all get there?)
11	reporting expressions: the man who Anna had said would tell US
Complicated structures can be produced when reporting expressions are
included in sentences.
We were unable to find the man who Anna had said would tell US about
the church.
They spent none of them could remember how much money on their trip.
12	more examples
Here are some more examples of the structures discussed เท this entry, most of
them taken from authentic written sources. It might be interesting to consider
why each one might cause difficulty to an unskilled reader.
A picture a schoolboy bought for £5 has turned out to be worth £10,000.
Money makes money, and the money money makes makes money.
(Benjamin Fruikkn)
Pictures of the baby the judge ordered should not be identified by reporters
appeared in a Sunday newspaper.
A young civil senant arrested after shootings on Tyneside left one person dead
is to be charged with murder.
Police called to a house in Hampshire after neighbours reported cries for help
found 18 year old M l· stuck in a small toilet window after being locked out
of his home.
Three immigrants returned to their countries by the authorities are to appeal
against their deportation.
A 2d year old labourer who was arrested in Trafalgar Square when he
allegedly attempted to knife a traffic warden is said to have injured
three policemen.
The rebel leader found out dun in spile of the precautions of the soldiers he had
bought the guns from the police had planted an informer among them.
Police hunting thieves who dumped น ten-month-old baby in an alley after
finding him inside a car they stole have charged two teenage boys.
grammar · 285 reading complicated structures
One way of deciding what to do if you hair difficulty เท deciding your next
course of action is to toss a coin.
If predictions that the British National Parly will gain at least one seal when
the turopean Parliament election results are announced tonight are
accurate, many labour MPs will see it as a political disaster grate enough Io
spark a major revolt.
But what bothered him more than what the files that uere in the drawer could
contain was the feeling that something was certainly missing.
Taking one's break out of season when everyone else is working can sate one a
great deal of money.
Many of the gold and silver objects excavated from the 3000-year-old royal
tombs resemble items of jewellery still made today by craftsmen trained in
the traditional skills.
Il is not unlikely that the ongoing investigation will show that the allegations of
corruption against the President are not without foundation.
(1$ lilt· President probably corrupt?)
lhe report will look into claims the design of the courthouse the men escaped
from was at fault.
Further details emerged shortly after the clergyman at the centre of the dispute
about anti-capitalist protesters camped outside St Paul's Cathedral broke a
week's silence to defend the decision to close lhe cathedral.
Millennium Dome chiefs have refused to discuss reports they ignored advice
attendance figures at lhe attraction would be lower than hoped, lhe Sunday
Times says the Millennium Commission warned Dome users the New
Millennium Experience Company แร own estimate was between 45m
and 5m. NMEC repeatedly insisted there would be at least 7m visitors
this year.
(from .1 report on lhe enormous tow of money by lhe Millennium Dome, built as a lourtu
attraction io celebrate the year 2000)
286	paragraphs
Written English text is usually divided into blocks called ‘paragraphs’, to make it
easier to read. Paragraphs can vary in length, from several hundred words (for
example in literary or academic writing), to a few sentences (for example in
journalism or letters). A paragraph division is usually shown by starting the text
on a new line and indenting (leaving a space at the beginning of the line).
The paragraph divisions break the material up into easily ’digestible' sections,
providing places where the reader can pause and think for a moment if
necessary. And good writers can show the structure of their texts by making
paragraph divisions in suitable places, for example when they move to a new
stage in a story, a new point in a discussion or a new part of a description.
grammar · 286 paragraphs
Written Texts
Section 26
Sam decided that it was too late to Hart slimming, and pat some more sugar
in his coffee. The way things were, he needed all the help he could get.
Everything was going wrong at work, everything had already gone wrong
al home, and the weather in Edinburgh in November was lousy, the only
remaining question was: should he commit suicide now or wait until after
payday and get drunk firstt
'—♦	three months ago everything had seemed so perfect. 11is boss had told him
a new stage', that he had an excellent future with the firm.
— —'	There are a lot of advantages to working at home. You don't have to travel to
your job, you can choose your own working hours, you can take a day off if
you want to, you don't waste time in endless unnecessary meetings, and-
perhaps most important of all you don't have a boss constantly checking up
on you.
. -1——»	On the other hand, it can be lonely working by yourself Without
wirpoOTr'X colleagues around you...
Another practice, common in typed letters and documents, is to leave a blank
line without indenting.
Dear Sir,Madam
Three months ago I sent you an order for a set of glasses, together with full
payment. You wrote acknowledging my order, and said that the glasses
would be dispatched เท 15 days.
I have still not received the glasses, and repeated telephone calls to your
office have had no result...
287	repetition
1	avoidance of repetition
เท English, unnecessary repetition is generally avoided. Careful witters try not to
repeat words and structures in die same clauses and sentences without a good
reason. For instance, we do not normally put related nouns and verbs together.
We made wonderful plans. OR We planned wonderfid things.
(mit KOT Ur1 ph tn nett น^ndcrful ftlttns I
She wrote an interesting piece. OH She diet an interesting piece of writing
There are some fixed expressions	for example sing a song
live a good life, die a violent death.
Mose of the repetitions in (he following text would be avoided by a careful writer,
by varying the structure and by careful use of synonyms (e.g. tried 'attempted,
summarise / describe briefly, forecast/prediet).
grammar
• 287 repetition
เท Illis report, I hare tried to forecast likely developments over the nest three
years. เท the first section, I have tried to summarise the results of the last two
years, and I have tried to summarise the present situation. เท the second
section, I hate tried to forecast the likely consequences of the present situation,
and the consequences of the present financial policy.
Casual repetition is more common in informal language, but even in
conversation people often sound monotonous or clumsy if they do not vary their
sentence structure and vocabulary (► 300). Some kinds of repetition arc actually
ungrammatical in both writing and speech (► 2B2.I).
2	deliberate repetition
Writers (and speakers) can of course repeat vocabulary and structures
deliberately. This may be done for emphasis.
That was a very, very unfortunate decision.
The head doctor made a point of knowing the name of every patient เท the
hospital: every man. every woman and every child.
Structural repetition can show how ideas are similar or related, by using the
same structure for the same kind of item.
First of all, I wish to congratulate you all on this year's splendid results.
Secondly, I wish to guv you some interesting news. And finally, I wish to
thank you all...
3	literary examples
Here arc two contrasting examples of repetition used deliberately for literary
purposes. เท the first, by John Steinbeck, structures and key vocabulary
(especially nouns and verbs) arc repeated and rhythmically balanced in order to
create an impressive (or mock impressive) effect - to make the story and
characters sound striking and important.
This is the story of Danny and of Danny's friends and of Danny's house. It is a
story of how these three became one thing so that in Tortilla Flat if you speak
of Danny’s house you do not mean a structure of wood flaked with old white-
wash, overgrown with an ancient unirimmed rose of Castile. No, when you
speak of Danny's house you are understood to mean a unit of which the parts
are men, from which came sweetness and joy, philanthropy, and, in the end, a
mystic sorrow. For l>anny's house was not unlike the Hound Table, and
Danny's friends were not unlike the knights of it. And this is the story of how
the group came into being of how it flourished and grew to be an organisation
beautiful and wise. This story deals with the adventuring of Danny's friends,
with the good they did. with their thoughts and their endeavors. เท the end, this
story tells how the talisman was lost and how the group disintegrated.
(iohn Steinbeck. TorUHa Hat)
เท contrast, the following text, by Ernest Hemingway, uses a kind of style which
good witters would normally avoid, repeating pronouns and simple structures
in an apparently monotonous way. Hemingway s purpose is to show the
simplicity of his hero, an uneducated old fisherman, by using a style that is
supposed to reflect the way he thinks and speaks.
grammar
repetition
Written Texts
Section 26
He did nol remember when he had first started to talk aloud when he was by
himself He had sung when he was by himself in the old days and he had sung
at night sometimes when he was alone steering on his watch in the smacks or
in the turtle boats. He had probably started to talk aloud, when alone, when
the boy had left. Hut he did nol remember.
(Ernest Hemingway, rhe Old Man and lheSea)
288	academic writing
The writing found in academic journals and similar contexts (for example
research reports, theoretical discussion and debate, historical accounts) is
normally formal in tone, and folloss's the conventions of formal writing discussed
in other pans of this Section. เท particular:
1	vocabulary
Informal wording is usually avoided. Contractions arc not used, and ‘general-
purpose’ words like do. hate and get are replaced by more specific terminology .
Further research will be carried out (better than ... will be done)
rhe team experienced a number of problems.
(better than ... had a lot of problems)
Early investigators obtained ambiguous results.
(better than... got ambiguous results)
2	impersonal writing
Academic writing is most often impersonal, so for example the authors or
researchers may not often appear as subjects of sentences.
This report questions the conclusions of earlier researchers.
(rather than We question ...)
All well dated Neanderthal sites have been found to be at least 39,000
years old.
Impersonal structures with it are frequently used.
แ is clear that... It is likely that... It is important IO...
And academic writers may avoid presenting over definite conclusions, by using
verbs such as may, suggest, or adjectives such as possible, arguable.
Preliminary results suggest that... It is possible that...
3	nominalisation
Nominalisation (expressing actions by nouns, ► 285.3) can help to make
writing impersonal.
The discovery of penicillin transformed the treatment of bacterial infections.
(rather than Mien Fleming discovered penicillin...)
Chemical analysis of their bones shows that their diets differed from those of
modern humans.	-*
grammar
academic writing
4	pre- and post-modifiers
Complex noun phrases may be used to package information, with several pre-
modifiers and/or post modifiers (► 285.1-285.2).
accelerating climate change	a clear evolutionary pathway
important survival information ongoing hydrothermal activity
the divergence of the species from แร apelike cousins
laws of motion and gravitation that connected everything in the cosmos
evidence for the way in which mirror cells work
brain areas associated with reward
chemical reactions between rock and water
5	discourse markers
Academic writers use discourse markers (► 281) to make the structure of their
text clear, for instance by signalling point's which add to or contrast with what
has come before.
เท addition, MRI scans consistently showed tissue abnormalities.
these results, however, must be regarded as provisional pending further
investigation.
Note the use of furthermore and what is more to strengthen an argument.
Compare:
Participants completed tests of endurance. เท addition, their lung capacity was
measured, (simply adding information)
Λ dear relationship was found between lung capacity and endurance.
Furthermore / What is more, training which increased endurance was
shown to haw a positive effect on lung capacity, (adding another piece of
evidence for the writer’s claims)
Note also the use of on the other hand to emphasise a contrast. Compare:
Several studies have provided evidence that playing classical music to cows
increases their milk yield. However, no similar studies to date haw been
carried out on goats, (a different point, but not an emphatic contrast)
Playing classical music to cows has been shown to Increase their milk
production. Kock music, on the other hand, is found to result in significantly
reduced yields, (a more emphatic contrast)
6	collocations and formulaic language
Academic writing involves two kinds of formulaic language (► 332). One type
consists of the fixed expressions that are commonly used in the particular area
of study concerned, and which anyone writing academic material in that area
needs to be familiar with.
to take a blood sample (medicine)
to draw out / trace out a floor plan (architecture)
communicative competence (linguistics)
แพ other kind of fixed expressions are those that arc used, in any subject of
study, when discussing research, evaluating evidence, developing an argument,
agreeing and disagreeing with published views, and so on. A few examples:
to conduct / carry out research
to compile analyse/present data	to raise an issue
to put forward / question / take issue with challenge / contest /
dismiss; a view / an argument / a theory / a hypothesis / a claim
grammar
academic writing
Section 26
Written Texts
to make/refect a claim / an assumption
to claim that... to assert that...	to รuggesl that...
to draw a conclusion to prove disprove solid theoretical reasoning
proof/evidence for, that	powerful/persuasive/compelling evidence
sound empirical evidence lack of evidence	little evidence for...
research findings a strong implication a logical conclusion
on both theoretical and practical grounds
based on unproved hypotheses
broad agreement	to lake something into account
English, like any language, contains a very large number OÍ formulaic
expressions. The most important thing for students of academic writing is to
note, and leant, those that are commonly used for their subject matter? hut to
understand that they cannot realistically expect to master all of the formulaic
vocabulary of English in a limited time.
289	correspondence: letters
Traditionally constructed letters are now much less common than other forms of
correspondence such as emails. I lowever, it is useful to know the normal
conventions used in English-speaking cultures - for instance, in letters of
application.
1	Put your own postal address at the top on the right or in the centre. Addresses
generally follow the rule of ‘smallest first’: house number, then street, then town
(and sometimes county) plus postcode. Telephone numbers and electronic
addresses come last. Don't put your name with the address.
2	เท formal letters and business letters, put the name and address of the person
you are writing to on the left side of the page, starting on the line after
your own address.
3	Put the date on the right, on the line after the address of the person you are
writing to. A common way to write the date is to put the number of the day.
followed by the month and year (e.g. 17 May 2005). For other ways (and
differences between British and American customs), ► 321.
4	Different styles arc common เท formal letters on paper which has the address
ready printed at the top of the page. For example, the date may be put on the
left, and the address of the pe rson written to may come at the end of the letter
or of the first page.
5	Begin the letter (Deer X) on the left. Common ways of addressing people arc:
•	by first name (informal): Dear Penny
•	by title and surname (more formal): Dear Ms Hopkins
•	especially to somebody w hose name is not known: Dear Sir or Madam,
Dear Sir 'Madam, Dear Sir, Dear Madam. Dear Sirs (to a company)
6	Some people like to use the first name and surname (Dear Penny Hopkins)
when writing to strangers or people that they do not know well.
Do not use a title like Mr together with a first name (noi Dear Mt fames Carter
OH Dettt-Mt-Mmes).
grammar
correspondence: letters
7	After Dear X, pul a comma or nothing al all, not an exclamation mark (!).
A colon (ะ) is used in American business letters. Either leave an empty line after
Dear X and start again on the left, or start again on the next line, a few spaces
from the left. Do the same for each new paragraph. (The first method is now the
most common in Britain.)
8	Letters which begin with formulae like Dear Sir(s) or Dear Madam usually finish
Yours faithfully in British English. Formal letters which begin with the person's
name (e.g. Dear Ms Hawkins, Dear Peter Lewis) usually finish Yours sincerely.
เท American English, common endings are Sincerely, Sincerely yours, Yours truly
and Cordially. Other less common formulae are (With) best wishes and (With)
kind regards,
9	Sign with your first name (informal) or your full name (formal), but without
writing any title (Mr/Ms./Dr. etc). Ways of writing one's full name: Luke Forbes,
L Forbes, i. / Forbes.
เท a formal printed letter, add your full printed name after your handwritten
signature. Friendly business letters are often signed with the first name only
above the full printed name:
sincerely
Luke Forbes
10	On the envelope, pul the first name before the surname. People usually write a
title (Mr, Mrs, etc) before the name. You can write the first name in full
(Mrs Angela Brookes), or you can write one or more initials (Mrs A F. Brookes).
11	British people now usually write abbreviated titles, initials, addresses, dates, and
opening and closing formulae without commas or full stops.
12	American usage is different from British in some ways:
•	Dates are written differently (month before day) ► 324.
•	Americans are often addressed (and sign their names) with the first name
in full, followed by the initial of a middle name (Luke L Parker). This is
less usual in Britain.
13	letter to strangers often being with an explanation of the reason for writing.
I am writing to ask...
One docs not normally begin a letter to a stranger with an enquiry about health.
(sot Dear-Xr44tHtHtfe-yrHtgeef4ng-0H?)

grammar
correspondence: letters
Written Texts
Section 26
Example of a formal letter and envelope
14 Plowden Road
Torquay
Devon
TQ6 IRS
Tel 0742 06538
The Secretary	16 June 2016
Hall School of Design
39 Beaumont Street
London
พ4 41J
Dear Sir or Madam
I would be grateful If you would send me information
about the regulations for admission to the Hall School
of Design. Could you also tell me whether the School
arranges accommodation for students?
Your faithfully
KZÍth POrteir
Keith Parker
The Secretary
Hall School of Design
39 Beaumont Street
London
พ4 4บ
290	correspondence: emails, text messages, etc
1	formal emails: style and layout
Formal emails arc similar in style to letters on paper. าTie writer s postal address
and phone numbers, if they are Included, follow the signature.
2	personal messages
Personal messages sent by email, by (SMS) text messages and other social media
(such as WhatsApp, Twitter, Tumblr, online chatrooms) arc usually much more
informal in style than letters on paper. Instead of Dear X, they might begin for
example X, Hi, Hi X, Hello X, Good morning X. or with no salutation at all.
Sentence structure may be reduced: for example Can't come because work.
Afterthoughts that are added after the signature (or in following messages) arc
often introduced by PS (AmE PS ), an abbreviation of Latin post Kriptum
(ะ written afterwards'). People who have forgotten to include an attachment
often send it in a follow-up message beginning ‘Oops!'.	-*
grammar
correspondence: emails, text messages, etc
3	addresses
email addresses are read as follows:
[.Harris^ funbt7_co.uk	'j do! Harris at funbiz dot co dot น k'
emilyffloR lann.com	'cmily al log dash farm dot com
the rabbitbvcoolmail.gr 'the underscore rabbit at coolmall dot g r
Note also the names of symbols in urls' (internet addresses):
/ 'forward slash' \ 'backslash' : 'colon*
Example of an informal email
Hi Phil,
Good to hear from you.
How about 29 or JO Sept’
I am working like crazy - still a lot to do around the house.
Also signed up for a creative writing course - don’t laugh!
Enjoying the village - very interesting world this, but there
are times when they talk a language I don't understand. พ!
New address etc below.
Yours
Robin
6J Baker lane
Carstairs
Yorkshire เร7 3P0
Tel 01466 790256
4	txt msgs (text messages)
A number of abbreviations are commonly used in text messages, especially by
younger people. A few examples:
2bsy
btw
Jyi
grs
too busy
as soon as possible
by the way
for your information
great
สุ/!· away from keyboard
atm at the moment
sec you
him
I don't mind
grammar · 290 correspondence: emails, text messages.
Written Texts
Section 26
A	just kidding	I8r	later
lol	laugh out loud	ท#	not gonna lie
nm	never mind	np	no problem
omg	Oh. my God!	m	right now
ruok?	Are you OK?	tbh	to be honest
tx. thx	thanks		
291	abbreviated styles
Some sty les of writing and speech have their own special grammar rules, often
because of the need to save space or time.
1	advertisements and instructions
Small ads and instructions often leave out articles, subject or object pronouns,
forms of be and prepositions.
Single man looking for flat Oxford area. Phone 806127 weekends.
lob needed urgently. Will do anything legal. Call 312651.
Pour mixture into large saucepan, heat until boiling then add three /sounds
sugar and leave on low heat for 15 minutes.
2	notes
Informal notes, to do lists, diary· entries, etc often follow similar rules.
Gone to hairdresser. Back 12.30. Get tickets phone Anna
see losh 11.00 meeting Emma lunch
The same style is common in postcards, emails and text messages.
AMY
Hi, Gran
Watching tennis on TV. A good book. Three meals a day.
No washing-up. Clean sheets every day. Everything done
for me. Yes. you've guessed - in hospital!! Only went to
doctor for cold landed up in hospital with pneumonia!?
If you have time please tell the others - would love some
visits to cheer me up.
Hope to see you.
Love. Amy	14.15
grammar · 291 abbreviated styles
3	commentaries
Commentaries on fast·moving events like football matches also have their own
kind of grammar. Auxiliaries and other less important verbs are often left out.
Goal kirk... And the score still Spurs I, Arsenal 3... that's Pearce ... Pearce
to Coates ... good ball... Sawyer running wide... Billings takes it, through
to Matthews, .Matthews with a cross, oh, and Billings in beautifully, a good
chance there - and It's a goal!
4	titles, notices, etc
Titles, labels, headings, notices and slogans usually consist of short phrases, not
complete sentences. Articles arc often left out, especially in the names of
buildings and institutions.
ROYAL HOTEL	I WORM A TION OFFICE	MORI ΜΟΝΕ Y FOR NURSES!
5	headlines
News headlines have their own special grammar and vocabulary.
For details, ► 292.
RECORD DRUGS HAUL AT AIRPORT: SIX HEI D FOUR DIE IN MO ΗΙΛ7.Ε

grammar · 291 abbreviated styles
Written Texts
Section 26
292	headlines
1	special language
".ฯ''.'.'0.ฯ a’e à.à" titles above news reports (e g. DOG FINDS HOMAN
ท!^^!'-^^. **ไ’5 beelines can be very difficult to understand.
2”	ฯ5.à'?à' deadlines are often written in a special style, which is
โ^?'0!?น0,d na? EnRlish ln ,his 'here are some special rules of
grammar, and words are often used in unusual ways.
2	grammar
a ทน™?,เ^L?°.,-Í*ays comP,e,c	Many headlines consist of noun
phrases with no verb.
wtww WAGE CUTS	LUXURY HOTEL DEA TH
EXETER MAN'S DOUBLE MARRIAGE RID
๖ .ΐϊϊ?. .ฯฯ"/?.1''3’0 โ"’ไ8?.0, lh,ce· 'our or more nouns; nouns earlier in
the string modify those that follow.
FURNTTURE FACTORY PA Y CUT PROTEST
.นไ^น".?-^ฯ^?ไ-?ไ be difficult to understand. It sometimes helps to read
!ฯ670''’พุ™พุOTKTrefers to a msr about
a < UT (reduction) เท PAY at a FACTORY that makes FURNITURE.
c Headlines often leave out articles and the Serb be.
SIMKESPEARI PLAY IMMORAL SAYS HEADMASTER
SCHOOLBOY WALKS IN SPACE
d ฯ..!?โ!ฯ1"*4' 'Tple ,eพุ* a,e Often used instead of progressive or
pe'!'ใ"2?โไIs.™*.s'mple pre*em is ustd lor boI*> present anti past events.
โ7·"DiVA FIGHT FOR COURSE CHANGES (ธ... are fighting ...)
BLIND GIRL CLIMBS EVEREST (a ... has climbed . . .)
Thepresentprogressive is used to talk about changes. Be is usually dropped.
BRITAIN GIT TING WARMER. SA Y SCIENTISTS	TRADE FIGURES IMPROVING
“ .»!7.hC!dluL· ไ'.?1โ15 a,e us5d as bo,h nouns and verbs, and nouns are often
โ'?ฯ '° ''''โ*5 “'h.er "พุ15 (paragraph b above). So II is not always easy to
work out the structure of a sentence. Compare:
US CUTS AID TO THIRD WORLD (ะ. The US reduces its help ... CUTS is a verb.
AID is a noun.)
Λ/ίไร,^ฯ??โฯ?.,โ .Th.โ,'· has ’พุ0 a p,oleM àu, the reduction in aid.
and CUTS are both nouns.)
"โโ' '’'"ฯฯ7-''( 'ทุ’® reduction is helping the revolutionaries. CUTS is a
noun. AID is a verb.)
f Headlines often use infinitives to refer to the future.
'ไ' ไฯE AUSTRALIA	HOSPITALS TO TAKE FEWER PATIENTS
lor is also used to refer to future movements or plans.
TROOPS FOR GLASGOW (- Are soldiers going to be sent to Glasgow?)
grammar
headlines
g Auxiliary verbs are usually dropped from passive structures,
MURDER HU,KI: MAN HELD (-...a man is being held by police.)
SIX XIU.fl) IX EXPLOSION (è Six people have been killed ...)
Note that forms like HELD, ATTACKED are usually past participles with passive
meanings, not past tenses (which are rare in headlines). Compare:
AID PROTEST: PRESIDENT ATTACKED (=1.. the President has been attacked.)
AID PROTEST: PRESIDENT ATTACKS CRITICS l- ... the President has attacked
her critics.)
- BOY POUND SAFE (- The missing boy has been found safe; he is safe.)
BOY FINDS SAFE (= Λ boy has found a safe.)
h As and เท are often used instead of longer connecting expressions.
HOSPITAL HOSS AXED AS PATIENTS 1)11 (- ... because patients have died.)
FOOTBALL MANAGER IN CAR CRASH
i Λ colon (ะ) is often used to separate the subject of a headline from what is said
about it.
ร TRIKES: PM TO ACT	MOTORWA Y CRASH: DEA TH TOLL RISES
Quotation marks ('...') are used to show that words were said by somebody
else, and that the report docs not necessarily claim that they are true.
CRASH DRIVER 'HAD BEEN DRINKING'
Λ question mark (?) is often used when something is not certain.
CRISIS OVER Bi SEPTEMBERT
lor other rtyle» >p*cul V»MN>»T. » Ml.
3	vocabulary
Short words saw space, and so they are very common in headlines. Some of the
short words เท headlines are unusual in ordinary language (e g. curb, meaning
restrict or restriction). and some are used in special senses which they do
not often have in ordinary language (e g. bid, meaning 'attempt'). Other words
are chosen not because they are short, but because they sound dramatic
(e g. blaze, which means ‘big fire’, and is used in headlines to refer to any fire).
The following is a list of common headline vocabulary.
act	take action; do something
FOOD CRISIS: GOVERNMENT IO ACT
aid	military or financial help; to help
MORE AID FOR POOR COUNTRIES
UNIONS AID HOSPITAL STRIKERS
alert	alarm, warning
FLOOD ALERT ON FAST COAST
allege	make an accusation
WOMAN ALLEGES UNI AIR TREATMEN I'
appear	appear in court accused of a crime
MP TO APPEAR ON DRUGS CHARGES
axe	abolish, close down; abolition, closure
COUNTRY RUS SERVICES AXED
SMALL SCHOOLS EACE AXE
HA	British Airways
BA MAKES RECORD LOSS
grammar · 292 headlines
Written Texts
Section 26
back	support
AMERICA BACKS BRITISH PEACE MOVE
ban	forbid, refuse to allow something: prohibition
US BASS STEEL IMPORTS
NEW BAN ON DEMONSTRATIONS
bar	refuse/refusal to allow entry
NOTH. BARS EOOTBAU. FANS
NEW RAR ON IMMIGRANTS
bid	attempt
/APANESE WOMEN IN NEW EVEREST BIO
blast	explosion: criticise violently
BLAST AT PALACE
PM Bl ASTS CRITICS
blaze fire
SIS เพ. IN HOTtl BLAZE
block	stop, delay
TORIES BLOCK TEACHERS PAT DIAL
blow	bad news; discouragement: unfortunate happening
SMITH ILL· BLOW TO WORLD CUP HOPES
bolster	give support/encouragement to
EXPORT FIGURES ROISTER CETY CONFIDENCE
bond	political/business association
NEW TRADE BONDS WITH ICELAND
boom	big increase; prosperous period
SPENDING ROOM OVER. SAYS MINISTER
boost	encourage(ment); increase (noun or verb)
PLAN TO BOOST EXPORTS
brink	edge (of disaster)
WORLD ON BRINK OF WAR
Brussels	the European Union administration
BRUSSELS BANS BRITISH BLACKBERRY WINE
call (for)	demand/appeal (for)
CALL FOR STRIKE FALKS
HOSPITAL SCANDAL· MP CALLS FOR ENQUIRY
campaign organised effort to achieve social or political result
MP LAUNCHES CAMPAIGN FOR PRISON REFORM
cash	money
MORE CASH NEEDED FOR SCHOOLS
charge	accusation (by police)
THREE MEN HELD ON BOMB CHARGE
chop	abolition, closure
300 BANK BRANCHES FACE CHOP
City	tendon’s financial institutions
NEW TRADE FIGURES PLEASE CITY
grammar · 292 headlines
claim	(make) a statement that something is (rue (especially when (here may be disagreement); pay claim demand for higher wages SCIENTIST CIAIMS CANCER BREAKTHROUGH NEW ทนCE RACISM Ct AIM TEACHERS' PA Y Cl AIM REJECTED
damp down on clash	deal firmly with (usually something illegal) ทนCE TO CLAMP DOWN ON SPEEDING quarrel, fight (noun or verb) PM IN CLASH OVER ARMS SALES STUDENTS CIASH WITH POLICE
clear	find innocent DOCTOR CLEARED Of DRUGS CHARGE
Commons	the House of Commons (in Parliament) MINISTERS IN COMMONS Ct ASH OVER HOUSING swindle TEENAGERS CON WIDOW OUT OF LIFE SAVINGS
crackdown	firm application of (he law GOVERNMENT PROMISES CRACKDOWN ON DRUGS DEALERS
crash	financial failure RANK CRASH THREATENS TO BRING DOWN GOVERNMENT
curb	restrict; restriction NEW PRICE CURBS
cut	reduce; reduction BRITAIN CUTS OVERSEAS AID NEW HEALTH SERVICE CUTS
cutback	reduction (usually financial) LEATHERS SLAM SCHOOL CUTBACKS
dash	(make) quick journey PM IN DASH TO Bl AST HOSPITAL
deadlock	disagreement that cannot be solved DEADLOCK IN PEACE TALKS
deal	agreement, bargain TEACHERS REJECT NEW PAY DEAL
demo	demonstration 30 ARRESTED IN ANT! TAX DEMO
ditch	abandon EDUCATION MINISTER DITCHES FEES CUT PLAN
dole (BrE)	unemployment pay DOLE QUEUES LENGTHEN
drama	dramatic event; tense situation PRINCE. IN AIRPORI DRAMA
drive	united effort DRIVE TO SAVE WATER
drop	give up, get rid of; fall (noun) GOVERNMENT TO DROP CHILD LABOUR PLAN BIG DROP IN INDUS!RIA! INVESTMENT
due	expected to arrive QUEEN DUE IN RERUN TODAY
grammar
headlines
Written Texts
Section 26
duo	two people
DISABLED DUO ROW ACROSS ATLANTIC
EU	the European Union
EU TRADE MINISTERS TO MEET
edge	move gradually
WORLD EDGES TOWARDS WAR
envoy	ambassador
FRENCH ENVOY DISAPPEARS
face	be threatened by
HOSPITALS FACT. MORE CUTS
STRIKERS FACE SACK
feud	long lasting quarrel or dispute
FAMILY FEUD EXPLODES INTO VIOLENCE- SIX HELD
find	(noun) something that is found
BEACH FIND MAY HE BONIS OF UNKNOWN DINOSAUR
firm	determined not to change
PM FIRM ON TAX LEVELS
flak	heavy criticism
GOVERNMENT FACES FLAK OVER VAT
flare	begin violently
RIOTS FLARE IN ULSTER
foil	prevent somebody from succeeding
TWELVE YEAR OLD FOILS BANK RAIDERS
fraud	swindle, deceit
IAIL FOR TICKET FRAUD MEN
freeze	keep(ing) prices, etc at their present level;
blocking) a bank account
MINISIER WANTS TWO-YEAR PAY FREEZE
DRUG PROFITS FROZEN
fuel	provide reason for growth (of anger, protest, etc)
PAY FREEZE FUELS UNION ANGER
gag ccnsor(ship), prevent(ion) from speaking
AFRICAN PRESIDENT ACTS TO GAG PRESS
FURY AT PRESS GAG
gems	jewels
Í2M GEMS STOLEN
go	resign; be lost, disappear
PM TO GOT
4.001) IOHS TO GO IN NORTH
go for be sold for
PICASSO DRAWING GOFS FOR ÍSM
go-ahead	approval
SCOTTISH ROAD PLAN GETS GO AHEAD
grab	take quickly or violently
INVESTORS GRAB SHARES IN SCOTTISH COMPANIES
grammar
headlines
grip	tight hold; hold tightly
REBPJS TIGHTEN GRIP ON SOUTH
COID WAVE CHIPS COUNTRY
gun down shoot
TERRORISTS GUN DOWN PRIEST
hail	welcome, praise
PM HAUS PEACE PI AN
halt	stop (noun or verb)
CAR PLANT TO HALT PRODUCTION
haul	amount stolen in robbery, or seized by police or customs
TRAIN ROBBl RY: BIG GOLD HAUL
RECORD DRUGS HAUL AT AIRPORT
head lead; leader
PM TO HEAD TRADE MISSION
COMMONWEALTH HI ADS TO MEET IN OTTAWA
head for/	move towards
to	ECONOMY HEADING IOR DISASTER. EXPERTS WARN
heed	pay attention to
GOVERNMENT MUST HEED HOUSING CRISIS SATS BISHOP
hike	rise in costs, prices, etc
(AmE)	INTEREST HIKE WILL HIT BUSINESS
hit	affect badly
SNOWSTORMS HIT TRANSPORI
hit out at attack (with words)
PM HITS OUT AT CRITICS
hitch	problem that causes delay
LAST-MINUTE HITCH DEI AYS SATELLITE LAUNCH
hold	arrest; keep under arrest
MAN HELD ALTER STATION BIASI
POLICE HOLD /ERROR SUSPECT
in (the)	in debt; making a financial loss
red	BRITISH STEEL, IN RED
jail	prison
I All TOR PEACE MARCHERS
jobless	unemployed (people)
THREE MILLION IOBLESS BY APRIL>
key	important, vital
KEY WITNESS VANISHES
landslide	victory by large majority in election
IANDSUDI FOR NATIONALISTS
launch	send(ing) (satellite, etc) into space; bcgin(ning) (campaign,
etc); put(ling) (new product) on market
ENVIRONMENT MINISTER LAUNCHES · IMPAIGN
TOR CLEANER BEACHES
BRITISH ( OMPANY LAUNCHES THROW AWAY CHAIRS
SPACI TELESCOPE LAUNCH DELAYED
grammar - 292 headlines
Written Texts
Seaion 26
lead	clue (in police enquiry)
NEW LEAD IN NIGHTCLUB MURDER CASE
leak	unofficial publication of secret information
PM FURIOUS OVER TAX MAN LEAKS
leap	big increase
LEAP IN IMPORTS
life	imprisonment for life'
LIFE FOR AXE MURDERER
link	connection, contact
NEW TRADE LINKS WITH PERU
loom	threaten to happen
VAT αν FOOD NEW PROTESTS LOOM
Lords	the House of Lords (in Parliament)
LORDS VOTE ON DOG REGIS TRA TION
lotto	the national lottery
DANCING GRANDMOTHER IN RECORD LOTTO WIN
mar	spoil
CROWD VIOLENCE MARS CUP FINAL
media	newspapers, radio and rv
GOVERNMENT TIGHTENS GRIP ON MEDIA
mercy	intended to save lives
DOCTOR IN MERCY DASH TO EVEREST
mission delegation (official group sent to conference, etc)
SHOTS FIRED AT UN MISSION
mob angry crowd; (Amt) organised crime Mafia
MOBS RAMPAGE THROUGH CITY STREETS
MOB LEADERS HELD
move step towards a particular result (often political)
MOVE TO BOOST TRADE LINKS WITH JAPAN
MEP	Member of the European Parliament
MEPS WANT MORE PAY
M p	Member of Parliament
MP DENIES DRUGS CHARGE
nail	force somebody to admit the truth
MP NAILS MINISIER ON PH CLOSURE PLANS
net	win, capture
TWO SISIERS NET £3M IN POOLS WIN
No 10 Number 10 Downing Street (the Prime Minister's residence)
ANOTHER PETITION HANDED IN AT NO 10
GAP (BrE) old age pensioner; anybody over retirement age
OAPS MARCH AGAINST W AR PLANS
odds chances, probability
JONES RE ELECTED AGAINST THE ODDS
on	about, on the subject of, concerning
NEW MOVE ON PENSIONS
opt for	choose
WALES OPTS FOR INDEPENDENCE
grammar · 292 headlines
oust	drive out, replace
MODERATES OUSTED IN UNION ELECTIONS
out IO	intending to
NATIONALISTS OUT TO CAPTURE MASS VOTE
over	about, on the subject of. because of
PROTESTS OVER AID CUTS
pact	agreement
DEFENCE PACT RUNS INTO TROUBLE
pay	wages
TRANSPORT PAY TALKS BREAK DOWN
PC (BrE)	police constable
PC SHOT IN BANK RAID
peak	high point
RANK LENDING HITS NEW PEAK
peer	lord; Member of the House of Lords
PEERS REJECT GOVERNMENT WAGE FREEZE BAN
peg (BrE) hold (prices, etc) at present level
BANKS PEG INTEREST RATES
pensioner old age pensioner; anybody over retirement age
(BrE)	PENSIONER SKIS DOWN MONT BLANC
peril	danger
FLOOD PERIL IN THAMES VALLEY
pit	coal mine
PIT TURNED INTO MUSEUM
plant	factory
STEEL Pl ANT BLAZE
plea	call for help
BIG RESPONSE IO PLEA FOR FLOOD AID
pledge	promise
GOVERNMENT GIVES PLEDGE ON IOBLESS
PM	Prime Minister
EGG THROWN AT PM
poised to	ready to, about to
TORIES POISED TO MAKE ELECTION GAINS
poll	public opinion survey
TORIES AHEAD IN POLI S
pools football pools: a form of gambling in which people guess the
results of football matches
SISTERS SHARI BIG POOLS WIN
premier prime minister
GREEK PREMIER TO VISIT UK
press (for) urge, encourage, ask for urgently
MINISTER PRESSED TO ACTON HOUSING
OPPOSITION PRESS EOR ENQUIRY ON AIR CRASHES
probe investigation; investigate
CALL FOR STUDENT DRUGS PROBE
POLICE PROBE RAC ING SCANDAL
grammar · 292 headlines
Written Texts
Section 26
pull out
push for
quake
quit
quiz
raid
rampage
rap
rates
record
riddle
rift
rock
row (BrE)
rule out
sack (BrE)
scare
scoop
scrap
seek
withdraw; pull-out Withdrawal
US PULLS OUT OF ARMS TALKS
MINISTER URGES PULL OUT FROM OLYMPICS
ask for, encourage
SCHOOLS PUSH FOR MORE CASH
earthquake
HOUSES DAMAGED IN WELSH QUAKE
resign, leave
C HURCH LEADER QUIIS
MINISIER TO QUIT GOVERNMENT
question (verb)
POLICL QUIZ MILLIONAIRE SUPERMARKET BOSS
enter and search; attack (noun and verb), rob. robbery
POLICE RAID DUCHESS'S FLAT
BIG GEMS RAID
riot
FOOTBALL FANS RAMPAGE THROUGH SEASIDE TOWNS
criticise
DOC TORS RAP NEW MINISTRY PLANS
(bank) Interest rates
RATES RISE EXPECTED
bigger than ever before
RECORD LOSS BY INSURANCE COMPANY
mystery
MISSING ΕΜΟΥ RIDDLE•ะ WOMAN HELD
division, disagreement
LABOUR RIFT OVER DEFENCE POLICY
shock, shake
BANK SEX SCANDAL ROCKS CTTY
IRELAND ROCKED BY QUAKE
noisy disagreement, quarrel
NEW ROW OVER PENSION CUTS
reject the possibility of
PM RULES OUT AUTUMN ELECTION
dismissal) from job
STRIKING TRAIN DRIVERS FACE SACK
long running news story
NEW RE VEIATIONS IN RUNAWAY DUKE SAGA
public alarm, alarming rumour
TYPHOID ST ARI IN SOUTHWEST
win (prize, etc)
PENSIONER SCOOPS LOHO FORTUNE
throw out (as useless)
GOVERNMENT SCRAPS NEW ROAD PLANS
look for
POLICE SEEK WITNESS TO KILLING
grammar · 292 headlines
seize	lake (especially in police and customs searches) POLICE SEIZE ARMS AFTER CAR CHASE £3M DRUGS SEIZED AT AIRPORT
sei to	ready to; about to INTEREST RATES SET TO RISE
shed	gel rid of CAR MAKERS TO SHED 5.000 JOBS
slam	criticise violently GENERAL SLAMS DEFENCE POLICY
slash	cut, reduce drastically GOVERNMENT IO SLASH HEAL TH EXPENDTTURL
slate	criticise PM SLATES BISHOP
slay (Amt)	murder FREEWA Y KILLER SLA YS SIX
slump	fall (economic) EXPORTS SLUMP c/ท' FEARS NEW SLUMP
snatch	Steal, robbery BIG WAGES SNATCH IN WEST END TEENAGE ROBBERS SNATCH POLICE CAR rise dramatically IMPORTS SOAR FOR THIRD MONTH
spark	cause (trouble) to start REFEREE S DECISION SPARKS RIOT
split	disagreement) CABINET SPLIT ON PRICES POLICY
spree	wild spending expedition BUS DRIVER SPENDS (30.000 IN THREE DAY CREDIT CARD SPREt
stake	financial interest JAPANESE BUY STAKE IN BRITISH AIRWAYS
storm	angry public disagreement STORM OVER NEW STRIKE LAW
storm out	leave angrily TEACHERS' LEADERS STORM OUT OF MEETING
stun	surprise, shock JOBLESS FIGURES STUN CHY
surge	sudden increase; rise suddenly SURGE IN JOBLESS FIGURES
swap	HEART SWAP BOY BETTER
sway	persuade HOSPITAL PROTEST SWAYS MINISTERS
switch	change (noun or verb) DEFENCE POLICY SWITCH MORE HOMES SWITCH ELECTRICITY SUPPLIERS
swoop	to raid; a police raid POLICE IN DAWN SWOOP ON DRUGS GANG
grammar
headlines
Written Texts
Section 26
threat	danger THREAT Of HU EPIDEMIC
toll	number killed QUAKE TOLL MAY Βί 5,000
top	(adj) senior, most important TOP BANKER KIDNAPPED
top	(verb)exceed IMPORTS TOP LAST YEAR S FIGURES
Tory	Conservative VICTORY FOR TORY MODERA TES
trio	three people /Alt.BREAK TRIO RECAPTURED
troops	soldiers MORE. TROOPS FOR BORDER AREA
UK	the United Kingdom (of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) BRUSSELS CRITICISES UK /All. CONDITIONS
UN	the United Nations UN IN RED: CANNOT BALANCE BUDGET
urge	encourage GOVERNMENT URGED IO ACT αν POLLUTION
ขร	the United States of America US URGED TO PUU OUT Of MIDDLE EAST
VAT	value added tax NEXT, VAT ON BABY FOOD' promise EXILED PRESIDENT vows TO RETURN
walk out	leave in protest CAR WORKERS WALK our OVER H'ACf FREEZE marry BISHOP TO WED ACTRESS
293	punctuation: full stop, question mark
and exclamation mark
1	sentence division
Full stops (AmE periods), question marks and exclamation marks
(AmE exclamation points) art! used to close sentences. After one of these, a new
sentence has a capital letter.
I looked out of the window. It was snowing again.
Why do we try to reach the stars? What is It all for?
We need more houses! Not one day, not next year - now!
We do not normally use full stops, question or exclamation marks to close
grammatically incomplete sentences.
She phoned me as soon as she arrived, (noi She pteM* me. As soon as
she arrived)	-*
grammar · 293 punctuation: full stop, question mark and exclamation mark
เท his job he has to deal with different kinds of people, (not lights job. He has
1(9 deal Uftfh different kinds iff pcopte·)
Did you understand why I was upset? (not du you understand'
Why I was upset?)
However, sometimes we can emphasise a clause or phrase by separating it with
a full stop and capital letter.
People are sleeping out on the streets. เท Hritain. เท the 21st century.
because there are not enough houses.
abbreviations
Full stops can be used after many abbreviations (► 336). But they are often
dropped in modern British English.
Dr. Andrew C- burke, M.A. (or Dr Andrew c burke, MA)
3	indirect questions
We do not use question marks after indirect questions (► 260).
I asked her what time it was. (not .. whai-fbne-U-was?)
294	punctuation: colon
1	explanations
A colon (ะ) usually introduces an explanation or further details.
We decided not to go to Mexico: we had too Utile money.
there was a problem with the car: it was losing oil.
2	lists
A colon can introduce a list.
The main points are as follows: (I).... (2)(3)....
We need three kinds of support: economic, moral and political.
3	subdivisions
A colon can introduce a subdivision of a subject เท a title or heading.
PUNCTUATION: COLON
4	capitals
เท British English, it is unusual for a capital letter to foltow a colon (except at the
beginning of a quotation). However, this can happen if a colon is followed by
several complete sentences.
My main objections are as follows:
lirst of all, no complete budget has been drawn up.
Secondly, there is no guarantee that...
เท American English, colons are more often followed by capital letters.
5	letters
Americans usually put a colon after the opening salutation (Dear...)
in a business letter.
Dear Mr. Callan:
I am writing to...
British usage prefers a comma or no punctuation mark at all in this case.
grammar
punctuation: colon
Written Texts
Section 26
6	direct speech
Normally, direct speech is introduced by a comma เท writing.
Stewart opened his eyes and said. 'Who's your beautiful friendr
But a long passage OÍ direct speech may be introduced by a colon.
Introducing his report for the year, the Chairman said: Ά number of fac tors
have contributed to the company'ร very gratifying results. First of ail.
And a colon is used when direct speech is introduced by a name or short phrase
(as เท the text of a play, or when famous sayings are quoted).
POLONIUS: What do you read, my lord?
NAMLfT: Words, words, words.
เท the words of Murphy's Law: 'Anything that can go wrong will go wrong.'
295	punctuation: semi-colon
1	instead of full stops
Semi-colons (;) are sometimes used instead of full stops, in cases where
sentences are grammatically independent but the meaning is closely connected.
Semi-colons are not nearly as common as full stops or commas.
Some people work best in the mornings; others do better เท the evenings.
It is a fine idea; let us hope dun it is going to work.
Commas are not usually possible in cases like these (► 296.7).
2	in lists
Semi-colons can also be used to separate items in a list, particularly when these
are grammatically complex.
You may use the sports facilities on condition that your subscription is paid
regularly; that you arrange for all necessary cleaning to be carried out; that you
undertake to make good any damage;...
296	punctuation: comma
1	the basic sentence
We do not use commas to separate the basic pans of a sentence (subject and
verb, verb and object).
The standard of living of the dock workers was slowly improving.
(iwn lhe standard of living of thedock workers, »„» slowly improving.)
Many of them were able to begin buying their own homes.
(not Many of them were able to begin buying, their own homes )
2	before and after the basic sentence
If we put long adverbial expressions before the basic sentence, we often
use a comma. Compare:
At that time the standard of living of the dock workers was slowly improving
During the late 1920s and early 19.10s. the standard of living of the dock
workers was slowly improving
grammar · 296 punctuation: comma
We do not so often put commas when adverbial expressions come after the
basic sentence.
The standard of living of the dock workers was slowly improving during the
late 1920s and early 1930s.
inside the basic sentence
When adverbial expressions come between or inside parts of the basic sentence,
we may pul commas before and after them.
the standard of living of the dock workers, during the late 1920s and early
1930s, was steadily improving.
noun phrases
We do not usually separate a noun from the adjectives or other expressions that
go with it.
the mainly foreign labourers (noi the mainly foreign, labourers)
the mainly foreign labourers in the north eastern docks (Nor the mainly foreign
However, we do use commas to separate non identifying expressions (► 234).
Andreas Hergmeister, who established the dock workers' union,...
sentences with conjunctions
We often put commas in sentences with conjunctions, especially
เท longer sentences. Compare:
The situation changed when the export markets began to contract.
The situation changed noticeably for the worse after 1932, when the export
markets began to contract.
We usually use a comma if we start with the conjunction.
When the export markets began to contract, the situation changed.
indirect speech
We do not put commas after verbs of saying, thinking, etc เท indirect speech.
Many commentators declared that the economy was เท serious trouble.
iheit /bl* (VViMn/ffv λ
No one knew how serious the situation would become, (noi Nv-one-kneพ.
luUit ..1J Λ .nJ	)
Λ useful rule: we do not put a comma before that (conjunction or
relative pronoun).
They did not understand that the economic conditions that had existed earlier
had disappeared for good.
between grammatically separate sentences
Between grammatically separate sentences (with no conjunction), we use a full
stop or a semi-colon, but not a comma. Compare:
Orders began to dry up, and most companies reduced their work force.
(comma and conjunction)
Orders began to dry up. Most companies started to reduce their work force.
OR Orders began to dry up; most companies started to reduce their
work force. (but not Orders began Io dry up. most companies started .,)
grammar · 296 punctuation: comma
Written Texts
Section 26
8	conjunctions and adverbs
'โ!''?,.?0me Hnkin? wo,ds (e•ร· consequently, however, therefore) are
adverbR noi conjunctions. A sentence beginning with an adverb is
ระระระ^Jโ.^ ,hc ^"""" belbre it consequent a full ร,op or
se'^‘ 'o,o*’^n«ce«ary between (he sentences (► 2พ๊).
"‘^C'lmpantes started to reduce their
<hdm_ d,y UP’ however, some companies tried to^^vmi^s More'
(*rders-b,‘gan lodryup, however, some companies . . .)
9	commas between adjectives
m	"ระร.*โระ!โ1"?.ร5 ๓“"y Mparale adiec,lvpl> ">al give the same
or related Kinds of information.
a tall, impressive f igure	a long, boring speech
an expensive, ill planned, wasteful protect
Commas are sometimes dropped between short adjectives.
a tall(.) dark(,) handsome cowboy
รู™,’1’'·,	“ à' mà, à » <™««
a green red and gold carpet (no, » green red and gold carpel)
concrete, glass and plastic buildings
รูระ“a"no'	u*'d ·*— «■" ■“«™»
Have you met our handsome new financial director? (not .. ___.... น—'-___
firHWtwl director)	'	'''	—•พ·*Vffnt
, ..โโ?''!?g	devetopments gloomy economic forecasts
โท์?โ.^,oàU^ng^rbs, adjectives are punctuated like a list (see below).
His speech was long, boring detailed and irrelevant.
Hie cowboy was tall, dark and handsome.
10	lists
ะ.โ*,'.ะ!?.'ไะ.’ะ.'.?^?,โ.*1’ใ l!lííc,enl ,hin8S ๒ a ๒'(bul Usually before
โ , IC aM ,cm is lo"«) Compare.
Ttuโ.*?*ะ0?"?β. m‘m‘faelu,c's. distributors, marketing
organisations, banks and credit agencies.
... marketing organisations, banks, and some of the major credit agencies.
11	numbers
ะะ!ะะ™?«“.ใะ,!0.?'*1? ,a,gโ "".Tbe,s ,nl° group* of three figures, by
separating off the thousands and millions.
6,135 (Mir &435)	7,456,189
in dates?1 dwa>'	four-figure numbers, and they are never used
3.164 <«3164 the year 194b
Spaces are sometimes used instead of commas.
There are 1000 millimetres in I metre.
We do not use commas in decimals (► 322.1).
35 - three point five on three and a half (m three comma fire)
grammar . 296 punctuation: comma
297	punctuation: dash
Dashes (-) are especially common in informal writing. They can be used in the
same way as colons, semi colons or brackets.
There are three things I can never remember - names, fares, and I've forgotten
the other.
We had a great time in Greece - the kids really loved it.
My mother - who rarely gets angry - really lost her temper.
Λ dash can introduce an afterthought, or something unexpected and surprising.
We'll be arriving on Monday morning - al least, I think so.
And then we met loseph - with Lisa, believe it or not!

298	punctuation: quotation marks_ ________
Quotation marks can be single ('...') or double .."). They are also called
inverted commas' in British English.
1	direct speech
We use quotation marks (single or double) when we quote direct speech.
For quotations inside quotations, we use double quotation marks inside single
(or single inside double).
‘His last words,'said Albert, 'were "Close that window":
American usage often prefers single quotation marks inside double
เท these cases.
2	special use of words
We often put quotation marks (usually single) round words which are used in
special ways - for example when we talk about them or when we give them
special meanings.
People disagree about how to use the word 'disinterested'.
A textbook can be a 'wall' between the teacher and the class.
American usage often prefers double quotation marks in these cases.
grammar
punctuation: dash
Section 27 Speech and Spoken
Exchanges
INTRODUCTION
Informal spoken sentences are generally simpler than written sentences.
They have fewer subordinate clauses, and mostly use a small number of
common conjunctions (e g. and, but. that, so, If, because, when). Noun phrases
are usually short: a subject is often a single pronoun. More formal grammatical
structures (► 281) and vocabulary (► 333) arc unusual. While many spoken
utterances are similar in structure to written sentences, word order is less fixed.
Information may be 'spaced out’ more by putting some of it before or after the
main sentence (► 299). Some speech docs not fit into the ‘complete sentence’
pattern of writing at all.
Lovely, the way she talks about her mother. That car, is it yours?
How long you been waiting here, then?
‘Maybe call in on limma on the way out?' ‘Not today I can't.'
‘What time?’ ‘ Half past eight.' ‘At your place?" ‘No, Andy's.'
Ihis Section cannot of course offer a complete analysis of spoken language.
The following entries describe a few common features of informal speech.
Do you know what’s wrong with these, and why?
© Those people that we met them เท Greece, shall we call them? ► 299.2
© Where you are going? ► 302
© ’What are you doing?’ ‘What I’m doing? Nothing.’ ► 301.3
© Are you the new secretary, aren't you? ► 305.2
© You never say what you’re thinking, don't you? ► 305.4
© Are you ready?’ Yes, I’m.' ► 308
© "Louise can dance beautifully.’ ’So can her sister dance.' » 309.1
© ’I’m gening bored.’ I also.’ ► 309.!
© Joe didn’t phone, and neither didn’t Kate. ► 309.2
© Couldn't you babysit this evening, please? ► 310.4
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
299	spoken sentence structure
300	avoiding repetition: Wonderful.
301	discourse markers in speech
302	declarative questions:
That'ร the boss?
303	rhetorical questions: who cares?
304	echo questions: She's invited
how many?
305	question tags: basic information
306	question tags: advanced points
307	reply questions: Was It? Did you,
dear?
308	short answers; Yes, he can. etc
309	so am I, neither do they, etc
310	politeness: using questions
311	politeness: distancing Serb forms
312	politeness: softening expressions
313	pronunciation: stress
and rhythm
3)4 pronunciation: intonation
315 pronunciation: weak and
strong forms
grammar · Section 27 Speech and Spoken Exchanges
299	spoken sentence structure
1	spacing out information: a course with three levels, it's carefully
put together
เท willing, information Is often packed tightly into complex structures (sec
Introduction to Section 26). เท speech. Information Is generally separated out
and given piece by piece, to make it easier to take in. One can read at one’s own
speed, backtracking as necessary, but one cannot listen at one’s own speed.
ΗΛΜΛΙ writing: a carefully constructed progressive three-level course incorporating
built-in oral and written revision tests
MOMMA! much: a course with three levels, it's carefully put together, progressive,
H's got revision tests, they're oral and written
2	fronting and topicalisation: Your friend Alex, now he
speaks German.
Spoken sentences may be built up quite differently from written sentences, not
necessarily with the order subject vvrb object Fronting (► 272) Is common in
speech: objects, adverbiais or other elements may be moved to the front to give
them more importance.
People like that I just can't stand.
Only this morning she was saying she had a problem.
What I'm going to do next I realty don't know.
Often, a word or group of words may be moved right out of the sentence
structure and announced at the beginning as the topic, with a more or less
complete sentence following These topicalisation structures are common in
both speech and writing เท many languages; in English they arc unusual
in writing.
Your friend Alex, now he speaks German, maybe he can help US.
(topicalised subject)
Your mother, can I see her if she's ini (topicalised object)
(topicalised indirect object)
That meeting, I thought I was going to scream, (topicalised adverbial)
What they did. they minted everybody and then forgot the date.
(topicalised verb phrase)
lately, the way she talks about her mother, (topicalised complement)
Topicalised subjects and objects are repeated by pronouns in these structures
l >๖14» friend Alex ...he·, Your mother... her). But note that English does not
normally allow these 'resumptive' pronouns inside relative clauses,
even in speech.
Those people that we met เท Greece, let's send them a card, (nvi NOt Those
3	tags: They work very hard, most of them.
We can space out information by putting some of it เท a complete sentence and
then adding more details at the end. The extra words at the end are called a ’tag’
or tail’.
grammar
spoken sentence structure
Speech and Spoken Exchanges
Section 27
Those kids work I Try hard, most of them.
That's the doorbell. I think.	I donΊ mind, to he honest.
It is possible to 'announce' the subject with a pronoun, and put the full subject
in a tag. These structures arc more common เท British than American English.
They're very polite, your children.
เท sentences like these, we often drop the pionoun at the beginning. We can
also drop unstressed forms of be. (For more detailed information about ‘ellipsis’
of this kind, ► 277.)
Hasn't a chance, Fred. likes his beer, lack. Very polite, your children.
Living เท the douds, you lol. Crazy, that driver.
The tag can repeat the verb by using an auxiliary.
(He) hasn Ί a chance. Fred hasn Ί.	(He) likes his beer, lack don
(She) really got on my nenTS, Sylvia did.
4 emphasising tags: You've gone mad, you have.
Sometimes a tag gives no new information, but simply repeats and emphasises
the subject and verb
You've gone mad, you have. I'm getting fed up, I am.
He likes his beer, he does.
Pronouns are not usually used alone in tags, except for reflexives.
(I) don't think much of the party, myself.
fl* other UK* ฟ Ιφ»1 «mil»T nnKturc». ► SOS-Joe (qucMlon พ). » vn (r»pb qvtukiirt)
and ► >00 (Λοη arüwm).
300	avoiding repetition: Wonderful, isn't it?
Speech is more tolerant of repetition than formal writing (► 287), but even in
spoken exchanges people often prefer to avoid repeating each other’s words
without a good reason. There is a common kind of exchange where one speaker
gives his/her opinion of something, and the other agrees by saying the same
thing in other words which are at least as emphatic. Repetition is
carefully avoided.
'Glorious day: ' Wonderful, isn't nr (not IÍHIAIIV Glorious, isn’t it?)
Terrible weather.’ 'Dreadful'
'United didn’t play very well, then.’ 'Absolute rubbish:
Speakers can of course repeat vocabulary and structures deliberately. This can
be done for emphasis.
I'm very very angry. You 'น eat every mouthful. Every single mouthful.
Repeating somebody else's words can show surprise or disbelief.
'I'm getting married: ‘You're getting married? Mio to?
to· more 4lx»l «ho qtMttfcni’ ๙ th» lind. . พ.
grammar · 300 avoiding repetition: Wonderful, isn't it?
301	discourse markers in speech
Discourse markers are words and expressions which help IO structure spoken
exchanges and written text. (eg. first of all, by the way, on the other hand, in any
case, to sum up}. English has a ver)· large number of these. Some are used เท all
kinds of discourse, some mostly เท formal writing, and others mainly in informal
speech, 'those that are most common เท speech are discussed here; some of
these (but not all) are also used เท formal writing. ► 284. Discourse markers can
communicate several things:
•	‘What are we talking about?’ They can introduce or clarify a topic, and show
divisions and changes of topic.
•	‘What are we doing?’ They can show the type of communication that is
going on.
•	attitude They can show a speaker’s attitude to what he or she is saying, or to
the listener's expectations.
1	What are we talking about?
Some discourse markers say what a speaker is going to focus on, and may show
a link with previous discussion. Others show subdivisions and changes of topic.
focusing: talking/speaking of about; regarding; as regards;
as far as... is/are concerned; as for
Ί saw Max and Emma today. You know die - ' Talking of Max, you know
he's leaving?
And speaking of Australia, did you see that documentary., .?
Regarding that car you were thinking of selling - how much do you
want for it?
As far as the kids are concerned, let's ask them U'hat they think
As for that business of going to the police, I'm sorry I mentioned it.
I've invited Andy and lose ph. As for loshua, I never want to see him again.
subdividing: first; firstly; first of all; in the first place; to start with;
for one thing; and then
I don't think I can help you. Firstly) First of all For one thing เท the first
place. I haven't got the time. And then I’m going Io be away all next week.
To start with, let ทน· remind you that I'm the one who's paying for all this.
brief change of subject: incidentally; by the way
I was talking to Annie yesterday. Incidentally By the way, did you know
she's got a new job? And she said that fake told her..,
returning to previous subject: as I was saying
... on the roof - leremy, pul the cat down, please. As I was saying, if lack gels
up on the roof and looks al the tiles ...
introducing a new subject (for example เท lectures): now; all right;
right; OK
OK. Now a word about iron oxide. There'ร two basic types...
Any questions? Right, let's have a word about tomorrow's arrangements.
grammar - 301 discourse markers in speech
Speech and Spoken Exchanges
Section 27
summing up: all เท all; เท a word
And the car broke down And ladle gal mugged. And then Sophie น«ร ill.
All เท all, II wasn't the best trip we’ve bad.
He gets up at midday. He won't look for a job. lie doesn't help around the
house. เท a word1 he's bone idle.
2	What are we doing?
Some discourse markers make >t clear what kind of communication is going on.
generalising: on the whole; to some extent; in general;
in all/most/many/some cases: broadly speaking
On the whole / เท general, people like to help others.
’Do you think TV is bad for kidsT 'Well. เท some cases, maybe.'
To tome extent. It's an interesting job. but there are some pretty dull patches.
Broadly speaking. I gel on pretty well with people.
exceptions: apart from; except for
I'll eat anything apart from except for chillies.
making contrasting points: still; all the same; even so; mind you;
on the other hand; but; yet; however; in spite of this/that
I'm glad to hair a place of my own. OK. it's a long way from the centre, and it
needs redecorating Still, it's home.
I was a bit bored and lonely, yrs. blit I had a reasonably pleasant time
all the same
lenkins wasn 7 on top form. Even so, he got two goals.
Bankers arc generally nice people Mind you. I wouldn 7 want my daughter to
marry one.
She can be really irritating On the other hand, she’s got a heart of gold.
OK. we've got to cut down expenses. But we can 7 gel rid of the car.
He's «5. Yet he still takes care of the farm.
Ill	do a lol for my family. However, there are limits.
The train was two hours late. เท spite of that, ur got to the match on time.
contradicting: on the contrary; quite the opposite
I don't dislike him at all. On the contrary Quite the opposite. I'm very fond
of him.
showing a logical or causal connection: so; then (► >83)
They didn't think I had enough experience, so I didn't get the job.
7	don't like this slew.’ Then So don't cat n:
persuading: after all (► 361); look at it this way, look; question lags
(► 305); negative questions o 218)
Why shouldn't ร/น- buy a horse if she wants to? After all. it's her money.
Look at it this way. Suppose you were in the same position สร me. How would
you feel?	-»
grammar · 301 discourse markers in speech
We can Ί go to the gym nou>. Look, they dose in an hour.
You're taking this too seriously, aren’t you'
It's a bit expensive, don't you think?
adding: also; on top of that; as well as that; another thing is; besides;
I mean (► 526.4)
I don't like his attitude. Also, I don't believe he's actually got the qualifications
he says he has.
They’re cutting unemployment benefits. And on top of that, they're
putting up VAT.
The place is close to the sea. And another thing is. the people are
really friendly.
I don't like her going out alone at night. You don't know U'hat sort of people
she's going to meet. And besides I mean, she's far loo young
giving examples: in particular; for instance; for example
I'd like to have time to talk to some of the others. เท particular, I want to find
out what loshua thinks.
iVt> could invite some of the neighbours, for instance / for example,
less and Simon.
attitude
Some discourse markers express the speaker's attitude to what he/she is saying,
or modify what is being said to make the communication more effective.
showing speaker’s altitude: no doubt; honestly; frankly
No doubt you will be paying your rent by the end of the week. Mr lenkins?
(No doubt is often ironic: the speaker may not be at all sure of Mr lenkins*
intentions.)
Honestly, I think your poetry is remarkable.
‘What do you think of my hairf ‘Frankly, darling it's a disaster.'
making things clear: that is to say; in other words; I mean; I guess
There's a problem about tomorrow. That is to say, I don't think we can come.
I've got a funny feeling about him. เท other words I mean, I don't trust him.
softening and correcting: tn my view/opinion; apparently; so to speak;
that is to say; more or less; I thinkjfcel/suppose'reckon/guess; sort of, kind
of; really; well, at least; I'm afraid (► 359.2); actually (► 358); or rather;
I mean
A lot of people say he's a bad manager. เท my view opinion, he’s OK.
'I've heard there's been a fire al the office.' "Yes. apparently so.'
Dan's the family conscience, so to speak. He's always telling us what's right.
Leave me out. That Is to say /1 mean. I'm not sure your plan will work
grammar - 301 discourse markers in speech
Speech and Spoken Exchanges
‘Arc you still looking for work? 'Yes. Weil, sort of, more or less.'
He's not always very good at organising Ids life. At least, that's my impression.
Ί sort of wondered if you could help me with this.’ ‘Sorry, I'm afraid
I'm not free.'
I can't get to the hospital to see lulie. I mean, not this week, anyway.
She lives al 19 Gordon Terrace - or rather. Gordon Close.
(LZtr	ไ
V"*· · · » V» «zlllvl · · «I
My brother didn Ί do well at school, though actually, he did get a prize for art.
dismissing what was said before: เท any case; anyhow; anyway;
at any rate
These expressions mean ‘What was said before doesn’t matter - this is
the real point.'
Maybe it was Daniel, or maybe it was loc. Or lack. Anyway, it was
one of them.
I can't get to the hospital to see lulie. I mean1 not this week, anyhow.
The hotel's probably OK. It's cheap, and the place seems clean. At any rale, it’s
better than sleeping เท the car.
I’m not sure what lime I'll arrive, maybe seven or eight. เท any case, I'll
certainly be there before ร.:พ.
referring to the hearer’s expectations: in fact; actually; as a matter offact;
to tell the truth; well; actually
These expressions introduce information that will contradict (usually) or
perhaps confirm what the hearer or reader thinks.
’So what do you think? 'To tell the truth, I wasn't really listening to what
everyone was saying'
How are your medical studies going? ’4s a matter of fad, I've decided to drop
out for a year and get a job.'
Hello. Adrian: 'Actually, my name's Richard.'
■ Was the skiing good? 'Ye.ร, actually, it was wonderful:
’How did the team do? ‘Well, they lost:
gaining time: let me see; let's see; let me think; well; you know; I don’t
know; I mean; kind of; sort of
‘How much is it going to cost? 'Let me see. There's materials. And transport.
And..
Wien can you pay me back? ' Well, you know, let me think, I don't know,
I mean, things are kind of tight just now. .. :
checking common ground: you know; (you) know what I mean?; of course
(► 540); you see
A speaker says you know to tell the hearer (or to pretend) that they share the
same piece of information.
I was talking to Marty - you know, the guy who works with Alex - and he
thinks we can ...
We were in Haworth you know, the village where the Brontes lived. And 1..
He never called her. Because unattractive men don’t want unattractive girls;
(you) know what I mean?	-*
Section
grammar · 301 discourse markers เท speech
Of course implies (ha( everybody knows something (and can be used to make
lhe hearer feel inferior for not knowing it!).
Il’s a lovely piece, isn’t it' Of course. Il was originally written for violin and
piano,...
You see introduces information that the speaker thinks the hearer does
not share.
It's no good using this battery charger. You see, it’s 12 volts, and your battery is
I’m sorry, but you can't come in here. You see. it's for members only.
302	declarative questions: That's the boss?
เท spoken questions, we do not always put an auxiliary Serb before the subject.
You're working late tonight?
These ‘declarative questions’ are often used when the speaker thinks he/shc
knows or has understood something, but wants to make sure or express
surprise. A rising intonation is common.
This is your car? (- I suppose this is your car, isn't it?)
That's the boss' I thought he was the cleaner.
'We're going to Hull for the weekend: ' You're going to Hullr
This word order is not normally possible after a question word.
Where are you going? (sor Where you are going')
303	rhetorical questions: Who cares?
1	questions that do not expect an answer
Questions do not always ask for information. เท many languages, a question with
an obvious answer can be used simply as a way of drawing attention to
something. Questions of this kind are called ‘rhetorical questions'.
Do you know what time it is? (- You're late.)
Who's a lovely baby? (= You're a lovely baby.)
I can't find my coat: What's this, then?’ (- Here it is, stupid.)
Very often, a rhetorical question draws attention to a negative situation -
the answer is obviously No, or there is no answer to the question.
What‘ร the use of asking her ? (- It's no use asking her. )
How do you expect me to find milk on a Sunday night? Where am I going to
find a shop open? (= You can't reasonably expect... There aren’t any
shops open.)
Where's my money? (- You haven’t paid me.)
7	can run faster than you.' 'Who caresr (- Nobody cares.)
Are we going to let them do this to US? (ะะ We aren’t...)
Have you lost your tongue? (- Why don’t you say anything?)
What do you think you’re doing? (■ You can’t justify what you’re doing.)
Who do you think you are? (- You aren't as important as your
behaviour suggests.)
Why don't you take a taxi? ( There’s no reason not to.)
grammar · 302 declarative questions: Hun's lhe boss?
Speech and Spoken Exchanges
Section 27
2	Why/How should...?
Why should...? can be used aggressively (0 reject suggestions, requests and
Instructions.
’/Inna's very unhappy: · Why should I carer
'Couldyour unfe help US เท lhe office tomorrow?’ · Why should she? She doesn't
work for you.'
How should/would I know? is an aggressive reply to a question.
■ What time does the film start?' 'How should I know?
3	negative yes/no questions
Negative yra/zro questions (► 21H) often suggest that the speaker wants the
answer Yes, or some other positive response?
Hoyen't I done enough for you? (- I have done enough for you.)
Didn’t I tell you it would rain? (ธ I told you ...)
Don 't touch that.' ■ Why shouldn’t !?(= I have a perfect right to.)
304	echo questions: She's invited how many?
1	You're getting married?
1๖ question what has been said, a speaker may simply repeat (‘echo’) what he/
site has heard. Λ rising intonation is common.
‘I'm getting married: ' You’re getting married?
2	Take a look at what?
To question one pan of a sentence, we can repeat the rest of the sentence, and
put a stressed question word in place of the part we are asking about.
lust take a look at that: 'Take a look at whatr
She's invited thirteen people to dinner' 'Sheร invited how many?
We're going to Tierra del Tuegofor a month: 'You're going wherer
'I've broken the fettle gauge: ‘You’ve broken the what?
To question a verb, or the pan of a sentence beginning with the verb, do what
‘She set fire to the garage.' She dill what (to the garage)?
3	repeating a question: Where am I going? Home.
A speaker may question a question, by repeating it with a rising intonation.
Note that we use normal question structures with inverted word order, not
indirect question structures, in this case.
• Where are you going? · Where am I going? Home.'
(sot . . เพพ·».· I'm going?...)
'What does he wantr H7rnr does he want? Money, as usual:
(μιϊ ·, Πhill he	I
Are you tired? Am I tired? Of course not: (sot .. Whether I'm Med?...)
Do squirrels eat insects? Do squirrels eat insects? I'm not sure.'
(sot .. Whether tqwrrehnil inseets1 . .)
grammar. 304 echo questions: She's invited how many?
305	question tags: basic information
1	What are question tags?
'Question lags' (also called 'tag questions') are the small questions that often
come at the ends of sentences เท speech, and sometimes in informal "Tiling.
The film wasn't very good, was nr
Negatives are usually contracted. Full forms are possible เท formal speech.
[hat’s the doorbell, isn't it? You take sugar in lea, don't you?
They promised to repay US within six months, did they not? (formal)
Question tags can be used to check whether something is true, or to ask
for agreement.
2	negative after affirmative, and vice versa
Question tags are used after affirmative and negative sentences, but not
after questions.
You’re the new secretary, aren't you?
You're not the new secretary, are you?
To check information or ask for agreement, we most often put negative tags after
affirmative sentences, and non negative tags after negative sentences.
It's cold, isn't it?	แ'ร not warm, is it?
3	auxiliaries
If the main sentence has an auxiliary verb (or non auxiliary be), this is repeated
in the question tag.
Sophia can speak Trench, can Ί she?
t---------1
ihe meeting’s at ten. Isn't it?
You didn’t speak to Luke, did you?
You wouldn Ί like a puppy, would you?
If the main sentence has no auxiliary, the question tag has do.
You like oysters, don't you?
Harry gave you my address, didn't he?
grammar - 305 question tags: basic information
speech and spoken Exchanges
Section 27
4	negative words
Non-ncgative tags arc used after sentences containing negative words like never,
no, nobody, hardly, scarcely and little.
You never say what you’re thinking, do you? (not ... don 't you?)
It’s no good, is it? (not .. ■ isn't it?)
It's hardly rained at all this summer, has it?
There's little we can do about it. is there?
5	meaning and intonation
เท speech, we can show the exact meaning of a question tag by the intonation.
If the tag is a real question if we really want to know something and are not
sure of the answer - we use a rising intonation: the voice goes up.
lhe meetings at four o'clock, isn’t it?
If the tag is not a real question - if we are sure of the answer - we use a falling
intonation: the voice goes down.
It's a beautiful day, isn Ί it?
เท wilting, the exact meaning of a question tag is normally clear from
the context.
6	requests: You couldn't..could you?
We often ask for help or information by using the structure
negative statement · question tag
You couldn't lend me a Iround. could you?
You haven’t seen my watch anywhere, have you?
306	question tags: advanced points
1	aren't I?
The question tag for / am is aren’t I?
I’m late, aren't I?
Am I not? is also possible in very formal contexts.
2	imperatives: Come in, won't you?
After imperatives, won't you? can be used to invite people politely to do things
(especially in British English).
Come เท, won’t you?
Will· would/can. could you? can all be used to tell or ask people to do things.
Give me a hand, will you?	Open a window, would you?
Can't you expresses impatience.
Shut up, can't you?
After a negative imperative, we use will you?
Don’t forget, will you?
grammar » 306 question tags: advanced points
z Let's..shall we?
After let's ...(เท suggestions, etc, ► 225), we use shall we?
I ft’s half a party, shall น*?
4	There's.... isn't there?
there can be used in question tags.
There's something wrong, isn't there?
There weren't any problems, were there?
When there's introduces a plural noun phrase (► 130.6), the tag is aren't there?
There's some more chairs upstairs, aren't there?
5	it and they with nothing, nobody, somebody, etc
We use it in question tags to refer to nothing and everything.
Nothing can happen, can it?
We use they (► 175) to refer to nobody, somebody and everybody
(and no one, etc).
Nobody phoned, did they?
Somebody wanted a drink, didn't they? Mw was it?
6	non-auxiliary have
After non auxiliary have (referring to states), question tags with ha If and do arc
often both possible. (Do is normal in American English.)
Your father has a bad back, hasn't/doesn't he?
7	'same-way' question tags: You're getting married, are you?
Non-negative question tags are quite common after affirmative sentences.
These are often used as responses to something that has been said: the speaker
repeals what hc/she has just learnt, and uses the tag to express interest,
surprise, concern or some other reaction.
So you're getting married, are you? How nice!
So she thinks she's going to become a doctor, does she? Weil, well.
You think you're funny, do you?
‘Same-way· tags can also be used to ask questions. เท this structure, we use the
main sentence to make a guess, and then ask (in the tag) if it was correct.
Your mother’s al home, is she?	This is the last bus, is it?
You can eat shellfish, can you?
I'll..., shall I? can he used to make offers.
I'll hold that for you, shall I?
Negative 'same-way· tags arc occasionally heard; they usually sound aggressive.
I see. You don't like my cooking, don't you?
8	ellipsis: Nice day, isn't it?
เท sentences with question tags, it is quite common to leave out pronoun
subjects and auxiliary verbs. (This is called 'ellipsis·. For details, ► 277.)
(It’s a) nice day, isn Ί it? (She was) talking to my husband, was she?
grammar
question tags: advanced points
Speech and Spoken Exchanges
ciion 27
In very informal speech, a question tag can sometimes be used after a question
with ellipsis.
Have a good lime, did you? Your mother at home, li she?
lack be here tomorrow, will he?
9	I (don't) think
Note the use of question tags in sentences beginning with I (don’t) think and
similar expressions (► 277).
I think he’s Norwegian, isn’t he? (noi ... don’t I?)
I don’t think it will rain, will it? (not ... do I?)
I suppose you 're hungry, aren’t you?
10	simpler question tags
เท informal speech, simpler tags such as No? (after affirmatives) and Hight? are
very often used to check information or ask for agreement.
We're seeing her tomorrow, no? t hey all speak English, right?
You haven’t got a ticket, right?
Right can also be used, rather aggressively, to mean 'Is that clear to you?·
this is your last chance, right? I'm not working extra hours, right?
in non standard speech, isn't it?! innil? is common as a universal question tag
You wants them bricks today, innil?
>๖1 dcuat nt <xticr แ·เป็เ ๙ I»x- » 29*
307	reply questions^ Was it? Did you, dear?
Short questions are often used in conversation to show that the listener is paying
attention and interested. They are constructed with auxiliary verb . pronoun,
like question tags (► 305).
'It น«ร a terrible party.’' Was nr ‘Yes..:
Note that these questions do not ask for information - they simply show that the
listener is reacting to what has been said. More examples:
‘We had a lovely trip.’ ‘Did your ‘Yes, we went..
'I've got a headache.’ ‘Have you, dear? I'll get you an aspirin.'
‘lack likes that girl next door.' ‘Oh, docs hcT
7	don't understand.' ‘Don’t you?I’m sorry.'
Negative questions in reply to affirmative statements express emphatic
agreement (like negative question exclamations, ► 223.4).
‘It was a lovely concert. ‘ Yes, wasn’t it? I did en/oy it:
‘She's put on a lot of weight: 'i'es, hasn’t the?'
grammar . 307 reply questions: Was it? Did you. dear?
308	short answers: Yes, he can, etc
Answers are often grammatically incomplete, because they do not need to repeat
words that have just been said. A common 'short answer* pattern is subject ♦
auxiliar)' verb, together with whatever other words are really necessary.
'Can he swim? 'Yes, he can: (More natural than Yes, he can รพเท)
'Has it Slopped raining?' 'No, it hasn't'
Are you enjoying yourself? 7 certainly am.'
'Don’t forget to write.' 7 won't.’
You didn't phone Debbie last night.' ‘No, but I did this morning'
We use do if there is no other auxiliary.
'She likes cakes: 'She really does."
‘That surprised you.' ‘It certainly did:
Non-auxiliary be and have can be used in short answers.
'Is she happy? 7 think she is.'
'Have they any money? Ves, they have:
Short answers can be followed by tags (► 305-306).
•Nice day: ' Yes, it is, isn’t it?
Note that stressed, non-contracted affirmative forms are used in short answers.
Yes, I am. (.SOT Yes.fm.)
lor similar Mrwiures. · >07 (r<p6 queMlom). » พ'-*·> (queulim น*»! •ฟ · 27S (ellip->l
309	so am /, neither do they, etc
1	so + auxiliary + subject
We can use SO to mean ‘similarly, also', before auxiliar)’ verb · subject
The structure is used to answer or add to what came before. Note the word order.
Louise can dance beautifully, and so can her sister.
'I've lost their address ' So have i:
The same structure is possible with non auxiliar) be and have.
I was tired, and so were the others.
7	have a headache: 'So have i:
After a clause with no auxiliary verb, we use doidoes/did.
■He just uwiis the best for his country.' So did Hitler.'
We do not normally use a more complete verb phrase in this structure.
We can say. for example. So can her sister, but not Socan he sister fiance.
A more informal alternative to So am /, etc is Me too.
I'm getting bored: ‘Me too: (noi I fdso)
2	neither do 1.1 can't either, etc
We can use neither and nor as adverbs to mean also not’. Neither and nor come
at the lie ginning of a clause, and are followed by inverted word order (► 270):
auxiliar)' verb + subject.
7	can't swim' ‘Neither nor can i: (not I also can's.)
Ruth didn Ί turn up, and neither.· nor did Kate, (not ... and Kale didn't loo)
เท American English, nor is not normally used after and.
grammar · 306 short answers: yes.
Speech and Spoken Exchanges
We can also use not... either with the same meaning and normal word order.
Ίain't swim: 7 can’t either.’
Ruth didn't turn up, and Kate didn't either
เท very informal speech, me neither (and occasionally me either, especially in
American English) can he used instead ok/.. .n't either.
7	can't swim.’ 'Me neither.'
Only one negative word (not or neither) is necessary to give a negative meaning
Neither did Kate on Kate didn’t cither.
(not Neither didn't Kale OH Kmedidn 't neither)
for the |H0ituniMt»n ๙ tithrr. ► tML	For the pronuncuexin <4 ท«นพ·. ► 157
3 SO + subject ♦ auxiliary: So it is!
So is used เท another short structure before subject + auxiliary verb (note the
word order) to express surprised agreement.
'It's raining.' 'Why, so it is'
'You’ve Just put the teapot in the fridge.' ‘So I haver
310	politeness: using questions
1	requests: Could you ...?
We usually ask people to do things for US by means of yes/no questions.
(This suggests that the hearer can choose whether to agree or not.)
Could you tell me the time, please? (much more polite than Please tell me
the time.)
Some other typical structures used in requests:
Could you possibly tell me the way to the station? (very polite)
Would you mind switching on the TV?
Would you like to help me for a few minutes?
You couldn't lend me some money, could you? (informal)
Indirect yes/no questions are also used เท polite requests.
I wonder if you could (possibly) help me for a few minutes.
2	other structures: telling people to do things
If we use other structures (for example imperatives, should, had better), we are
not asking people to do things, but telling or advising them to do things.
These structures can therefore seem rude if we use them เท requests, especially
เท conversation with strangers or people we do not know well. Please makes an
order or instruction a little more polite, but does not turn it into a request.
The following structures can be used perfectly correctly to give orders, instructions
or advice, but they are not polite ways of requesting people to do things.
Please help me for a feu· minutes.	You ought to tell me your plans.
Help me, would you?	You should shut the door.
Carry this for me, please.	You had better help me.
grammar «310 politeness: using questions
3	shops, restaurants, etc
Requests in shops, restaurants, etc are usually more direct, and are not always
expressed as questions. Typical structures:
Can I have one of those, please? I'd like to see the wine list, please.
Could I have a look al the red ones? I would prefer a small one.
Give me..please and I want_____ please are not normally considered polite.
But in places where only a few kinds of thing are sold and not much needs to be
said, it is enough just to say what is wanted and add please.
The limes', please. Two cheeseburgers, please.
Black coffee, please. Return to Lancaster, please.
4	negative questions
Negative questions (► 218) are not used in polite requests.
Could you give me a light? (not Couldn't you gwe^me a light? - this sounds
like a complaint.)
But negative statements with question tags are common in informal requests in
British English.
You couldn’t babysit this evening could you?
I	don't suppose you could babysit this evening, could you? (very polite)
5	expressions of opinion
Expressions of opinion can also be made less direct by turning them into
questions. Compare:
II	would be better to paint it green, (direct expression of opinion)
Wouldn't it be better to paint it green? (less direct: negative question asking
for agreement)
Would it be belter to paint it green? (open question - very indirect)
311 politeness: distancing verb forms ________________
1	past tenses: How much did you want to spend?
We can make requests (and also questions, suggestions and statements) less
direct (and so more polite) by using verb forms that suggest ‘distance’ from the
immediate present reality. Past tenses are often used to do this.
How much did you want to spend, sir? (meaning 'How much do you
want to spend? )
How many days did you intend to Slay? (meaning"... do you intend ...')
I wondered if you were free this evening.
2	progressives: I'm hoping ...
Progressive forms can be used เท the same way. They sound more casual and
less definite than simple forms, because they suggest something temporary’
and incomplete.
I'm hoping you can lend me LIO. (Less definite than I hop<■...)
What time are you planning to arrive? (More casual sounding than Please let
us know what time you plan to arrive.)
I'm looking forward to seeing you again. (More casual than I look
forward.,.)
I'm afraid we must he going.
grammar · 311 politeness: distancing verb form*
Speech and Spoken Exchanges
Seclion .
Past progressives give two levels of distancing.
Good morning. I was wondering do you need help moving that stuff?
Were you looking for anything special? (in a shop)
I was thinking - what about borrowing lake's rar?
3	future: You'll need to ...
Another way to distance something is to displace it into the future. Will need
have to can be used to soften instructions and orders.
I'll have to ask you to wait a minute.
And will is sometimes used to say how much money is owed.
That will be £1.63, please.
Future progressive verbs are often used to enquire politely about
people’s plans (► 11).
Will you be going away this summer?
4	modal verbs: would, could and might
The modal verbs would, could and might also make questions, requests and
suggestions less direct.
I thought it would be nice to have a picnic.
HL' I thought I'd tome over anti introduce myself My name's Andy.
Could you give me a hand?
Could 1 ask you to translate this for me?
We could ask Daniel to help US.
I was wondering if you might he interested เท a game of tennis.
Ί came เท and ordered some shoes from you.' ‘Oh yes, sir. when uould that
have been, exactly?'
Would is very often used to form requests and offers with verbs like like
and prefer.
What would you like to drink?
Note the common use of would before verbs of saying and thinking, to make
a statement sound less definite.
I uould say we'd do better to catch the earlier train.
This is what I would call annoying.
I uould think we might stop for lunch soon.
I'm surprised you didn't like the film. I would have thought it was just your
kind of thing.
We uould ask passengers to haltr their tickets ready for inspection.
5	conditional and negative expressions
Another way of distancing suggestions from reality is to make them conditional
or negative.
It would be better If we turned it the other way up.
What if we stayed at home for a change? Suppose I gave Alice a call?
If you would come this way...	I wonder if you could lend me £5?
I don't suppose you want to buy a car, do you?
You uouldn't like to come out with us, by any chance?
You couldn't take the children to school, could you? (mrr NOT Couldn't you lake
the children ioschool? This sounds like a complaint, ► 310.4.)
grammar · 311 politeness: distancing verb forms
312	politeness: softening expressions
1	quite, maybe, I think, etc
Wc can express our opinions and intentions less directly (and therefore more
politely) by using softening expressions like quite, rather, kind of, a bit, maybe,
teem, at all (► 387).
He's quite difficult to understand, isn't he?
I find her rather host)', don Ί you ?	Maybe I ’ll go for น walk now.
The food'ร a bit expensive.	they don ‘l seem very friendly.
This music 'ร kind of boring.	Will you be seeing Denise at all?
2	I think I'll...
We can say that wc arc thinking of doing things, instead of expressing our
intentions directly.
I think I'll go to bed in a few minutes.
I’m thinking of going to London tomorrow.
I'd quite like to start thinking about going home.
3	We would like to ...
เท a formal style, requests, invitations, suggestions, etc are often introduced by
would like instead of being expressed directly.
IVe would like to invite you to give a talk IO our members on lune 14th.
I'd like to suggest that we take a vote.
I would like to congratulate you on your examination results.
313	pronunciation: stress and rhythm
Stress and rhythm are important elements in English pronunciation. If learners
pronounce ail the syllables in a sentence too regula I ly, with the same force and
at the Sarne speed, they can be quite hard for English speakers to understand.
And if learners are not sensitive to English stress and rhythm, they may not
perceive unstressed syllables (especially 'weak forms’, ► 315) at ail, and this may
make it difficult for them to follow natural English speech.
1	stress
Stress is the word for the strength with which syllables are pronounced. เท
speech, some parts of English words and sentences sound louder than others.
For example, the first syllable of CARpet, the second syllable of inspection or the
last syllable of confuse are usually stressed, while the other syllables เท these
words are not. เท the sentence Don't look at Hist HI didn't do it, the words
him and he arc stressed in order to emphasise them. Stressed syllables arc not
only louder; they may also have longer vowels, and they may be pronounced on
a higher musicai pitch.
grammar · 312 politeness: softening expressions
Speech and spoken Exchanges
Section 2
2	word stress
English words with more than one syllabic mostly have a fixed stress pattern.
There are not many rules to show which syllable of a word will be stressed: one
usually has to learn the stress pattern of a word along with นิร meaning, spelling
and pronunciation Examples:
Stressed on first syllable:
After. CApital. llAPpen, exercise. fAsy
Stressed on second syllable:
inSlEAD. pronounce aGRFfmcnl. particularly
Stressed on third syllable:
enter!Λ!ร·. under SIAM), concenlRAtion
The stressed syllable of a word is the one that can carry an intonation movement
(►314 below).
Many short phrases also have a fixed Stress pattern.
front DOOR (not FRONT door) living room (not living ROOM)
Related words can have different stress patterns.
to inCREASE an increase
Photograph photographer photoGKAphic
A good dictionary will show how words and common phrases are Stressed.
3	variable stress
Some words have variable stress. เท these, the stress is al or near the end when
the word is spoken alone, but it can move to an earlier position when the word
is in a sentence, especially if another stressed word follows. Compare:
afternoon (stress at the end)
It's time for my Afternoon nAP. (stress at the beginning)
-	Japanese.
lApanese cooking
-	ninetffn
The year nineteen minty
Many short phrases - for Instance, two word verbs - have variable stress.
Their marriage broke UP.
Money problems HROKE up their marriage.
Do sit DOWN.
She SA r down and cried.
-	It’s dark BLUE.
a DARK blue surr
4	stress and pronunciation
Unstressed syllables nearly always have one of two vowels: 1/ (in unstressed
prefixes written with e, like de-, te-, pre·, ex-) or เ» (เท other cases).
Compare the first syllables เท the following pairs of words:
-	PRtference P'prefrans/)
-	Expert (''ckspãít/;
exPERience (' ik'spiorinnsj
-	confident (/konftdant J
confUSED fkan'fjutzd )
-	PARÜde (?pa:tikl/J
particular (/pa’ttkjab(r)9	-»
grammar - 313 pronunciation:
and rhythm
Many short words (mostly pronouns, prepositions, conjunctions and auxiliary
verbs) have two quite different pronunciations: a normal 'weak' unstressed form,
and a 'strong' form used when the word has special stress. (For details, ► .115.)
Ί was (เพ3/เ) here first: ‘No you weren't: ' i'cs I was (เพ0/1):
5	emotive and contrastive stress
We can use stress to emphasise (strengthen) a particular word or expression.
There are two main reasons for this. We may wish to show that we feel strongly
about what we are saying ('emotive emphasis').
I feel GRi A	Your hair looks so good like that!
This is your LAST chance.
Or we may wish to show a contrast between, for example, true and false,
or present and past, or a rule and an exception (‘contrastive emphasis').
‘Why weren’t you at the meeting? 7 WAS at the meeting:
I don't do much sport now, but I DID play football when I was younger.
I don’t see my family much, but I visit my MOTHER occasionally.
Emphasis can also show that something expected actually happened,
or is the case.
I thought I'd pass the exam, and I DID pass.
We often stress auxiliary verbs to show emphasis. This can make a whole
sentence sound emphatic, or it can indicate a contrast. Most auxiliary verbs
change their pronunciation when they arc stressed (► 315).
You /Mil grown! I AM telling the truth! You MUST believe me!
เท emphatic sentences without auxiliary verbs, we add do to carry stress.
DO sit down. She Dots like you.
If he DOTS decide to come, let me know, will you ใ
With stressed auxiliary verbs, word order can change (► 200.3). Compare:
I'm really tired. I really AM tired.
Changes in stress can affect the meaning of a sentence. Compare:
MtXiAN called me yesterday. (She was the one who called.)
Megan CALLED me yesterday. (But she didn’t come and see me.)
Megan called ME yesterday. (But she didn't call you, did she?)
Megan called me YESTERDAY. (Not today.)
6	stress in sentences; rhythm
Rhythm is the word for the way stressed and unstressed syllables make patterns
in speech. เท sentences, we usually give more stress to nouns, ordinary verbs,
adjectives and adverbs, and less stress to pronouns, determiners, prepositions,
conjunctions and auxiliary verbs.
She was SURI that the BACK of the CAR had been DAMaged.
Stressed syllables are pronounced more slowly and clearly, and (in the opinion
of some linguists) follow each other at roughly regular Intervals. Unstressed
syllables arc pronounced more quickly and less clearly, and are fitted in between
the stressed syllables. Compare the following two sentences. The second does
not take much longer to say than the first: although it has three more unstressed
syllables, it has the same number of stressed syllables.
She KNEW the Doc tor.	She KNEW that there was a Doc tor.
grammar · 313 pronunciation: stress and rhythm
Speech and spoken Exchanges
Section 2 (
314	pronunciationjntonation
Intonation is the word for the 'melody· of spoken language: the way the musical
pitch of the voice rises and falls. Intonation systems in languages are very
complicated and difficult to analyse, and linguists do not all agree about how
English intonation works.
1	intonation in conversation
One use of intonation is to show how a piece of Information fits เท with what
comes before and after. For instance, a speaker may raise his or her voice when
taking over the conversation from somebody else, or IO indicate a change of
subject. A rise or fall on a particular word may show that this is the centre' of
the message - the place where the new information is being given; or it may
signal a contrast or a special emphasis. A rising tone at the end of a sentence
may suggest that there is more to be said and perhaps invite another speaker to
take over.
2	attitude
Intonation (together with speed, voice quality and loudness) can also say things
about the speaker's attitude. For Instance, when people are excited or angry’ they
often raise and lower their voices more.
3	three patterns
There arc three particularly common intonation patterns in English speech.
a falling intonation
A falling intonation can suggest that we arc saying something definite, complete
The voice falls on the last stressed syllable of a group of words.
I'm tired.
Here 'ร your dictionary.
Sophie couldn't find him.
A falling intonation is also common in นΛ questions.
What time's the last bus?
Where's the secretary?
b rising intonation
A rising intonation is common in yes/no questions. The voice rises at the end of
a group of words, beginning on the last stressed syllable.	-
grammar · 314 pronunciation: intonation
Are you tired?
Is that the secretary?
Did he tignit?
เท ‘alternative questions' with or, the voice rises on the first part o( the question
and falls on the second part.
Are you staying or going?
fall-rise
A fall-rise intonation suggests that something is incomplete, or uncertain, or that
there is more to be said.
I’m tired. (perhaps suggesting But maybe I'll go out with you anyway.)
I don't play tennis.	(perhaps suggesting But I do play other games.)
She's quite a good teacher.	[perhaps suggesting But I'm not completely happy with her.)
Vie first week was good.	(perhaps suggesting But not the second.)
Is this all you 'tv written ?	(perhaps suggesting l นพ expecting more.)
Λ fall-rise makes questions sound more interested or friendly. It is common in
polite requests and invitations.
Where’s the secretary?
Please come in.
Is this your car?
What's your name?
Some more potatoes?
grammar · 314 pronunciation: intonation
Speech and spoken Exchanges
4	intonation and misunderstandings
If a statement is made on a rising intonaiion, it may be misunderstood
as a question.
'That's our train.' Ί don't know.’ ‘Yes, it is, I'm telling you.'
If ป็ declarative question (► 302) is made on a falling intonation, it may lx?
misunderstood as a statement.
'That's our train?' 'Is it?’ ‘No, I'm asking you.'
Section
A falling intonation can also turn a polite request into an order.
'Can I have some more coffee?' ‘At once. Your Majesty.'
A fall-rise in the wrong place can lie misunderstood as suggesting more
than is said.
I'd like to play tennis.' ‘So, what’s the problem?' ‘There's no problem.'
For intonation in
315	pronunciation: weak and strong forms
1	What are weak and strong forms?
Some English words - for example at, for, have, and, US - have two
pronunciations: one is used when they are not stressed, and the other when
they are. Compare:
I'm looking at at1 you. What are you looking at Jet*?
2	stressed or not?
Most words with two pronunciations are prepositions, pronouns, conjunctions,
articles and auxiliary verbs. Such words are not usually stressed, because they
are generally found together with other more important words which carry the
stress. So the unstressed ( weak ) pronunciation is the normal one. This usually
has the vowel I» or no vowel: a few weak forms are pronounced with 'll.
grammar · 315 pronunciation: weak and strong forms
However, these words can be stressed when they are emphasised, or when there
is no other word to carry the stress. In these cases the 'strong' pronunciation is
used. This has the vowel that corresponds to the spelling. Compare:
-	/ must /mas/ go now.
I	really must /mast/ stop smoking, (stressed lor emphasis)
-	I was -war/ late.
II	was -'war/ raining.
Yes, it was WDZ7. (stressed at end of sentence: there is no other word
to be stressed)
-	Where have /av/ you been?
You might have lav/ told me.
What did you have hXV.· for breakfasti (non auxiliary verb)
Contracted negatives always have a strong pronunciation.
can't ko:nt. mustn't/'masnl/ Hasn't worn!
list of words with weak and strong forms
The most important words which have weak and strong forms are:
	Weak form	Strong form
3fn	/ว'	/ei/ (unusual) /(ว)๓/	/am/
an and arc	IM	/an/ (unusual) /(ว)ท (d)/	and1 /วพํ	Mr)/ lav	!xV lati	IxV /bl/	w
but can could do does for from had	bin	bi: ท/ /bat/	/bat/ /k (ว)ท/	kirn/ 1'kวd/	kud /d(»)/	/du:/ /d av	IdisV /fa(ry	/f วะพ/ /franv	/from /(h)ad/	hied /(h ว*/	hXV
have	/(h)av/	Ihxvi /(h)i/	/hi:/
her him his must not of our saint shall	/(h)a(r)/	/hs:(r)/ '(h) 1๓/	/him/ /(h)iz/	IhizJ /M(ว)sltv	:ะst/ /nt/	/not/ /av/	lovl Mr)/	'aua(r)/ /ร(ว)nt/ (BrE only)	/semi/ /J(9)V	//-I/
grammar «315 pronunciation: weak and strong forms
Speech and spoken Exchanges
Section 27
	Weak form	Strong form
she	'ทุ'	'ทุะ'
should	‘Sty?	/Jod
sir	พ	/พะ (r)/
some (► 158)	/รพฺ เท'	/SAin/ Λφถ (nrp)
man that (conj.)	ฟุะ»)·'	\ιαιν; /dart/
lhe	/da. d ป	/St:/
(hem	/ò(a)m	Sem
there (► 60S)	'พุ	'Ôc3(r)/
to	/la/	/I นะ'
US	พุ	/as/
was	/w(a)z/	'WD*
we	fali	/พํะ/
were	/wa(r)/	ะ'-
who	Λ1๙	Zhu:
will	M®)l. V	/wiV
would	W3<i. (3)๕	.'พนd'
you	Ijiu	/juy
your	พุ	/J3:(r)z
grammar · 315 pronunciation: weak and strong forms
Section 28 Varieties of English
INTRODUCTION
Many people believe that (here is one form of their language that is more correct
than others. They may believe for instance that British English ts more correct
than other varieties: or that Mitten English is more correct than spoken English:
or that standard spoken forms are more correct than dialect forms. Often this
belief is supported by reference to grammars, usage guides or dictionaries:
if something conflicts with a rule in a grammar, or if a word isn’t in the
dictionary, it 'must be wrong*. Since the reference books are most often based
on observation of the standard written language (and not by reference to a great
grammar book in the sky), the argument is really circular, these books will
naturally describe standard usage, because that is what they are for; but this
does not mean that there is anything wrong with other kinds of usage that are
less often described.
A better way of looking at things is to say that usage is correct in its place'.
Standard American English is correct in an American context, British English เท
a British context, Indian English in an Indian context, spoken grammar in casual
speech, formal written grammar in formal writing, dialect forms in the
appropriate dialect. The only forms that are wrong in all contexts are learners’
errors (f /weet/ie	obsolete forms and structures (/had
f (J{rtc/f	พ/f/ j and ร์เ)|)\ (O/IC o/*our	evf) mcdns (licit
there is no one answer to the question: 'What kind of English should learners
study?’ It depends on their purposes. Someone who wants to use English mostly
เท, for example, Australia, South Africa, India or Canada, will do well to study
the standard variety of that region. For many learners, however, the best model
is one or other of lite two main standard varieties: British or American English.
Neither of these is ‘better’ than the other, and they arc both used and
understood worldwide. The differences are generally unimportant:
for details, ► 319.
People are also worried by language change. If younger people 'break' the rules
that older people have learnt, or use language in new ways, older people often
feel disturbed: they are concerned that younger people no longer know (heir
grammar, and that the language is going downhill. This is a needless worry :
change is natural and inevitable, it cannot be halted, and it does not generally
affect a language’s efficiency as a communicative tool. A great deal of modem
English grammar would have been wrong three hundred years ago, and will
perhaps be wrong again three hundred years from now.
grammar - Section 28 Varieties of English
What do you think? Are these correct or not in standard
British English?
the company has doubled it's profils this year. ►317.1
1 could not understanding the lecture. ► 317.1
1 ain't done nothing. ► 317.2
I wants a drink ► 317.2
lack and me went to the cinema. ► 317.3
They're different to us. ► 317.3
There are less people here than usual. ► 317.3
Somebody's dropped their keys. ► 317.3
What are you waiting for? ► 317.4
You need to really concentrate. ► 317.4
I'm making a concerted effort to eat less. ► 317.5
Here’s your papers. ► 318.6
The data is unclear. ► 318.7
Who do you trust? ► 318.9
If I was younger I’d do it myself. ► 318 9
You pronounced it wrong. ► 318.9
Be not afraid. ► 318.10
I lost my coin-purse. ► 319.2
You’re tired, is it? ► 320.2
Will I call back later? ► 320.3
Can be that Ahmed calling. ► 3203
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
316	standard English and dialects
317	correctness
318	changes เท English
319	American and British English
320	other varieties of English
grammar - Section 28 Varieties of English
316	standard English and dialects
A language is a dialect that has an army and a navy.' (Ma. WdnMch)
Dialect: A language variety that has everything going for it, except die
government, the schools, the middle class, the law and the armed forces.’
(Tom McArthur)
1	What is 'standard English'?
เท the 9th century, southern England was under attack from Viking invaders
from Scandinavia, who had already come to dominate much of the nonh of
Britain. เท a decisive battle in 878, southern forces under King Alfred defeated a
northern army and secured the independence of the south. A long term result of
this victory was that the government of Southern England came to bl·
established in London, which later became the capital of the whole of Britain.
The English spoken in London and the East Midlands was therefore gradually
adopted as the official variety of English, rather than the very different varieties
spoken in the West and North. This dialect (and its later developments,
profoundly Influenced by Norman French) thus became the ’.standard’
language - the form of English generally used for government, the law, business,
education and literature. Standard British English, like all standard languages, is
therefore largely the result of historical accident. If the Vikings had defeated
Alfred’s army, the capital of modem Britain might well be York, and Practical
English Usage would be written in (and about) a very different variety of English.
เท fact, it is slightly misleading to talk as if British English had only one standard
variety . While standard written English varies very little throughout the British
Isles, standard speech differs somewhat, with Scotland, Northern Ireland and tire
Irish Republic in particular having not only their own pronunciation, but also
some regional features of grammar and vocabulary.
2	What is a dialect?
Many people think that dialects arc corrupted forms of a language, spoken by
ignorant people who make mistakes because they have not learnt correct
grammar. This is not at all true (for more about correctness, ► 317). A standard
language is not linguistically better than other dialects; it เร simply the dialect
that has been adopted for official purposes such as government and education.
All English dialects have a long history, going back to the distinct forms of
speech of the Germanic and Scandinavian invaders who came from various
parts of northern Europe to occupy Britain during the early Middle Ages. And
each of these dialects has a grammar that is as rich and systematic as standard
English, even though it may be very different. Some examples of British English
dialect forms;
I bain't ready. (- I’m not ready.)
He don Ί like it. I wants a rest.
Where's them papers what I give you?
Can ye no help me?	they're not believing it.
She's after telling me. (ะะ She’s told me.)
Are yoúse coming or not? (- Are you - plural coming or not?)
I ain't done nothing (= I haven't done anything.)
grammar · 316 standard English and dialects
Varieties of English
Section 28
American English, like British English, has many dialects, some of them very
different indeed from the standard language. An extreme case is so-called ‘black
English' or ‘AAVE’ (Afro-American vernacular English, a dialect widely used
informally by black Americans, largely in working-class urban environments).
The grammar of AAVE is different เท many ways from General American.
A few examples:
He been married. (He has been, and still is, married.)
She done cal. (She has eaten.)
She be tailing all the time. (She talks all the time.)
You gon be sorry. (You'll be sorry.)
I ain't believe you that day, man. (I didn’t believe you ...)
AAVE is similar in some ways to Southern US dialects. Its origins go back to
the early days of slavery, but the main influences on its development are
not well understood.
As in many countries, however, dialects are disappearing or changing under the
influence of the standard language. The language of most British speakers is far
closer to standard English than it would have been a century ago.
3	pronunciation: dialect and accent; 'received pronunciation'
A dialect is not the same as a regional accent (though they often go together).
.Many British people speak standard English, but with the typical accent of their
part of the country. Other British people, however, combine standard English
with a non-regional standard pronunciation. This (the so-called ‘received
pronunciation or BP) is the pronunciation that has traditionally been used by a
majority of British upper and upper middle class people, though it has changed
a good deal over the year*. For a long time BP was considered more ‘correct’
than other accents, and its social dominance was reinforced by education and
the media. This attitude is now changing, and there is less social prejudice in
Britain than before against regional accents. Very few people, in fact, now have
an BP accent. BP is increasingly being replaced as a standard by so-called
‘Estuary English', an accent somewhere between BP and working-class London
speech, originating in South East England along the River Thames
and its estuary.
4	showing accent in writing: 'e's gone 'ome
Writers may spell words in special ways to show a non standard or
conversational pronunciation - for example, apostrophes may be used in place
of letters that arc not pronounced. These spellings are common in cartoon
stnps. Some examples (mostly British English):
'e’s gone ’ome. (- He's gone home.)
'elp yerself. (- Help yourself.)
Yer gettin'old. ( - You're getting old.)
If I get me 'ands on yer... (= If 1 get my hands on you ...)
Where d'she put 'em? (a Where did she put them?)
C’mon, we're late. (= Come on ...)
C’n I 'ave a glass o' water? (- Can 1 have a glass of water?)	-*
grammar - 316 standard English and dialects
fish ’n‘chips. (- fish and chips)
Come u>i' me. (= Come with me.)
I dunno. (■ I don’t know.)
I gotta go. t- I've got to go.)
It's gonna rain, (- It's going to rain.)
I don't wanna play. (= I don’t want to play.)
5	the languages of Britain
Two hundred years ago six native languages besides English were spoken in
Britain. Of these, four still survive. Three are Celtic languages, very different from
English. Gaelic is spoken เท parts of Scotland; Irish, similar to Gaelic, is spoken
in pans of Ireland; Welsh is spoken in parts of Wales and is more closely related
to the Breton of north-western France. Two other Celtic languages, Manx and
Cornish (the original languages of the Isle of Man and Cornwall) no longer have
native speakers, though enthusiasts are attempting to revive them. The other
surviving British language is Scots (also called 'Lallans’), spoken by some people
in Scotland. This is a distinct language which is different from the Scottish
variety of English, although closely related.
Scots wis aince the state language o Scotland an is aye a grace til oor national
lei teralure. Il lies at the herto Scot land'ร heirskep as aneo wlr three
indigenous leids along wi Gaelic an Scottish Inglis.
(from Λ publication of the Scots Irld Assooe the Scots language Society)
A translation: Scots was once the slate language of Scotland and IS still an
ornament to our national literature. It lies at the heart of Scotland's heritage as
one of our three indigenous languages along with Gaelic and Scottish English.
317	correctness
When people say that somebody's language is ’not correct’, they may mean
several different things.
1 slips and mistakes: He works in wildlife conversation.
People sometimes make slips of the tongue when they are talking.
He works in Wildlife Conversation - I mean Conservation.
Somebody can use a word wrongly because he or she is unsure of its meaning,
or confuses it with another word.
You're being very authoritative, (mistake for ’authoritarian')
And many people have trouble with spelling and punctuation.
The company has doubled it’s profits this year, (should be Us profits)
Foreign learners may also make mistakes with points of grammar that do not
cause problems for native speakers.
I could not understanding the lecture, (instead of I could not understand...)
grammar - 317 correctness
Varieties of English
Section 28
2	dialect forms: / ain't done nothing.
Dialect forms arc not incorrect, though some people believe they are (► 316.2);
they are simply different. Teachers เท British schools often tell children whose
dialects have multiple negation, for example, that they are making mistakes if
they say things like ‘I ain't done nothing', because 'two negatives make a
positive' (so I ain't done nothing is supposed to mean I have done something').
This is not, of course, the case: เท the child's dialect, the sentence means
Ί haven't done anything· (like the equivalent เท older English and many modern
languages). Indeed, if 'two negatives make a positive', then the teacher ought to
be quite happy if the child says ฯ ain’t done nothing to nobody. since logically
three negatives must make a negative!
Dialect forms are not, therefore, incorrect in themselves. They are, however, out
of place in styles where only the standard language is normally used. It would be
inappropriate - in fact, incorrect - to use I wants, he don’t or a double negative
in a school essay, a job application, a newspaper article or a speech at a
business conference. เท fact, British dialects are rarely written (though Scotland
has a tradition of dialect literature which is still very much alive).
3	divided usage: different from; different to
Speakers of a standard language often differ about small points of usage, where
two different forms are common, people who use one form may claim that
theirs is the only ‘correct’ usage, and that people who use the other form are
making mistakes. Some examples from modern English:
so-called 'only correct form'	so-called ’mistake’
lack and I went to the cinema.	lack and me went to the cinema.
They're different from แร.	They're different to แร.
fewer people	less people
Somebody'ร dropped his or her keys. Somebody's dropped their keys.
เท fact, all of the so-called 'mistakes' listed above have been normal in standard
English for centuries, and are not wrong at all (though some of them are more
informal than the so-called only correct forms', and would be out of place in a
formal style). For details. ► 174.1 (/ and me), ► 433 (different), » 169 {lea) and
► 175 (their).	-»
grammar - 317 correctness
4	prescriptive and descriptive rules
Il people say <hat less people or different to Is wrong, rhcy are following a
prescriptive rule. Prescriptive rules are made by people who believe that they
can improve a language, or protect it against change. A lot ol prescriptive rules
were made by eighteenth- and nineteenth century British grammarians, often
because they thought that English grammar should imitate Latin, which was
considered a superior language. A typical example is the older condemnation of
'split infinitives' like to boldly go, where an adverb is put between to and the
verb (a iatin infinitive is a single word, so cannot be split). Many people still
believe this, and try to avoid split infinitives, although the rule is unrealistic
(► 89.7). A similar rule said that sentences should not end in prepositions (as in
What are you waiting forΪ or I don't like being shouted at). เท fact, it is quite
normal for English sentences to end in prepositions (► 209). Most prescriptive
rules give misleading information, and have little effect on the development
of a language.
Descriptive rules simply say what happens in one form of a language (for
example standard written British English, standard spoken American English,
Yorkshire English. Dublin English or Singapore English), and not what some
people feel ought to happen. The rules เท Practical English Usage are primarily
descriptive of standard British English (spoken and written), but include notes
on American-British differences where necessary.
5	When do mistakes become correct? a concerted effort
When somebody misuses a word or expression, this may influence other people
to make the same mistake. Sometimes a mistake becomes so widespread that it
turns into part of the language (this is one way in which languages develop), and
we can no longer realistically call it a 'mistake'. The expression oblivious of, for
example, originally meant ’forgetful of, but came to be used to mean
unconscious of. A hundred years ago this was still a mistake; now it is the
normal use. The same thing is happening today with the expression a concerted
Effort. This literally means 'an effort by people working together', but its original
meaning is getting lost. Since very many people now use It to mean a strong
effort’, this should probably no longer be considered a mistake.
318	changes in English
Languages change over time. Younger people adopt newer forms of expression,
while older people often resist change; so even people who speak the same
standard language do not speak it in exactly the same way. T here are several
reasons for change.
1	communicative need
Several centuries ago, standard English had two second-person pronouns:
thou (singular) and ye (plural). Standard modem English uses you for both.
But people still feel the need to distinguish singular and plural, and so
expressions like you guys (used for both men and women) are beginning to
function as second person plural pronouns.
grammar *318 changes in English
Varieties of English
Section 28
2	influence from other varieties
Modern British English is heavily influenced by American English. Some
structures which were not used by British speakers half a century ago are now as
common as their older British equivalents.
I feel like I'm gelling a cold, (informal) (formal British still: I feel as if I'm
getting a cold.) '
Do you have today's newspaper? (older British form: Hate you (got)
today's newspaper7)
3	Languages simplify themselves.
As languages develop, complicated structures often become simpler and more
regular. This may be happening with English conditional sentences - structures
with would or would hate เท both clauses are quite common in speech.
If you'd have asked I'd have laid you.
4	Small, less important distinctions are confused or disappear.
Some irregular verb forms like sank, sunk, sang/sung or lay/latd are quite often
confused in speech. Examples from the British radio:
He wrote eight operas, all of which sunk without trace.
... a song she sung in yesterday’s concert.
Infinitives and ing forms after verbs also sometimes gel mixed up. An example
from a British letter:
I now have pleasure to enclose the correct proposal form.
(instead of... pleasure in enclosing...)
When confusions like these become widespread, they can lead to language
change. This may well happen with the possessive 'ร form: more and more
people are leaving out the apostrophe or putting it in the 'wrong' place, so that
this spelling convention might one day lose its Importance and even disappear.
5	New forms and uses spread through the language.
Progressive verb forms came into English a few hundred years ago. and
gradually became used more and more widely. There arc still a few verbs
that are not generally used in progressive forms (► 4), but even these are losing
their resistance. Some typical modem examples:
I'm understanding Italian a lol belter now.
How many eggs were you wanting? I'm loving il.
6	'Underground' forms become respectable.
Some forms have always existed in the language, but haw been ‘driven
underground’ by prescriptive rules (► 317.4), so that they have been avoided by
careful speakers. People are now more tolerant of such forms, so they are
becoming more common. Some examples:
Here's your papers, (instead of Here are... ► 130.6)
Somebody's left their umbrella behind, (instead of... his or her umbrella.
► 175)
Alice and me went to the same primary school. (► 174.1)
between you and I (v 174.1)	·*
grammar · 318 changes เท English
319	American and British English
Standard American English ('General American') and standard British English
arc very similar. There are a few differences in the use of structures and in
spelling rules, and rather more differences of vocabulary and idiom. Modern
British English is heavily influenced by American English, so some contrasts are
disappearing, pronunciation is sometimes very different, but most American and
British speakers can understand each other easily.
An excellent, very detailed guide to grammatical differences, particularly
differences in the grammar of individual words, is lohn Algeo's British or
American English? (Cambridge University Press, 2006).
Note that the term ‘American English' is used here for the standard English of
the United States, but that some of the statements apply more widely to North
American English in general.
grammar: I've never gotten ... / I’ve never got.,.
Here are examples of the most important differences. Some other differences are
dealt with in other entries. In many cases, two different forms are possible in
one variety of English, while only one of the forms is possible or normal in die
other variety.
American English
He just went home.
(<· He's just gone home.)
I've never really gotten to know her.
I (can) see a car coming
It's important that he be told.
Will you buy it?' 7 may.'
The committee meets tomorrow.
(on the phone) Hello, is this Susan?
He looked at me real strange, (very
informal) (or He looked al me
really strangely.)
He probably has arrived by now.
(o« He has probably arrived ...)
Should I call the hospital?
British English
He’s just gone home. (► 503.2)
I've never really got to know her.
(► 472.6)
I can see a car coming. (► 84.1)
It's important that he should be told.
... I may (do) (► 28)
The committee meet meets tomorrow.
(► 128.1)
Hello, is that Susan? (► 144.6)
He looked at me really strangely.
(*194)
He has probably arrived by now.
Shall·Should I call the hospital?
Besides get. some other verbs have different forms in British and American
English. (► 1.3)
»Of lhe Soulhern แร wnrxl person plurtl pronoun you Utt · 1748
grammar · 319 American and British English
Varieties of English
Section 28
2 vocabulary: sidewalkipavement
There are very many difference*. Sometimes the same word has different
meanings (BrE mod ะะ crazy; AmE mad - angry). And very often, different words
are used for the same idea (BrE lorry - AmE truck). Here arc a few examples,
with very brief Information about the words and their meanings. A very-
useful guide to vocabulary differences is Mighty Fine Worth and Smashing
Expressions - Making Sense of Pransatlantic English, edited by Orin liargraves,
Oxford University Press.
American English
airplane
anyplace, anywhere
apartment
attorney, lawyer
biscuit
busy (phone)
call collect (phone)
can
candy
check/bill (in a restaurant)
coin-purse
cookie, cracker
com
crazy-
crosswalk
cuffs (on trousers)
diaper
doctor's office
drapes
elevator
fall, autumn
faucet (indoors), spigot,
tap (outdoors)
fired (from a job)
first floor, second floor, etc
flashlight
flat (tire)
French fries
garbage, trash
garbage can, trashcan
gas(oiine)
gear shift (on a car)
highway, freeway
hood (on a car)
intersection
British English
aeroplane
anywhere
flat, apartment
barrister, solicitor, lawyer
engaged
reverse the charges
tin, can
sweets
bill
purse
biscuit
sweetcorn, maize
mad, crazy
cot
pedestrian/zebra crossing
turn-ups
nappy
doctor’s surgery
curtains
lift
rubber, eraser
autumn
tap (indoors and outdoors)
sacked, fired
ground floor, first floor, etc
torch
flat tyre, puncture
chips
rubbish
dustbin, rubbish bin
petrol
gear lever
main road, motorway
bonnet
crossroads
grammar «319 American and British English
American English	British English
jello	jelly
jelly	jam
luB	pitcher
mad	angry
math	maths
mean	nasty, mean
movie, film	film
one-way (ticket)	single (ticket)
pants, trousers	trousers
parking lot	car park
pavement	road surface
period	full stop
pharmacy	chemist's
pitcher	jug
(potato) chips	crisps
purse, (hand)bag	handbag
railroad	railway
raise (in salary)	rise
rest room, bathroom	(public) toilet
résumé	cv (curriculum vitae)
round trip	return (journey/ticket)
schedule, timetable	timetable
sidewalk	pavement
sneakers (■ sports shoes)	trainers
stand in line	queue(up)
stingy, cheap (opposite of generous)	mean
subway	underground, (London) Tube, metro, subway
takeout	takeaway
truck	lorry, van
trunk (of a car)	boot
two weeks	fortnight, two weeks
vacation	holiday(s)
windshield (on a car)	windscreen
yard	garden
zee (the name of the letter 'ะ')	zed
zipper	zip
I Expressions with prepositions and particles
American English	British English
check something (out)	check something
different from, than do something over'again in 3 course	different from, to (► 433)
	do something again on 2 course
live on X street look around the church	live in X street look (a)round the church (» 376)
grammar «319 American and British English
Varieties of English
Section 28
American English
meet with somebody (planned)
Monday through/to Friday
on a team
on the weekend
ten alter past lour (lime)
ten to 'of,'before'till four
British English
meet (with) somebody
Monday to Friday
เท a team
at the weekend
ten past four
ten to four
spelling: color/colour
A number of words end เท -or in American English and -our in British English
(e g. color/colour). Some words end in -er เท American English and -re in British
English (e g. center/centre). Many verbs which end in -ize in American English
(e g. realize) can be spell in British English with Ise or -ize (► 343). Some of the
commonest words with different forms
American English
aluminum
analyze
catalog! ue)
center
check
color
defense
disk
enroll
fulfill
honor
inquire
jewelry
labor
license (noun)
liter
meter (measure)
neighbor
organize
pajamas
paralyze
practice (verb)
program
realize
skillful
theater theatre
tire
traveller
whiskey
British English
aluminium
analyse
catalogue
centre
cheque (paid by a bank)
colour
defence
disc, disk
enrol
fulfil
honour
enquire, inquire
jewellery
labour
licence
litre
metre
neighbour
organise'organize
pyjamas
paralyse
practise
programme
realise/realize
skilful
theatre
tyre (on a wheel)
traveller (► 347.6)
(Scotch) whisky. (Irish) whiskey ->
grammar · 319 .American and British English
4	pronunciation
There are. of course, many different regional accents in both Britain and
America. The most important general differences between American and British
speech are as follows:
a Certain vowels are nasal (pronounced through the nose and mouth at the same
time) เท some varieties of American English, but not in most British accents.
b British English has one more vowel than American English. This is the rounded
short o (.'๙) used in words like cot, dog, got, gone, off, slop. lost. เท American
English these words are pronounced either with /นะ/, like the first vowel in father,
or with /;♦:/, like the vowel เท caught. (This vowel is also pronounced rather
differently in British and American English.)
c Some words written with a < consonant (e g. fast, after) have different
pronunciations: with 'นะ/ in standard southern British English, and with '®/ in
American and some other varieties of English.
d The vowel in home, go. open is pronounced /so/ in standard southern British
English, and 0๙ in American English. The two vowels sound ver)’ different.
c เท standard southern British English, r is only pronounced before a vowel sound.
เท most kinds of American English (and most other British varieties), r is
pronounced in all positions where it Is written in a word, and it changes the
quality of a vowel that comes before It. So words like car, turn, offer sound very
different in British and American speech.
t เท many varieties of American English, I and d both have a very light voiced
pronunciation (/d/) between vowels - so writer and rider, for example, can
sound the same. In British English they are quite different: Trait S<r)/ and
'raida(r)/.
9	Some words which are pronounced with 'นะ/ in most varieties of American
English have /ju:/ in British English. These are words in which th, d, I or ท
(and sometimes ร or 0 are followed by น or cu- in writing.
enthufiariic AmE/in,0u:zi'e$tik/ BrE/m,6ju:zi*«stik/
duty·	AmE "du:ti/	BrE /*dju:li/
rune	AmE /tu:n/	BrE /t ju:n/
new	AmE 'ทน:/	BrE /nju:/
h Words ending เท unstressed -tie (e g. fertile, misfile) are pronounced with /ail/ เท
British English; some are pronounced with Λ) เท American English.
fertile AmE Tfairtl· (rhyming with turtle)
BrE "faitail·1 (rhyming with her tile)
grammar · 319 American and British English
Varieties of English
Seclion 28
i Some long words ending in ary. ery or ory are pronounced differently, with
one more syllable in American English.
secretary AmE I'sekrateri/ BrE "sekrotri/
i Horough and thorough are pronounced differently,
AmE.''baroo, ’Θλγοο'
BrE .'bars. Oara
k Words borrowed from French are often stressed differently, especially if their
pronunciation ends with a vowel sound. The final vowel is usually stressed in
American English but not in British English.
pálf	AmE pm'tet BrE /'paMci/
ballet AmE .๖«ฯCl.'	BrE rbalct/
320	other varieties of English
the British and American standards are historically the most influential varieties,
but of course Britain and the US do not own the English language. เท a number
of countries round the world, English is either a national language or an
important second language. These countries have their own varieties of English,
which broadly speaking fall into two groups.
1	native-speaker varieties
In countries such as Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa, English
arrived with die early British colonists, and in time became the language, or one
of the languages, of the new nation. เท the first three of these countries English
is the mother tongue of a large part of the population. (South Africa is a different
case: see below.) Over the years these varieties have developed เท their own
ways, as has British English, so that distinct differences have grown up between
them. The differences are most noticeable เท pronunciation, but each variety has
a good deal of home-grown vocabulary, as well as some grammatical features of
its own. local vocabulary and grammar show up especially in Informal speech;
more formal speech is closer to the written standards, which themselves are
strongly influenced by British and American models.
2	non-native varieties
เท many countries, while English is not the mother tongue of most of the
population, it serves as an important additional language. T he historical or
practical reasons for this vary, as does the exact role of English in these
countries. เท many cases, but not all, it has some official status. Some of these
varieties are relatively new; others, like Indian English, have a long history.
Their origins vary. Indian and Singapore-Malaysian English, for example, have
developed out of British English; African lingua franca English is also British
based; the Philippines variety has its source in American English; Fijian English
owes much of its character to Australian / New Zealand English.	-»
grammar · 320 other varieties of English
/Ml such varieties show the influence of other regional languages: when people
habitually use two or more forms of speech, each one affects the grammar,
vocabulary and pronunciation of the others). Common simplifications and
regularisations typical of'learner English' may also become fixed in one variety or
another for example countable uses of nouns which are uncountable in the
source languages (furnitures), dropping of grammatical endings (three brother, shr
think), merging of which and who (the people which were there), reduction of tense
distinctions (they arrive yesterday), omission of be (he the driver, they studying),
and the use of is it?or isn't it? as universal question tags (You’re tired, is it?).
เท such multilingual situations, there are often great variations เท the kind of
English used, so that it is not possible to give a straightforward description of,
say, Indian, Malaysian or larnaican English. More accomplished speakers will
generally adopt a variety that is relatively close to a British, American or other
national standard with some local colouring, while others, like language learners
the world over, may speak a far less fluent and more basic kind of English.
เท certain countries something like a national standard has developed, though
the definition of 'standard' Is more controversial than in the case of a
native speaker variety.
3	notes on some varieties
a Australian and New Zealand English
These varieties are similar in many ways to British English, but each naturally
has a good deal of regional vocabulary. Australian English has taken many words
for natural features from the Aboriginal languages of Australia: for example
kangaroo, billabong (a pool or a tributary of a river), dingo (a wild dog), mulgn
(a tree, wilderness). Similarly, New Zealand English has incorporated words
from the indigenous language Maori: for example pukeku and lakahe (names of
birds), mana (power, honour). Both Australian and New Zealand English have a
rich store of informal and slang words and expressions, many of them shared
between the two varieties - for instance bludger (a lazy person), dinkum
(genuine), bonzer (excellent), my shout (my turn to buy the drinks), rhe few
grammatical differences from British English include a preference for singular
verbs with group nouns, where British English might use a plural verb
(The team is confident of winning); the New Zealand use of Will I...? in
questions like Will I call back later?, where British English has Shall I...?; and
conversational she instead of it. as in She’ll be right (It will be OK). Informal
Australian English frequently shortens nouns and adds an 4e or o suffix: for
example barbte (barbeque), mushie (mushroom), sunnies (sunglasses), brekkie
(breakfast), Tassie (Tasmania), arvo (afternoon). Australian and New Zealand
pronunciation have many common features, and are doser to British than to
American English. Standard written English is almost identical with the British
standard, regional vocabulary aside. As with other varieties, however, there is
growing influence from American English.
grammar · 320 other varieties of English
Varieties of English
Section 28
b Canadian English
Canadian English is in some ways midway between the British and American
varieties. The written standard is very close to that of British English, but
American spellings arc quite common. Informal speech has a distinctly
American flavour, and pronunciation is fairly close to that of the northern
United States Canadian vocabulary naturally includes words reflecting the local
environment and culture, many of them taken from the native American
languages spoken in Canada: for instance husky, moose, toboggan, anorak,
kayak. French, the mother tongue of around one third of Canadians, has also
given words to Canadian English vocabulary, e g. cache (a hiding place).
c South African English
English is the lingua franca of South Africa, but it is only one of eleven oflicial
languages. It is spoken as a mother tongue by about 10% of the population, and
in this form It is the language primarily associated with education and social
prestige. Ihe written standard is similar to that of British English. Mother-tongue
spoken English is heavily influenced both by Afrikaans (a descendant of the
language of the early Dutch settlers) and by the African languages of the region;
it also reflects the mixed social and geographical origins of the British settlers.
Words derived from Afrikaans include nogal (what is more), sommtr (simply, for
no specific reason), trek, padkos (food for a journey), divaal (a reverie or state of
confusion), braai (barbecue). Examples of words taken from African languages
are indaba (discussion, meeting, gathering), bonsella (bonus, free gift), babalaas
(hung over). Some words that have died out in British English have stayed in
South Africa: for example robot (traffic light), geyser (boiler). Grammatical
features of informal South African English include some non-standard word
order (e g. I'll come and see you tomorrow rather) and the use of hey as a
question tag (Vou know his name, hey?). Standard pronunciation, originally that
of the educated English speaker, may be changing now that political
developments have brought senior black African speakers into positions of
influence; at the same time, however, upwardly mobile young black speakers are
tending to take the British-flavoured standard pronunciation as a target.
Native speakers of English are massively outnumbered by speakers of the non-
native English which is used as a lingua franca across the region. This varies
greatly from one social and ethnic group to another, and is very heavily
influenced in its grammar, vocabulary and pronunciation by the mother-tongues
of its speakers. However, this too may be developing a standard form: there was
a strong move a decade or so ago to recognize black South African English as
'the standard'.
d Caribbean English
The English of Caribbean countries like Jamaica developed out of pidgin (mixed)
languages that grew up during the slave trade. Speakers at one end of the social
educational spectrum are likely to use a British or American standard with a few
regional characteristics. At the other extreme, Caribbean dialects ('creoles') are
very different indeed from the standard varieties. เท Jamaican Creole, for
example, the equivalent of I go is mi guo. I am going is mi de guo, I went is
mi bin guo and I was going is Mi bin de guo.	■*
grammar · 320 other varieties of English
e Indian English
English is an associate official language in India, alongside Hindi, the official
language. As a lingua franca เท a country with over 700 different languages,
English has enormous administrative, political and cultural importance and ven
many speakers. Command of the Language ranges from basic to native-speaker
like. Standard British English with an RP accent has traditionally enjoyed high
prestige, and is fostered by private English-medium schools. However, very
many varieties of English co exist in India, with differences arising from regional,
social, linguistic and other factors. Common features of pronunciation and
grammar which are regarded by some educated Indians as mistakes arc seen by
others as characteristics of an emerging Indian standard. Grammatical
differences from British and American English include tense use and the use of
progressive forms: I am here since last week; I am seeing her often; We have been
there five years ago; He is doing it yesterday. She is having ruo children.
Questions and negatives may be structured differently: Who you are wishing to
speak to?; You no! like curry? Article use varies: articles may be dropped, and one
is often used rather than a!an; IVe are needing one new car. Repetition may be
used for emphasis: / am having small, small problem. Typical question-tags are
Yes?. No? and Isn't il?
The vocabulary of Indian English includes many words taken from modern and
classical Indian languages, some of which have made their way into general
English outside India, for example bungalow, cheetah, yoga, nirvana. Some
English words are special to Indian English, for example headbath (shampoo),
issueless (having no children), prepone (the opposite of postpone), teachercss.
Others are current เท India although they are no longer used elsewhere, for
example needful, thrice (three times), miscreant (criminal).
Indian pronunciation of English is generally syllable-timed rather than
stress-timed.
f Singapore and Malaysian English
These varieties have a good deal เท common, and both are strongly influenced
by the regional Chinese, Malay and Indian languages. However, they developed
differently after gaining independence from Britain. เท a post colonial reaction,
Malaysia initially down-graded the teaching of English, and has only more
recently given It renewed importance. Singapore, เท contrast, chose early to
make English its national language (despite having virtually no native speakers),
so as to provide a lingua franca and cultural unifying force for its multilingual
population. Education เท Singapore is entirely English-medium, and as English
comes to be more and more a natural part of Singapore life, it may well become
the mother tongue of many citizens. More than a third of Singaporeans now use
English at home.
เท Singapore and Malaysian English, as in others world-wide, there is
considerable variation arising from differences in education and social position.
Some members of the urban middle class arc virtually bilingual, with a native
speaker like level of fluency and accuracy, while other English speakers have
only a basic command of the language. The context of use also plays a part.
grammar
other varieties of English
Varieties of English
Section 28
Singapore English, for instance, has a 'high' variety, closer to a British standard,
which is used in formal situations; this contrasts with the low' informal variety
called 'Singlish'. The choice between high' and low' varieties does not
necessarily depend on language proficiency - even accomplished speakers of
standard Singapore English use Singlish when they feel that the situation calls
for it, as Singlish functions as a marker of Singaporean identity.
Singapore'Malaysian vocabulary includes many local words and expressions,
such às hand phone (mobile phone) and void deck (the ground floor of a block
of flats, left vacant to be hired out for communal activities). Many words are
imported from the regional languages: for example makan (food, eating).
rakyat (the common people, an ordinary citizen). Typical grammatical
differences from standard English, found in many speakers' usage, include many
common learner English' features; for instance the complex English modal verb
system is often reduced to two elements: can and must. Spoken discourse
panicles include the very common lah, which perhaps originates from Chinese
and is used as a marker of informal intimacy.
We eat here yesterday. This coffee house very cheap. You got car or not?
Can or not?\= Is this possible?)	She call you, is it?
Can be that Ahmed calling. ( That will be Ahmed calling.)
Please lah call me soon.
Pronunciation varies considerably, depending on the speaker's mother tongue,
At the higher end of the social educational spectrum, speech is strongly
influenced by the British standard, though with a tendency to give syllables
equal weight as against British stress-timed rhythm (► 313).
English as a lingua franca <’ELF‘)
A lingua franca is a language used for communication between speakers of
different mother tongues. The name 'lingua franca' itself was originally applied
to a mixed language used for trade in the Eastern Mediterranean from the 11 th
to the 19th centuries. Many other languages have served as lingua francas at
different times in different parts of the world, for instance Greek. Latin, French,
Spanish, Russian, Arabic, Swahili and Chinese. English is now the world's major
lingua franca, and. unlike earlier lingua francas, has no geographical boundaries.
like other languages which are adopted for international use, lingua franca
English varies very widely from one speaker to another, depending on its users'
command of the language; it ako tends to be heavily influenced in its
pronunciation and grammar by the speakers' mother tongues. The variation is of
course limited by the need for effective communication, so that speakers will try
to accommodate their English to make it more comprehensible to those who
need to understand them. And. like most second-language speakers, lingua
franca users worldwide tend to make the kind of common simplifications and
regularisations illustrated in 320.2 above. So, despite very large individual
differences, much lingua franca English has some shared characteristics. Some
of these are regional. European kinds of ELF often resemble each other
(reflecting mother tongue similarities in grammar or pronunciation) in ways that
distinguish them from, say, typical East Asian, South Asian or African lingua
franca types of English.	-*
grammar
other varieties of English
Similarities เท lingua franca use, and the term 'English as a lingua franca’ itself,
can lead people to suppose that there is a distinct variety of English, 'ELF', that
can be analysed and described in the same way as, say, Australian or Indian
English. This is not, however, (he case: lingua franca versions of English differ far
too much to constitute a consistent variety. The term 'English as a lingua franca’
therefore only refers to a process, the use of English for international
communication, not to a non existent form of English that has arisen for this
purpose.
grammar · 320 other varieties of English
Section 29 Vocabulary Areas
INTRODUCTION
This Section contains information about the vocabular)' associated with a
number of common topics, together with notes on slang, idioms and related
matters. For more about vocabulary problems, ► Sections 30-31.
Do you know what's wrong with these, and why?
o There's an Irish in the house next door. ► 321
õ I have a lot of american friends. ► 321
o We can say ‘one half as ‘nought comma five’. ► 322.1
Ο I waited for him for one and a half hour. ► 322.2
o A third of the students is from abroad. > 322.3
o King Henry Eight was born in 1491. ► 322.6
õ I want to live for hundred years. ► 322.10
Ο I paid three thousand, a hundred pounds for the car. ► 322.10
o Sorry, 1 have no change - only a twenty-pounds note. ► 322.14
Õ ‘How ok! are you?' 'I'm thirty years ' > 323.1
o When 1 was at your age I was working in a coal mine. ► 323.2
Õ He could already read in the age of three. > 323.3
o Wake me at five past seven o'clock. ► 325.1
Õ Good morning, Mr lack Smith. > 326.2 b
Õ The painter Trziano lived in Venezia. ► 327.1,327.3
Q There's a spider in the bath. She's enormous! ► 320
o Congratulation on your exam results. ► 329.4
Õ Please lend me a pen. ► 329.17
Q Thank you a lot for offering me that golden chance. But I've changed
my thoughts. ► 332.3
Ο I am as cross as two sticks because it is raining cats and dogs again. If
this goes on I think I will kick the bucket. ► 332-5.
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
321	nationalities, countries
and regions
322	numbers
323	talking about age
324	dates
325	telling the time
326	names and titles: Daniel·,
Mr Lewis
32 names: Florence, Homer, etc
328	gender (references to males
and females)
329	‘social’ language
330	meals
331	telephoning
332	idioms, collocations and
formulaic expressions
333	formal and informal vocabulary
334	slang
335	discriminatory and offensive
language
vocabulary · Section 29 Vocabulary Areas
321	nationalities, countries and regions
1	introduction
เท order IO refer to a nation or region and Its affairs it is usually necessary to
know four words:
•	the name of the country or region
Denmark	Japan	France	Catalonia
•	the adjective
Danish	Japanese	French	Catalan
•	the singular noun used for a person from the country
a Dane a Japanese	a Frenchman/woman	a Catalan
» the plural expression the... used for the population as a whole
the Danes the Japanese the French the Catalans
Usually the singular noun is the same as the adjective (e.g. Greek, Mexican).
The plural expression is usually the same as the adjective * ■ร (e.g. the Greeks,
the Mexicans); words ending in -ese, and Swiss, remain unchanged for plural
meanings (e.g. the Japanese; the Swiss). ► 321.2 below for more examples.
However, there are a number of exceptions. Some of these are listed in 321.3.
All words of this kind (including adjectives) begin with capital letters.
American literature (not american literature)
The name of a national language is often the same as the national adjective.
Danish is difficult to pronounce. Do you speak Japanese'
2	Examples
Country, region	Adjective	Person	Population
America (the United States)	American	an American	the Americans
Belgium	Belgian	a Belgian a Brazilian	the Belgians
Brazil	Brazilian		the Brazilians
Europe	European	a European	the Europeans
Italy	Italian	an Italian	the Italians
Kenya	Kenyan	a Kenyan	the Kenyans
Morocco	Moroccan	a Moroccan	the Moroccans
Norway	Norwegian	a Norwegian	the Norwegians
Palestine	Palestinian	a Palestinian	the Palestinians
Russia	Russian	a Russian	the Russians
Greece	Greek	a Greek	the Greeks
Iraq	Iraqi	an Iraqi	the Iraqis
Israel	Israeli	an Israeli	the Israelis
Thailand	Thai	a Ihai	the Thais
China	Chinese	a Chinese (person)	the Chinese
(Longo	Congolese	a Congolese (person)	the Congolese
Portugal	Portuguese	a Portuguese (person)	the Portuguese
Switzerland	Swiss	a Swiss	the Swiss
vocabulary · 321 nationalities, countries and regions
Vocabulary Areas
Section 29
3 exceptions
Co unity /region	Adjective	Person	Population
Britain	British	a British person (also Brilon) an Englishman.1 woman	the British
England	English		the English
France	French	a Frenchman'woman	the French
Ireland	Irish	an Irishman, woman	the Irish
Spain	Spanish	a Spaniard	the Spanish
the Netherlands /	Dutch	a Dutchman/woman	the Dutch
1 lolland Wales	Welsh	a Welshman/woman	the Welsh
Denmark	Danish	a Dane	the Danes
Finland	Finnish	a Finn	lhe Finns
Poland	Polish	a Pole	the Poles
Scotland	Scottish. Scotch	aScot	the Scots
Sweden	Swedish	a Swede	the Swedes
	Turkish 		a Turk		the Turks
Notes
a Scottish is the usual word for lhe people and culture of Scotland; Scotch is used
for whisky.
b lhe word Briton is unusual except เท newspaper headlines - for example rwo
BRITONS KILLED IN AIR CRASH. Brit is sometimes used informally.
c English is not the same as British, and is not used for Scottish, Welsh or Irish
people (► 111).
d English (the name of the language) can be used in the plural to talk about
varieties of English, for instance World Englishes.
e Although American is the normal English word for United States riltorcand
affairs, people from other parts of the American continent may object to this use
and some people avoid it for this reason.
f Inuit is now considered a more respectful term than Eskimo for the Arctic races
of Northern Canada and elsewhere.
q Arabic is used for the language spoken เท Arab countries; เท other cases, the
normal adjective is Arab. Arabian is used in a few fixed expressions and place
names (e g. Saudi Arabian, the Arabian Sea).
h Note the pronunciation of words like Irishman/men. Dutchman/men; the
singular is the same as the plural (/'atri/man. 'dAiJman.').
vocabulary · 321 nationalities, countries and regions
322	numbers
1 fractions and decimals: two fifths·, nought point four
We say simple fractions like this:
<4	a/one quarter
a	an/one eighth
%	three sevenths
%	tUO fifths
"/(· eleven sixteenths
34* three and three quarters
6- six and one eighth
More complex fractions can be expressed by using the word over.
"’itn three hundred and seventeen over five hundred and nine
We write and say decimals like this:
0.4	nought/zero point four (not 0.-4 OR nought comma four)
0.375 nought/zero point three seven five (not nought point three hundred
•f. 7 four point seven
For the difference between a(n) and one with numbers, ► 322.10 below.
2	before nouns
With fractions below I, we use 0/before nouns.
three quarters of.an hour	seven tenths of a mile	a third of the students
Half is not always followed by «/(► 478).
half an hour (AmE also a half hour)	half (of) the students
Of is also possible with decimals below 1.
nought point six of a mile
0.1625cm: nought point one six two five of a centimetre
However, decimals below 1 are often followed directly by plural nouns.
nought point six miles (not Houghf-pomtsomile)
nought point one six two five centimetres
Fractions and decimals over I are normally followed by plural nouns.
one and a half hours (noi one ami น half hour)
three and three eighths miles
1.3 millimetres (not l.3mdhmetre)
•Note also the structure a... and a half.
I've been waiting for an hour and a half.
3	singular or plural verbs
Singular verbs arc normally used after fractions, decimals, and other expressions
referring to amounts and measurements (for more details, ► 129).
Three quarters of a ton is too much. (.SOT Three quurters of num are.. .)
3.6 kilometres Is about 2 miles.
But plural verbs are used when we are talking about numbers of people or
things, even after a singular fraction.
Λ third of the students are from abroad. (.SOT A-fhud-of4he-s<udeHf»4Sr. ..)
Half of the glasses are broken.
ocabulary · 322 numbers
Vocabulary Areas
Seaion 29
After expressions like one เท three, one out of five · plural noun, both singular
and plural verbs are possible.
One in three new carร break/breaks down เท the first year.
4	telephone numbers
We say each figure separately, pausing alter groups of three or four (nut two).
0 is often called oh (like the letter o).
307 4922 three oh/zero seven, four nine two two
5	Roman numerals
Roman numerals (/, //, III. IV. etc) arc not common เท modern English, but they
are still used in a few cases - for example the names of kings and queens, page
numbers เท the introductions to some books, the numbers of paragraphs in
some documents, the numbers of questions in some examinations, the figures
on some old clock faces, and occasionally the names of centuries.
It was built เท the time of Henry V.
For details, see Introduction page น.
Do question (vi) or question (ÒÚ). but not both.
a fine XVIII Century English walnut chest of drawers
Ihe Roman numerals normally used are as follows:
J '"n “ทุ 6	VI 1-/ 7	VII vii 8	vm viii 9	IX tx	10	X X	40	XL xl 11	XI Xi	45	XLV xh' 12	XII xii	50	L I 13	XIII xiii	60	IX lx 14	XIV xiv	90	xc xc 19	XIX xix	100	c c 20	XX XX	500	D 21	XXI xxi	1000	M 30 XXX XXX	1995	MCMXCV
6	cardinal and ordinal numbers: books, chapters, etc;
kings and queens
After a noun we usually use a cardinal number (one. two. etc) instead of an
ordinal number (first, second, etc). This structure is common in titles. Compare:
the fourth book - Book Four Ihe third act - Acr Three
Mozart'ร thirty ninth symphony - Symphony No. 39. by Mozart
Ihe third day of the course - Timetable for Day Three
However, the names of kings and queens are said with ordinal numbers.
Henry VIII. Henry the Eighth (sot Henry Fight)
Louis XIV: Louis the Fourteenth Elizabeth II: Elizabeth the Second
7	centuries
Note how the names of centuries relate to the years เท them. Ihe period from
1701-1800 is called the 18th century (not the 17th); 1801-1900 is the 19th
century, etc.
vocabulary - 322 numbers
8	floors
The ground floor of a British house is the first floor of an American house;
the British first floor is the American second floor, etc.
9	and: punctuation
In British English we always put and between hundred!thousand' million and
numbers below a hundred. In American English, and can be dropped.
310 three hundred and ten (AmE also three hundred ten)
5,6*12 five thousand, six hundred and forty-two
2,025 two thousand and twenty-five
เท measurements containing two different units, and is possible before the
smaller, but is usually left out.
two hours (and) ten minutes two metres (and) thirty centimetres
เท writing we generally use commas (,) to diside large numbers into groups of
three figures, by separating off the thousands and the millions, l ull stops (.) are
not used in this way.
3,127 (.MOT M27)	5.466,243
We do not always use commas in four-figure numbers, and they are not used in
4,126 OK 4126	the year 1648
There are I 000 millimetres in a metre.
Note the hyphen between the tens and units in twenty-one, twenty-two.
thirty-six, forty-nine, etc.
10	a and one
We can say an eighth or one eighth, a hundred or one hundred, a thousand or
one thousand, a million or one million, etc. One is more formal.
I want to live for a hundred years, (not... for hundred years)
He was fined one thousand pounds for dangerous driving.
A can only be used at the beginning of a number. Compare:
a one hundred
three thousand one hundred (not three thousand a hundred)
Λ thousand can be used alone, and before and, but not usually before a number
of hundreds. Compare:
a/ one thousand	a/ one thousand and forty -nine
one thousand, six hundred and two (More natural than a thousand, six
hundred and two.)
We can use a or one with measurement words, rhe rules are similar.
a. one kilometre (Birr one kilometre, six hundred metres)
an. one hour and seventeen minutes (Bin one hour, seventeen minutes)
a. one pound (Bin one pound twenty-five)
11	numbers with determiners
Numbers can be used after determiners. Before determiners, a structure with of
is necessary.
You're my one hope.
One of my friends gave me this, (not One my friend...)
vocabulary · 322 numbers
Vocabulary Areas
Section 29
12	eleven hundred, etc
เท an informal style we often use eleven hundred, twelve hundred, etc instead of
one thousand one hundred, etc. litis IS most common with round numbers
between 1,100 and 1.900.
We only got fifteen hundred pounds for the car.
This form is used in historical dates before 2000 (► 324).
He was born in thirteen hundred.
It was built in fifteen (hundred and) twenty nine.
13	billion
Λ billion is a thousand million. (But in older British usage a billion was
a million million.)
14	five hundred, etc without L
After a number, the words dozen, hundred, thousand, million and billion have
no final •ริ, and of is not used. This also happens after several and a few.
Compare:
-	five hundred pounds
hundreds of pounds
-	several thousand times
It cost thousands.
-	a few million years
millions of years
Singular forms are used as modifiers before nouns in plural measuring
expressions.
a five-pound note (not a five-pounds Hete)
a three-mile walk	a four foot deep hole
six two-hour lessons a six-foot tall man
a three month old baby
เท an informal style, we often use foot instead of feet in other structures,
especially when we talk about people’s heights.
My father's just over six foot two.
ÍX (he นพ or pMOdn tormt เท espmoon» or Umr (eg Un ทแทนเท นธ!เ; fouf days /ouriuy). UMS.
15	British money
There are 100 pence in a pound Sums of money arc named as follows:
Ip one penny (informal one p ( pi:/) <· a penny)
5p five pence (informal five p)
£3.75 three pounds seventy-five (pence) O» (more formal) three /rounds and
seventy-five pence
Some people now use the plural pence as a singular in informal speech; pound is
sometimes used informally as a plural.
That’ร two Irounds and one pence, please.
It cost me eight pound fifty.
Singular forms are used in expressions like afive-pound note (see above).
However, pence is often used instead of penny (a five pence stamp).
vocabulary - 322 numbers
16	American money
There are 100 cents (c) in a dollar (ร). One cem coins are called pennies;
five-cent coins are nickels; ten-cent coins are dimes; a twenty-five cent coin
is a quarter.
17	metric and non metric measures
Britain uses not metric measures (miles, yards and feel) lor road distances;
heights are often given in feet.
The car park 'ร .straight on, about 500yards on the right.
We are now flying at an altitude of28,000feet.
Metric measures are now standard for most other purposes, hut non metric
measures are also sometimes used. The US generally uses non-metric units.
It's .TO miles to the nearest hospital.
The lightest road bike ever weighs around 6 pounds.
Other English-speaking countries use the metric system. Approximate
equivalents are as follows:
I inch (แท) X 2.5cm
12	inches - I foot (30cm)
3	feet (3ft) - I yard (90cm)
5.280feel / 1,760 yards X I mile (1.6km)
5	miles - 8km
16 ounces - I pound (455gyn)
2.2 pounds (2.21b) ■ I kg
1-1 pounds (14lb) - I stone (6.4kg) (BrE only)
I Hritish Ilint X 568ml
I US pint X 473ml
8	pints (8pt) ะ I gallon
I Hritish gallon ■ 4.55 litres
I US gallon = 3.78 litres
I cure X 4,840 square yards ะ 0.4 hectares
I square mile 640 acres X 259 hectares
18	area and volume
We say, for example, that a room is twelve feet by fifteen feel, or that a garden is
thirty metres by forty eight metres.
A room twelve feel by twelve feet can be called twelve feel square, the total area
is 144 square feet.
Λ container 2 metres by 2 metres by 3 metres has a volume of 12 cubic metres.
19	a and per
When we relate two different measures, we usually use a/an; per is often used in
formal writing.
It costs two pounds a week, (or ... £2 per week.)
We're doing seventy miles an hour, (or___70 miles per hour ' mph.)
vocabulary - 322 numbers
Vocabulary Areas
tion 29
20	numbers not used as complements after be
Numbers arc used as subjects or objects, but not usually as complements after
be except เท calculations, ► 322 21 below.
I've got three sifters, (no: My sisters are three.)
There are twelve of US in my family. (More natural than We are twelve...)
21	spoken calculations
Common ways of saying calculations in British English arc:
2-2-1 Two and two is/arefour. (informal)
Two plus two equals is four, (formal)
7-1-3	Tour from seven is/leaves three, (informal)
Seven take away four is/leaves three, (informal)
Seven minus four equals is three, (formal)
3	K 4 ■ 12 Three fours are twelve, (informal)
Three times four is twelve, (informal)
Three multiplied by four equals is twelve, (formal)
9*3 = 3 Threefs) into nine goes three (times), (informal, especially BrE)
Nine divided by three equals'is three, (formal)
22	example of a spoken calculation
Here, for interest, is a multiplication (146*281) together with all its steps, in the
words that a British English speaker might have used as he/she was working it
out on paper before the days of pocket calculators.
146
X 281
29200
11680
146
41026
A hundred and forty-six times two hundred and eighty-one.
beginning; Put down two noughts. Two sixes are twelve; put down two and
carry one; two fours are eight and one are nine; two ones are two.
next line: Put down one nought. Tight sixes are forty-eight; put down eight
and carry four; eight fours are thirty เพo and four is thirty-six; put
down six and carry1 three; eight ones are eight and three is eleven.
next line: One times 146 is 146.
addition:	Six and nought and nought is six; eight and four and nought is
twelve; pul down two and carry’ one; six and two are eight and
one is nine and one is ten; put down nought and carry one; nine
and one are ten and one is eleven: put down one and carry one;
two and one are three and one are four.
total:	forty-one thousand and twenty-six.
Note how is and are can often be used interchangeably.
for Ma»·» of and Mixing dale*. » 124. for »>«» of titling thr llmr. » 12»
vocabulary - 322 numbers
323	talking about age
1	use of be
We most often talk about people's ages with be » number
He is thirty, (not Hr Λα» thirty.)
ox be · number · years old (more formal:... of age).
He is thirty years old / of age. (not .. . thirtyyeãf*)
We ask How old are you?, not normally What is your age?
2	be + ... age
.Note the structure be ♦ ... age (without a preposition).
When I U'OS your age I น»ฝ» working, (noi Whenl ttwat your tigt-...)
The /น»o boys are the same age.	She's the same age as me.
3	prepositions
เท other structures, al is common before age.
He could read at the age of three, (not ... in the age-. ..)
Al your age I already had a job.
324	dates
1	writing
เท Britain, the commonest way to write the day's date is as follows. Note that the
names of months always begin with capital letters (► .'HI).
30 March 200-1	27 July '2003
rhe last two letters of the number word are sometimes added (e g. 1st, 2nd,
3rd, 6th). Some people write a comma before the year, but this is no longer very
common in Britain except when the date comes inside a sentence.
30th March/.) 2004
He was born in Hawick on 14 December, 1942.
The date may be written entirely in figures.
30/3/04	30-3 04	30.3.04
เท the USA it is common to write the month first and to put a comma before
the year.
March 30. 2004
/XII figure dates are written differently เท Britain and America, since British
people put the day first while Americans generally start with the month. So for
example, 6.4.02 means '6 April 2002' in Britain, but 'lune 4, 2002' in the USA.
The longer names of the months are often abbreviated as follows:
Ian reb Mar Apr Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec
The names of decades (e g. the nineteen sixties) can be written like this: the 1960s
(less commonly 1960's).
l-or the pcniuon ill ill Ct' เท letter». » -as. lor hill «opt เท ibbrevtatlotw » :is
vocabulary · 323 talking about
Vocabulary Areas
eclion 29
2	speaking
30 March 1993 - March the thirtieth, nineteen ninety three’(AmE also 'March
thirtieth ..-Ίο* ‘the thirtieth of March, nineteen ninety-three
1200 ะ· twelve hundred
1305 - thirteen hundred and five OK thirteen oh{‘W/) five
1498 = fourteen (hundred and) ninety-eight
1910 - nineteen (hundred and) ten
1946 - nineteen (hundred and) forty-six
2000 - two thousand
2005 - two thousand and five OR twenty oh five
To announce the date. It's is used.
It's April (the) first.
To ask about dates, we can say for instance:
What's the date (today)? What date is it?
What dale is the meeting? (or When is the meeting?)
3	BCandAD
To distinguish between dates before and after the birth of Christ, we use
the abbreviations BC (= Before Christ) and AD t- Anno Domini - jun ior
•เท่ the year of the Lord’). BC follows the date; AD can come before or after it.
lulius Caesar first came to Britain in 55 BC.
The emperor Trajan was horn in AD 53/ 53 AD ______
However, instead of BC and AD. many people now prefer to use BCE ( before
the Common Era ) and CE (‘Common Era ).
325	telling the time_______________________________________________
1	saying what time it is
There are two common ways of saying what time it is.
8.05 eight (oh) five (or five past eight)
8.10 eight ten (on ten past eight)
8.15 eight fifteen (or a quarter past eight)
8.25 eight twenty-five (or twenty-five past eight)
8.30 eight thirty (oh half past eight)
8.35 eight thirty-five (ok twenty-five to nine)
8.45	eight forty-file (or a quarter IO nine)
8.50 eight fifty (or ten to nine)
9.00 nine o'clock	..1.. „
Americans prefer to write a colon between the hours and the minutes: 8:50.
People generally prefer to say minutes past,'to for times between the five minute
divisions.
ieuen minutes past eight (More natural than seven past eight.)
three minutes to nine (More natural than three to nine.)
Die expression o'clock is only used at the hour. Compare;
Wake me at seven (o’clock).
Wake me at ten past seven, (sot ...fen past seven o'clock.)
Past is often dropped from half past in informal speech.
OK. see you at half two (»... half past two.)
vocabulary · 325 telling the time
In American English after is often used instead of past (e.g. ten after fix);
but Americans do not say half after. And in American English of, before and tin
are possible instead of to (e.g. twenty-five of three).
2	asking what time it is
Common ways of asking about time are:
What lime is it?	Have you got the time? (informal)
What’s the time?	Could you tell me the time? (more formal)
What lime do you make it? (oh What do you make the time? BrE, meaning
’What time IS it by your watch?’)
3	the twenty-four hour clock
The twenty-four hour clock is used mainly in timetables, programmes and
official announcements. เท ordinary speech, people usually use the twelve-hour
clock. Compare:
-	Last check-in time is 20.15.
I'm seeing Oliver al a quarter past eight this evening.
rhe next train from Platform 5 is the 17.30 departure for Carlisle.
'What time do you stop work?’ 'Half past five.'
-	rhe meeting will begin at fourteen hundred.
Jack and I are meeting up at two o'clock.
If necessary, times can be distinguished by using in the morning, afternoon'
evening. เท a more formal sty le, we can use am (ะ Latin ante meridiem -
before midday') and pm (- post meridiem - 'after midday').
09.00 - nine o'clock in the morning (on nine am)
21.00 nine o'clock เท the evening (on nine pm)
326	names and titles: Daniel; Mr Lewis
Names and titles are used both when talking about people and when talking
to them. There are some differences.
1	talking about people
When we talk (or write) about people we can name them in four ways.
a first name (also Christian name; AmE also given name or forename)
We use first names mostly informally, for colleagues, relatives,
friends and children.
Where's Daniel? He said he'd be here at three.
How's Mia getting on al school?
b first name + surname (also last name or family name)
This is neutral - neither particularly formal nor particularly informal.
Isn't that Daniel Connolly the actor?
We're going to Ireland with Emily and Daniel Sinclair.
vocabulary · 326 names and titles: Daniel; Mr Lewis
Vocabulary Areas
c title (Mr. Mrs, etc) * surname
This เร more formal. We talk like this about people we do not know, or when we
want to show respect or be polite.
Can I streak to Mr Lewis. please?
We'vt got a ncu> teacher called Mrs Campbell.
Ask Miss Andrews Io come เท, please.
there's a Ms Sanders on the phone.
Note that it is less usual to talk about people by using Mr. Mrs. etc . first name .
surname (e.g. Mr John Parker). Mr, Mrs, etc are not used before the first name
alone (Mr /ohrt).
d surname only
We often use just the surname to talk about men and women เท public life -
politicians, sports personalities, writers and so on.
Do you think Roberts would make a good President?
The 5.000 metres was won by tones. I never liked Eliot's poetry.
Thatcher was the first British woman Prime Minister.
Surnames alone are sometimes used by members of groups (especially all male
groups like soldiers or team members) when they refer to each other.
Let's put Billows in goal and move Carter up.
2 talking to people
When we talk (or write) to people we generally name them in one of two ways.
a first name
This is informal, used for example to colleagues, relatives, friends and children.
Hello, Olivia. How are you? Hi. Dan. Did you get my last email?
However, it is now becoming common for first names to be used by strangers เท
advertising literature and similar correspondence.
Dear Michael.
We can offer you 5% interest guaranteed for 3 years ...
b title * surname
This is more formal or respectful.
Good morning Miss Williamson.
Note that we do not usually use both the first name and the surname of a
person that we arc talking to. It would be unusual to say ‘Hello. Peter Matthews'.
for example.
Members of all-male groups sometimes address each other by their surnames
alone (e.g. 'Hello, Smith'), but this is unusual in modem English.
Mr, Mrs and Ms are not generally used alone.
Excuse me. Can you tell me the time? (noI Excuseme. Mr. OR Excuse me, Mrs.)
Sir and madam are used tn Britain mostly by people in service occupations
(e.g. shop assistants).
Can I help you, madam?	-»
Section 29
vocabulary
names and titles: Daniel; Mr Lewis
Some schoolchildren call lheir teachers sir or miss. เท British English, Dear Sir
and I tear Madam, Dear str or Madam and Dear Sir/Madam arc common wap
ol beginning letters to strangers (► 289) - note the capital letters. เท other
situations sir and madam are unusual เท British English.
Excuse me. Can you leli me the lime? (not Excuse me, sir...)
เท American English, sir and ma'am are quite often used (especially เท the South
and West) when addressing people, both formally and informally.
3	notes on titles
Abbreviated titles like Mr, Mrs and Dr are generally written without full stops in
British English, and more often with full stops (Mr.. Mrs., Dr.) เท American
English (► 336).
Note the pronunciations of the titles Mr, Mrs and Ms (used before names):
Mr fmisl3(r)i	Mrs /'mistz/ Ms/miz/Oft /m3/J
Mr (- Mister) is not normally written in full, and the other two cannot be.
Like Mr, Ms docs not show whether somebody is married or not. It is often used,
especially in writing, to talk about or address women when one does not know
(or has no reason to say) whether they are married. Many women also choose to
use Ms before their own names in preference to Mrs or Miss.
Dr ( Doctor) is used as a title for medical and other doctors.
Professor does not simply mean 'teacher'. It is a title reserved for university
teachers (especially, เท Britain, for more senior university teachers).
Note that we do not normally combine two titles such as Prof Dr or Mrs Dr.
fxir พ·)* ol oddfruing people เท feller. » 289. lor -1)1 ๗ Innoduong people. » 129 I
327	names: Florence, Homer, etc
1	cities
The names of cities are often different in different languages - for example the
capital of Denmark. Kobenhavn, is called Kopenhagcn เท German. Copenhague
in French, and Copenhagen เท Italian and English. Some examples of English
names for cities:
Antwerp, Athens. Beirut, Belgrade, Bombay (ทow usually Mumbai), Brussels,
Bucharest. Calcutta (now usually Kolkata), Cologne, Damascus, Florence,
Geneva. Genoa. The Hague. Hanover, lerusalem. Leghorn (now more usually
Livorno), Lisbon. Lyons (now more usually Lyon), Marseilles (now more
usually Marseille), Milan, Moscow, Munich, Naples, Oporto. Padua. Peking
(now usually Beijing), Prague. Borne. St Petersburg Seville, Thessalonica.
Turin, Venice, Vienna, Warsaw
2	classical names
The same is true of many classical Greek and Homan names. Some examples:
Homer, Aeschylus. Liiy. Horace, Ovid, Virgil. Aesop, Aristotle, Euclid.
Sophocles, Mercury, lupiter, Helen. Troy, Odysseus
3	artists
The Italian artists Raffaello Sanzio and Tiziano are called Raphael and Titian
in English.
vocabulary · 327 names: Florence, Homer,
Vocabulary Areas
Section 29
4	countries
The names of countries, of course, also differ from one language to another
(for example Deutschland is called Germany in English; its neighbours call It. for
instance, Allemagne. Tysklandor Niemcy). English versions are not listed here,
as they are well known and can easily be found in any dictionary if needed.
328	gender (references to males and females)
English does not have many problems of grammatical gender. Usually, people
are he or she and things are it. Note the following points.
1	animals, cars, ships and countries
People sometimes call animals he or she. especially when they are thought of as
having personality, intelligence or feelings. This is common with pels and
domestic animals like cats, dogs and horses.
Once upon a time there was a rabbit called loe. He lived ..
Go and find the cat and put her out.
เท these cases, U'ho is often used Instead of which.
She had an old dog who always slept in her bed.
Some people use she for cars, motorbikes, etc; sailors often use she for boats and
ships (but most other people use it).
How's your new carT ‘Terrific. She s running beautifully:
The ship s struck a rock. She’s sinking!
We can use she for countries, hut it is more common เท modern English.
Norway has decided to increase its trade with Romania.(or ... her trade ..)
2	he or she
Traditionally, English used he'him/his when the sex of a person was not known,
or in references that could apply to either men or women, especially in
a formal style.
If I ever find the person who did that. I'll kill him.
If a student is ill. he must send his medical certificate to the College office.
I his usage IS now widely regarded as sexist, and is generally avoided. He or she.
him or her and his or her (also he. she. him/her. his/her) are common
alternatives? especially in a formal style.
If a student is ill, he or she must send a medical certificate...
3	singular they
rhey is often used to mean he or she*, especially after indefinite words like
somebody, anybody, nobody, person. This usage is sometimes considered
'Incorrect. but it has been common เท educated speech for centuries.
For details, * 175.
If anybody wants my ticket, they can have it.
'There's somebody at the door: 'Tell them I'm out'
When a person gets married, they have to start thinking about
their responsibilities.
vocabulary · 328 gender (references to males and females)
4	actor and actress, etc
A few jobs and positions have different words for men and women. Examples:
Man	Woman	Man	Woman
actor	actress	monk	ทนท
(bride)groom	bride	policeman	policewoman
duke	duchess	prince	princess
hero	heroine	steward	stewardess
host	hostess	waiter	waitress
manager	manageress	widower	widow
A mayor can be a man or a woman; เท Britain a mayoress is the wife
of a male mayor.
rhe use of separate terms for women’s roles is often fell to be discriminatory or
sexist, and some of the words listed above are going out of use. Actor, hero and
manager are now commonly used for women as well as men. Police officer is
replacing polictman/policewoman, and flight attendant is replacing
steward; stewardess.
5	words ending in -man
Some words ending in man do not have a common feminine equivalent
(e.g. chairman, fireman, spokesman). As many people consider it inappropriate
to call a woman, for example, ‘chairman’ or ’spokesman’, these words are now
often avoided เท references to women or in general references to people of
either sex. เท many cases, -person is now used instead of -man.
Alice has just been elected chairperson (on chair) of our committee.
A spokesperson said that the Minister does not intend to resign.
เท some cases, new words ending เท woman (e.g. spokeswoman) are coming
into use. But it is now common practice to choose words, even for men. which
are not gender marked (e.g. supervisor instead of foreman, ambulance staff
instead of ambulance men, firefighter instead of fireman).
6	man
Man and mankind have traditionally been used for the human race.
Why does man have more diseases than animals'
That's one small step for a num, one giant leap for mankind. (Neil Armstrong
on stepping onto the moon)
This is now generally considered sexist, and preferred terms are people,
humanity or the human race. Note also the common use of synthetic instead
of man made.
Foe more about drtCTlmmMory hngu ง Re. ► 3)5 I
329	'social' language
Every language has fixed expressions which are used on particular social
occasions - for example when people meet, leave each other, go on a journey,
sit down to meals and so on. Here are some of the most important English
expressions of this kind.
vocabulary · 329 ‘social’ language
Vocabulary Areas
Section 29
1	introductions
Common ways of Introducing strangers to each other are:
lack, do you know Ella? Ella, this is my friend lack.
Sopilie, I don’t think you've met Laura.
I don't think you two know each other, do you?
Can/Mavi introduce Ben Willis? (more formal)	11.... 11
When people are introduced, they may say àseâce to meet you. (formal).
Hello/Hi (informal). Americans often say How are you.
People who are introduced often shake hands.
2	greetings
When getting together with people (formal):
(Good) morning/afternoon/evening.
When getting together with people (informal):
Hello. Hi. (very informal)
When leaving people:
Goodnight.
Bye. (informal)
Cheers, (informal - British only)
See you. (informal) . .
ท was nice to meet / meeting you.
<B^bye. (often used to and by children)
■ 1 Take care, (informal)
See you later / tomorrow next week, etc (informal)
Note that Good day เร very unus'ual (except In Australian IEnglish เท 1
form Gday). and Goodnight เร่ used only when leaving people, not when gecung
together with them.
3	asking about health, etc
Z	«I™"· « à à potely at"-' à„ "-à
นุ"1'·'™'1
How are things? / How’s things? (Informal) How (are) )"U doing'
fmv!ry“น็รเรนนΛ you. And you?	Tine, thank you.
Informal answers:
Fme/Great, thanks.	ร.*^fi?ร่!พนเฬท
07	Not roo bflrf	àtn t grumWe. (BrE)
&>so. (ΝΟΙ Se«*A^)	(Im)good	ff. 1.1.
Rri ” I, ท,,โท· do not usually ask How are you? when they are introduced
to people. And neither British nor American people begin letters to strangers เทฺ
asking about health (» 289).
4	Special greetings
Greetings for special occasions are.
Happy birthday! (or Many happy returns!)
Happy New Year / Easter!	____
Happy/Merry Christmas!	,0,	.
Co^raluiations on your exam results ■ new job. etc (noi CongrattdaliOH^·
ocabulary . 329 social’ language
ร small talk
British people often begin polite conversations by talking about the weather.
'Nice day, isn't nr ·Lovely:
6	getting people's attention
Excuse me! is commonly used to attract somebody's attention, or to call a waiter
in a restaurant. We do not normally say Excuse me. sin madam (► 326.2 b).
7	apologies
British people say Excuse me before interrupting or disturbing somebody,
and Sorry after doing so. Compare:
Excuse me. Could I gel past? Oh, sorry, did I step on your foot?
Excuse me, could you tell me the way to the station?
Americans also use Excuse me to apologise after disturbing somebody.
I beg your pardon is a more formal way of saying 'Sorry'.
I beg your pardon. I didn't realise this was your seat.
8	asking people to repeat
If people do not hear or understand what is said, they may say Sorry? (BrE),
What? (informal, not very polite), (I beg your) pardon? or Pardon me? (AmE).
■Mike's on the phone.''Sorryr Ί said Mike's on the phone.'
'See you tomorrow: ■WhatT 'See you tomorrow:
■ You're going deaf: Ί beg your pardont
9	journeys, etc
Common ways of wishing people a good journey are:
Have น good/nice trip. Have a good journey. (BrE)
Safe journey home. (BrE)
After a journey (for example when we meet people at the airport or station),
we may say:
Did you have a good journey/trip/flight?
How was the journey·/trip,flight?
If somebody is leaving for an evening out or some kind of pleasant event, people
might say Have a good time! or Enjoy yourself! (especially in American English
sometimes just Enjoy!), Good luck' is used before examinations or other difficult
or dangerous events.
When people return home, their friends or family may say Welcome back!home
10	holidays
Before somebody starts a holiday, we may say:
Have a good'nice holiday (AmE ... location). OR Have a good/nice time.
When the holiday is over, we may say:
Did you have a good, nice holiday/vacation?
11	meals
We do not have fixed expressions for the beginnings and ends of meals. It is
common for guests or family members to say something complimentary about
the food during the meal (for example This is very nice), and after (for example
vocabulary
social’ language
Vocabulary Afeas
Section 29
That was lovely/delicious: thank you very much). Some religious people say
grace' (a short prayer) before and after meals. Waiters often say Enjoy your meal
or just Enjoy after serving a customer.
Fo< the names of meaK ►
12	drinking
When people begin drinking alcoholic drinks socially, they often raise their
glasses and say something. Common expressions arc Cheers! (BrE) and Your
health! (AmE also To your health). When we drink to celebrate an occasion
(such as a birthday, a wedding or a promotion), we often say Here’s to..
Here’s to Lily! Here's to the new job!	Here’s to the happy couple.'
13	sending good wishes
Typical expressions are fiiee my best wishes/regards!greeting), loir to X,
Hemember me to X Kay hello to xfor me. When the wishes are passed on.
common expressions are X sends his/her best wishes/regards, etc, X says hello.
14	sympathy
Common formulae เท letters of sympathy (for example on somebody's death)
are I was very/terribly/extremely sorry to hear about... and Please accept my
deepest sympathy.
15	invitations and visits
Invitations often begin:
Would you like to.. .r
Possible replies:
Thank you very/so much. That would be very nice‘lovely, (formal)
Thanks, that would be great, (informal)
Sorry. I'm afraid I’m not free.
It is normal to thank people for hospitality at the moment of leaving their places.
Thank you very/so much. That นพ a wonderful evening.
16	offers and replies
Offers often begin Would you like...?or Can!May I get/offer you .. .'(more
formal), offers to do things for people can begin Would you like me to. ..I,
Can/May I ...for Shall I.,.? (mainly BrE). Typical replies are Yes. please.
No. thank you; Thanks, I'd love some; I'd love to; That's very nice! kind of you.
Note that thank you can he used for accepting as well as refusing.
17	asking for things
We normally ask for things by using yes/no questions. (► JIO).
Could you lend me a pen? (not Please lend me fl pen.)
18	handing over things
We do not have an expression which is automatically used when we hand over
things. We sometimes say Here you are, especially when we want to attract
people's attention to the fact that wc arc passing something to them.
' Have you got a map of LondonT Ί think so. Yes, here you are.' ’ Thanks.'
There you go IS also possible เท this situation, especially in AmE.	-»
vocabulary · 329 'social' language
19	thanks
Common ways os (hanking people
Thank you.
thank you very much.
Thanks, (informal)
Possible replies IO thanks
Not at all. (formal)
Don't mention it.
That's OK. (informal)
Noir that British people do not always reply to thanks, especially thanks for
small things.
Thanks very much / fl lot. (not Thank you a lot. )
Cheers, (informal BrE)
Thank you so much.
are;
You 're welcome.
That's (quite) all right.
No problem, (informal)
lot more information jbcAit thanking and the me ๗ ptow » โ»ร6.
20	sleep
When somebody goes to bed, people often say Sleep well. เท the morning,
we may ask Did you sleep well\ or How did you sleep?

330	meals
There arc regional and social differences in the names for meals.
1	British usage
a midday: dinner or lunch
I he midday meal is often called dinner, especially if it is the main meal
of the day. People who are higher' in the social scale usually call it lunch.
Lunch is also the normal term used by most people for a light midday snack
or packed meal.
b afternoon: tea
[ Afternoon) tea (a light meal of tea with biscuits and cakes, taken at four or Ηνί-
ο clock in the afternoon) is now very unusual, though it is often served in hotels.
c early evening: sometimes (high) tea or supper
Many people have a cooked meal around five or six o'clock This is often called
tea or high tea; some people call it supper.
d later evening: supper or dinner
A meal later in the evening is often called supper (and some people use the
same word for a bedtime snack). Some people use dinner for the evening meal if
it is the main meal of the day. A more formal evening meal with guests, or in a
restaurant, is usually called dinner.
2	American usage
Americans generally use lunch for the midday meal and dinner or supper for the
evening meal. Celebration meals at Christmas and Thanksgiving are called
Christmas Thanksgiving dinner, even if they are eaten at midday.
vocabulary · 330 meals
Vocabulary Areas
Section 29
331	telephoning
1	answering a phone
People answering a private phone either say Hello or give their name. People
answering a business phone most often give their name.
‘Hello’
'Albert Packard:
2	asking for a person
Could I speak to Megan Horrabin ? (AmE also Could I streak with ..?)
3	saying who you are
Hello, this is Corinne, (hoi USUAUA ... I'm Corinne)
‘Could I speak to Megan HorrabinT 'Speaking:
OH ๆhis is Megan Horrabin (speaking).'
4	asking who somebody is
Who is that? (AmE Who is this?) Who is that speaking?
Mio am I speaking to?	Who's calling, please?
5	asking for a number
Can, Could I have extension two oh four six?
Miat’s the dialling code area code for Bristol?
What's the country code for Portugal?
How do I get an outside line?
6	if you want the other person to pay for the call
I'd like to make a reverse (or transferred) charge call to 0-149 437878.
(AmE I'd like to make a collect call...)
7	if somebody is not there
I'm afraid she's not in at the moment.
Can I take a message?
Can I leave a message?
Please leave your message after the tone.
I'll ring/call again later. (AmE I'll call...)
Could you ask her to ring/call me back?
Could you ask her to ring/call me al/on 637022?
Could you just tell her lake called?
8	asking people to wait
lust a moment.	May I put you on hold?
Hold on a moment, please.	I'll just pul you on hold.
Hold the line, please.	Hang on. (informal)
vocabulary · 331 telephoning
d things a switchboard operator may say
One moment, please.	(the number's) ringing for you.
(I'm) trying Io canned you. (I'm) pulling you through now.
I’m afraid the number/line is engaged (BrE). busy (AmE). Will you hold?
I'm afraid there's no reply from this number from her extension.
10	wrong number
I think you've got the wrong number.
I’m sorry. I've got the wrong number.
11	problems
Could you speak louder? It's a bad line (BrE) / bad connection.
You’re breaking up. I'll call again. I was got cut off.
I rangí called you earlier but I couldn't get through.
332	idioms, collocations and
formulaic expressions
1	What are idioms? break even; a can of worms
An expression like turn up (meaning 'arrive'), break tvtn (meaning ’make
neither a profit nor a loss’) or a can of worms (meaning a complicated
problem') can be difficult to understand, because Its meaning is different from
the meanings of the separate words in the expression. (If you know break and
even, this does not help you at all to understand break even.) Expressions like
these are called idioms’. Idioms are usually special to one language and cannot
be translated word for word (though related languages may share some idioms).
2	verbs with particles or prepositions: bring up; look after
Common short verbs like bring, come, do, gel, give, go. have, keep, make, put,
and take arc very often used with prepositions or adverb particles (e.g. on, off.
up, away) to make two-word verbs. These are called prepositional verbs* or
phrasal verbs', and many of them are idiomatic.
Can you look after the cats while I'm away?
She just doesn't know how to bring up children.
I gave up chemistry because / didn Ί like it.
Many of these two word verbs are especially common เท informal speech and
writing. Compare:
-	What lime are you planning to turn up? (informal)
Please lei US know when you plan to arrive, (more formal)
-	lust keep on UH you gel to the crossroads. (informal)
Continue as far as the crossroads, (formal)
vocabulary · 332 idioms, collocations and formulaic expression*
Vocabulary Areas
29
collocations: burning desire; blazing disagreement
We can say / fully understand, but not I fully like; I rather like, but not I rather
understand; I firmly believe, but not / firmly think. Somebody can be a heavy
smoker or a devoted friend, but not a devoted smoker or a heavy friend.
Expressions like these are also idiomatic, in a sense. They are easy to
understand, but not so easy for a learner to produce correctly. One can think of
many adjectives that might be used with smoker to say that somebody smokes a
lot - for example big, strong, hard, fierce, mad, devoted. It just happens that
English speakers have chosen to use heavy, and one has to know this in order to
express the idea naturally and correctly. These conventional combinations of
words are called collocations, and all languages have large numbers of them
Some more examples:
a crashing bore (but -or a crashing nuisance)
a burning desire (but not a blaring desire)
a blazing disagreement (err NOT a burning disagreement)
highly reliable (art NOT highly ok/)
a golden opportunity (Bin NOT a golden thence)
change one's mind (mil NOI ihrmgeones ihmights)
Thanks a lot. (mtt NOT thank you a lot)
formulaic expressions: Sorry I kept you waiting.
The expressions that are used in typical everyday situations arc often idiomatic
เท the same sense. With the help of a dictionary and a grammar, one could
invent various possible ways of expressing a particular common idea, but
generally there are only one or two ways that happen to be used by English
speakers, and one has to know what they arc เท order to speak or write
naturally. Some examples:
Could you check the oil? (More natural than Could you inspect the oil?
o· Could you see how much oil there is เท the engine?)
Is it a direct flight or do I have to change? (More natural than /toes the plane
go straight there or do I hate to gel another one?)
Sorry I kept you waiting. (More natural than Sorry I made you wait.)
Could I reserve a table for three for eight o'clock? (More natural than Could
you keep me a table for three persons for eight o'clock?)
Other formulaic expressions are used as pans of sentences - useful
introductions, conclusions or frames for the things that people want to say.
Let me know when/where/what/how...
The best thing would be to... (do something) as a favour
lhe point is...	...is more trouble liuin it’s worth.
I wouldn't be surprised if. 1. I'll... on condition that you ...
using idioms, collocations and fixed expressions.
Idioms, collocations and formulaic expressions are common in all kinds of
English, formal and informal, spoken and written. Informal spoken language is
often very idiomatic.
Students should not worry because they do not know all the expressions of this
kind that are commonly used by English speakers. There arc enormous numbers
of them, and they can take years to learn. If students use non-idiomatic ways of ■*
vocabulary · 332 idioms, collocations and formulaic expressions
expressing ideas, (hey will normally be understood, and English speakers do not
expect foreigners (O speak perfect natural English. It is therefore not necessary
for students to make great efforts to memorise idioms, collocations, etc they will
learn the most common ones naturally along with the rest of their English. เท
particular, note that books of idioms often contain expressions which are slang),
rare or out of date, and which students should avoid unless they understand
exactly how and when the expressions are used. This is especially true of
colourful idioms like, for example, raining cats and dogs, as cross as two sticks
(-- angry) or kick the bucket (- die). If students try consciously to fill their speech
and writing with such expressions the effect will probably be very strange.
It is, however, helpful for learners to have a good up to date dictionary of
collocations (for example the Oxford Collocations Dictionary for Students of
English) in order to become aware of the most common word combinations.
Foe more about formal and mformjl UnCMgr ► 2RI For » 3M.
333	formal and informal vocabulary
commence
begin, start
alight (from a bus or irain)
ge t off
I beg your pardon?
Pardon? Sorry? (AmE Excuse me? Pardon me?)
What?
repair
mend (BrE)
acceptable, satisfactory
all right
OK
I am firry) grateful to you.
Thank you.
Thanks,
conceal
hide
construct
build
enquire
Some words and expressions are used mainly เท formal situations; เท neutral G
informal situations other words or expressions are used. And some words and
expressions are only used in informal situations. Some examples:
-	FORMAL
NEUTRAL· INFORMAL
-	FORMAL
N EUTRAl JIN FORMAL:
-	FORMAL
NEUTRAL/IN FORMAL
INFORMAL
-	FORMAL
NEUTRAL· INFORMAL
INFORMAL
-	FORMAL
NEUTRAL· INFORMAL
INFORMAL
-	FORMAL
NEUTRAL/ INFORMAL
INFORMAL
-	FORMAL
NEUTRAL' INFORMAL
-	FORMAL
NEUTRAL· INFORMAL
-	FORMAL
NEUTRAL INFORMAL
-	FORMAL
NEUTRAL
INFORMAL:
purchase
buy
gel, pick up
ιίουι formal Mxl
? 2 8
formal and informal ways of using people'» H*ncs and title* ► 12ft.
[he language uwd เก particular social sMuatfom. ► 329. For รนทุ
vocabulary
formal and informal vocabulan
Vocabulary Areas
ection 29
334	slang
1	What is slang?
‘Slang· is a very informal kind of vocabulary, used mosily เท speech by people
who know each other well Examples (mainly British English):
Can you lend me some cash? (‘money”)
My shoelace has bust (‘broken’)
He's a real prat, ('fool’)
Those boots are real cool, (’fashionable’)
let's chill, (‘relax’)
How are the kids? (‘children')
2	strong feelings
Many English slang expressions relate to things that people feel strongly about
(e.g. sex, family and emotional relationships, drink, drugs, conflict between
social groups, work, physical and mental illness, death).
I spent the weekend al my gran’s, (‘grandmother's’)
I've got some sort of bug. ( illness )
He's lost it. (’gone mad’)
Shut your trap! ('mouth )
Let's swap addresses, ('exchange')
Somebody's pinched, nicked my scarf, ('stolen')
There's muck all over the carpet, ( dirt )
I’m not going logo on reading this trash, ('rubbish')
Where’s the too? ('toilet')
Slang can be offensive (accidentally or deliberately) if used in a context where
more formal language would be normal This is particularly the case with taboo
language: words for subjects that some people find shocking.
3	group membership; using slang
Many slang expressions (e g. cash, kids) are widely used. However, many other
slang expressions are only used by members of particular social and professional
groups, and nearly all slang is used between people who know each other well
or share the same social background. So it is usually a mistake for ‘outsiders'
(including foreigners) to try deliberately to use slang. This can give the
impression that they are claiming membership of a group that they do not
belong to. There is also the danger that the slang may be out of date - some
kinds of slang go out of fashion quickly, and when it gets Into books it may
already be dead. It is best for learners to avoid slang unless they are really sure
of its use. If they start becoming accepted as part of an English-speaking
communit)·, they will learn to use the community's slang naturally and correctly
along with the rest of their language.
vocabulary - 334 slang
335	discriminatory and offensive language
The words and expressions described in this entry are generally offensive: their
use can upset or insult people. They are included here because they are
elements of English, and it is not the job of a usage guide to conceal aspects of
the language. However, students should realise that if they use language of this
kind, they are liable to offend and upset the people they are talking to. They are
also likely to give their listeners or readers the impression that they are
insensitive, prejudiced, intolerant, uneducated or worse.
1	false generics
One kind of discriminatory language involves 'false generics' - words that
suggest that all people in a certain category, arc, for example, exclusively male
or female. Talking in general about 'firemen', for Instance, implies that all
firefighters are men, which is clearly not the case. Some examples:
false generics	inclusive language
ambulance men	ambulance staff, paramedics
chairman	chair, chairperson
cleaning lady	cleaner
fireman	firefighter
foreman	supervisor
mailman (AmE) male/female (on a form)	mail carrier (AmE) male / female / prefer not to say
man hours	staff hours
man made	synthetic, manufactured
man, mankind	humanity, the human race
manning	staffing
manpower	human resources, employees
policeman/men	police officerfs)
postman, men (BrE)	postal worker(ร) (BrE)
steward’ stewardess	flight attendant
waiters/waitresses	restaurant staff, servers
False generics arc falling out of use in English, even to speak about Individuals -
so an individual fireman might well be described in a news report as a
'firefighter'.
A similar way of discriminating is to use a word or expression that is acceptable
เท one context, but that makes a person or an experience sound less serious
or important For example, a man's calling women he works with the girls in the
office' is different from calling female children "girls'. Talking about a salesgirl
instead of a shop assistam (BrE) or salesperson (AmE) is thus discriminatory in
two ways at once.
vocabulary · 335 discriminatory and offensive language
Vocabulary Areas
Seclion 29
2	offensive language
Other words and expressions are used to discriminate against particular
groups - to present them as inferior or undesirable in one way or another.
Common targets of discriminatory language arc disability status, gender, sexual
orientation, nationality and ethnicity. เท some cases the offensive use of a term
may be accidental - a speaker may not realise, for example, that disabled people
prefer not to be called ‘handicapped’. (Preferred words and expressions can
change over time: to find out what term a group Itself prefers, check on the
internet.) At the other extreme, words like dyke or nigger are clearly only
normally used to he deliberately offensive. Some examples:
offensive term
cripple, handicapped person
mental handicap
retarded, mentally handicapped
disturbed, mad, crazy, nuts
homo, queer
fasfaggot (AmE)
transsexual, trannie
Chink
gyppo, pikey
lap
Kraut
nigger
Polack (AmE)
spic (AmE)
yid AmE), kike (AmE)
preferred alternative
disabled person, person with a disability
mental/learning disability
having learning difficulties
a mental/learning disability
having a mental illness / health problem
health condition
{พุ
lesbian, gay woman
gay man
gender reassignment
transgender person, trans person
Chinese person
Spanish, Italian OR Portuguese person
Frenchman/woman
Roma, traveller (or Gypsy)
lapanese
German
Mack person (BrE),
African-American (AmE)
Pakistani
Pole
I alin-American
Middle-Eastern person
Italian
Jew
When a neutral term is widely used to discriminate, it may come to be felt as
offensive, leading to its rejection. This has happened with Negro (replaced by
Mack or African-American), Eskimo (replaced by Inuit), handicapped (replaced
by disabled) and Mongol,'Mongoloid'.Mongolism (replaced by (having) Down's
syndrome). Some Roma people now also regard Gypsy as offensive.
Note that it may sometimes be acceptable for members of a group to Gill one
another, for example, dyke’ or 'nigger'. But of course it is not at all acceptable
for people outside the group to use the word.
vocabulary - 335 discriminatory and offensive language
Section 30 Word Formation and
Spelling
INTRODUCTION
abbreviations
Abbreviations - shortened forms of words and expressions - are useful
time savers The)· can form an important pan of the language of a professional or
social group, but may be incomprehensible to outsiders. If an army officer says,
for instance. ‘RV at IBM. and tell the CS.M to get that sitrep to the 2IC now',
not all non military people will understand that the officer wants people to
assemble (HV - ‘rendezvous') at 6 pm, and that the Company Sergeant-Major
has to get a situation report to the Second in Command of the unit.
Ordinary non-professional language also contains large numbers of
abbreviations, some formal (like e.g., meaning for example ), and some informal
(like doc for doctor ). It is important for language learners to lie familiar with
the most common of these.
prefixes and suffixes
Il is also useful for learners to be aware of the most common prefixes and
suffixes and their meanings, since this can help them to understand unfamiliar
words. Knowing that hydro- means 'related to water’, for instance, makes
hydroelectric transparent. Many such prefixes and suffixes are derived from
classical Greek or Latin, and a number of these are commonly used to form new
words (e.g. technophobe, somebody who hates or fears technology, perhaps
especially computers).
spelling
English spelling is difficult for three main reasons.
1	English has a large number of different sounds: speakers of standard British
English distinguish around 21 different vowels and 24 different consonants in
pronunciation. But the English alphabet only has 26 letters, with only six vowels,
and English does not use written accents, so most spoken vowels have to be
represented by combinations of written vowels such as ea, ie, OU.
2	After live Norman invasion in the 11 th century, a large number of French
words came into English, and these were written according to French spelling
conventions rather than those that had been developed for old English. The
resulting unsystematic mixture of spelling rules gradually became fixed, and has
persisted into modern English.
z English pronunciation has changed a great deal over the centuries, but
spelling has not, in general, been revised accordingly. So spoken vowels are
often written in ways that are now misleading (like the vowels in women), and
many common words contain ghost consonants representing sounds that are no
longer there (like the gh in through, right, sigh etc).
It is not only foreign learners who find English spelling difficult. Many English-
speaking children have a hard time learning to read and write, and some do
vocabulary · Section 30 Word Formation and Spelling
not succeed. Indeed, even many highly educated adults have trouble with words
àà Literacy would probably be greatly Improved
by a well-planned spelling reform.
'ร? ร^.^^SOlne ,a,r1*· '°«ular patterns, and knowledge
'hcs<·can help a good deal. The most important ones are explained
in this Section.
For some notes on British American spelling differences. » 319.3.
Do you know what's wrong with these, and why?
Ο I wonder why Daniel ha'snt written to US. ► 337.1
o 'Are you ready?· Yes, I m ► 337 3
Q ‘Are you ready?' 'No, I amn’t.· ► 337.4 note 2
θ She travelled extensively in north africa. ► 341
Q Professor Hawkins is a specialist in Japanese history. » แ I
G Ihe production was realy original. ► 345
Q Their theory has been definitly disproved. » 346
θ 1*·® completly misunderstood my argument. ► 316
Q The government could easyly be overthrown. ► 348
Q Iragicly, the message never arrived. » 339.4
Q He should be made to apologise publically. ► 339.4
o Ihe results caused no surprize. » 343
2	1Γο® l"any Ι"·°ρ|ν a,e out-of-work. » 342
Q I am hopping to see you soon. » 347
Q I will write again latter. ► 347
o Thank you for ofierring to help. ► 347
® “c.d!d Wonderful Jiaintings of gallopping horses. ► 347
Q This is the begining of the end. ► 31.
c. p|easf sec illustration attatched. ► 349
Q Steack has become extremly expensive. ► 349, 316
r. L"" forward to rccieving your reply. ► 350
G The claim is hard to beleive. ► 350
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION
336	abbreviations
337	contractions; I'll, don'i, etc
338	prefixes and suffixes
339	-K and -leal
340	apostrophes
341	capital letters
342	hyphens
344	able and Me
345	-fy
346	finale
347	doubling final consonants
349	ch and ich, k and ck
350	ie and ei
351	spelling and pronunciation
vocabulary . Section 30 Word Formation and Spelling
336	abbreviations
1	punctuation
•Most abbreviations are generally Mirren without full slops เท modern British
English. Full stops (AmE periods} are normal in American English.
Mr (AmE Mr.) - Mister (not usually written in full)
kg (AmE tg.) kilogram	Ltd = Limited (company)
2	initial-letter abbreviations
Some abbreviations are made from the first letters of several words. This often
happens with the names of organisations.
the BBC » the British Broadcasting Corporation
These abbreviations are most often stressed on the last letter.
the BBC .<๖ ,b>: bi: 'si:/ the USA ÔÍ Ju: cs Ct
If one of these abbreviations has an article (a/an or the), the form and
pronunciation of the article depend on the pronunciation of the first letter of the
abbreviation. Compare:
- an EU country
a US diplomat /ว ju: . . ./ (not (ห-พร·...)
an MP an cm . . ./ (not a MP)
the USA .&> ju:. . J (Nor /dit-jtH.. 7)
the RSPCA /di: น:r . . J (not ../)
3	acronyms
Some initial-letter abbreviations are pronounced like words. These are often
called ‘acronyms’. Articles are usually dropped in acronyms.
UNESCO /jm’neskau/ (not the-UNESCO) the United Nations Educational.
Scientific and Cultural Organisation
Note that not all initial· letter abbreviations are pronounced as words.
the CIA /.si: at 'ci/ (not Z'stB/) the IRA /.at น:r ‘etI (not /"-awe/)
4	plurals
An apostrophe (') is sometimes used before the ร in the plurals of abbreviations.
MP’s, CD’s Ilin more often MPs, CDs.
5	some common abbreviations
Ihe following abbreviations are given in their common British form, without full
stops. Some of them could also have full stops in British English, and most
would have full stops เท American English. This is a small selection of the very
many abbreviations commonly used in English. For explanations of others,
see a good dictionary.
AD (AmE A.D.) after the birth of Christ (from Ulin anno dornini,
in the year of the Eord, used before years)
Aids OH AIDS	Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
am	เท the morning (from Latin ante meridiem.
before midday')
asap	as soon as possible
vocabulary
abbreviations
Word Formation and spelling
(Ctlon 30
ATM A tig à b BA BA BC BCE	cash machine ('automated teller machine') August Avenue bom (in biographical dates) Bachelor of Arts British Airway» before Christ (used before years) before the Common Era (alternative to BC, now increasingly preferred)
BSc (BrE)	Bachelor of Science Celsius, centigrade Captain
CE	compact disc (e g. for recorded music) Common Era (alternative to Al), now increasingly preferred)
CEO CIA	Chief Executive Officer Central Intelligence Agency· (the United States external security service)
	centilitres) centimetre(s)
c/o	care of (เท addresses, meaning living at X s house' Company
Col Corp Cpi	Colonel Corporation Corpora) cubic
CV(BfE)	summary of career (from Ullin curriculum vitae. equivalent of AmE résumé}
	died (in biographical dates) December
dept DIY DNA Dr DVD	department do it yourself deoxyribonucleic acid Doctor digital versatile disc, digital videodisc east(em) edited (by), editor for example (from Latin exempli gratia)
ETA	estimated time of arrival and so on (from Latin el cetera, 'and other things')
EU FAQ FBI	European Union Fahrenheit frequently asked questions Federal Bureau of Investigation (die United States national police force)
Feb fl	February foot, feet (in measurements) gallon(s)
GB Gen	Great Britain; glgabytefs) General
vocabulary · 336 abbreviations
GMT GNP go»'' HIV hr เท Inc IRA IT Ian รุ? km kph lb LCD LED LI Ltd MA MD (BrE)	Greenwich Mean Time gross national product government human immunodeficiency virus hourfs) เท other words (from latin id nt. 'that is') inch(es) Incorporated Irish Republican Army information technolog) lanuary Junior kilogram(s) kilometre(s) kilometres per hour pound(s) เท weight (from Latin libra(e)) liquid cry stal display light-emitting diode Lieutenant Limited metrc(s) Master of Arts Managing Director milligram's)
.พ/ร	the Security’ Service (concerned with information from inside Britain)
.M/6	the Secret Intelligence Service (concerned with information from outside Britain)
min ml mm MP mph Mt NATO NE NHS No Nou NW Oct PA	minute(s) millilitre(s) millimetres) Member of Parliament miles per hour Mount nonh(em) North Atlantic Treaty Organisation north east(ern) National Health Service number November north-west(em) October ounce(s) personal assistant personal computer; police constable
PhD PM pm	Doctor of Philosophy Prime Minister in the afternoon (from Latin post meridiem, after midday*)
Prof	Professor
vocabulary · 336 abbreviations
Word Formation and Spelling
Section 30
PS	addition to a written message (from Latin post scrip/um, ’written afterwards’) pint
Rd RIP	Road Rest in Peace (from Latin requiescafn)t เท 1- ’May he/she/they rest in peace )
rpm RSVP	revolutions per minute Please reply (on invitations, from French Rfponde· s'i! vous plait.)
i	south(em) south east(ern) second(s)
Sept	September Sergeant Square (in place names)
	square (เท measurements) Street; Saint
รพ UK UN UNESC.O OR Unesco	south west(em) United Kingdom United Nations United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation
uni Univ US USA VAT VIP เพ/ I'. MSO (especially AmE) พ/พ. พ WHO น'นพ yd	university University United States United States of America value added tax very important person volume against (especially in sporting events, from Latin versus) west(ern) World Health Organisation world-wide web yard(s)
For *bbrrvi>tk>m น*rd เท wn* etectrak mr«v* (r X hopr 2 r M for Ληρτ to wr ^toX ► 20.
337	contractions: /7/, don't etc
1	general rules
Contractions are forms like I've, don't, in which an auxiliar)' verb is combined
with another word. There are two kinds.
noun/pronoun, etc ♦ (auxiliar)') verb
I'm tired. My father's not very well.
Do you know when you'll arrive? Where's the station?
I've no idea. There's a problem. She'd like to talk to you.
Somebody's coming. Here's our bus.
vocabulary · 337 contractions: I'll, don't.
(auxiliary) verb « not
They aren’t reatty.	I haven't seen him for ago.
You won't be late, will you?	Can't you swim?
Contractions arc formed with auxiliary verbs, and also with be and sometimes
have when these arc not auxiliary verbs.
The short form 'ร (= is:has) can be written after nouns (including proper names),
question words, here and now as well as pronouns and unstressed there.
The short forms 'น,'d and ‘re are commonly written after pronouns and
unstressed there, but เท other cases we more often write the full forms
(especially in British English), even if the words would be contracted
in pronunciation.
‘Your mother will (/‘madarl') be surprised', she said.
I wondered what had (.''พอtad,') happened.
Contractions are not usually written with double subjects.
lack and I have decided to split up. (not lack and I've deeided...)
The apostrophe (■) goes in the same place as the letters that we leave out:
has not - hasn’t (not htc'sHi). But note that shan't (BrE ะ shall not}
and won't (ร will not') only have one apostrophe each.
Contractions are common and correct in informal writing: they represent the
pronunciation of informal speech. They are not generally used เท a formal style.
2	alternative contractions
Some negative expressions can have two possible contractions. For she had not
we can say she hadn't or she'd not; for he will not we can say he won't or
he'll not. The two negative forms of be (e g. she isn’t and she's not) are both
common. With other verbs, forms with n't (e g she hadn't) are more common in
most cases in standard southern British English: they are the only forms
normally used in American English. (Forms with not - e g. she'd not - tend to
be more common in northern and Scottish English.)
Double contractions are not normally written: she'รtt’l is impossible.
3	position
Contractions in the first group (noun / pronoun / question word ‘
auxiliary verb) do not normally come at the ends of clauses. Compare:
Kes, you are. (not les, you 're.)
I’ve forgotten.
Yes, you have. (Mil >es.,♦««พ·.)
Negative contractions can come at the ends of clauses.
They 'eally aren’t. No, I haven't.
4	list of contractions
Strong and weak forms (► 315) are given where appropriate		
Contraction	Pronunciation	Meaning
I'm	aim	1 «1ΠΊ
I’ve	atv/	1 have
I'll	ail'	1 will
I’d	/aid'	I had/would
you're	joa(r); p:(r); ja(r)/ • ju:v; jav;	you are you have
vocabulary » 337 contractions: I'll, don't,
Word Formation and Spelling
Section 30
Contraction	Pronunciation
you'll	ju:l; jal
you’d	ju:d; jad/
he's	hi:/, hlz/
he'll	hi:l; hil/
he’d	’hi:d; hid
she’s	/fi:z; fnt
she’ll	à /->
she'd	Ji:d; fid
it's	/its/
it'd (uncommon)	/’Had
we're	/wiafr)/
we've	'wi:v; wiv/
Use'll	■'พ·:!: Wil/
	wi:d. wid'
they're	«ำea(r); òe(r)/
they've	deiv; dev/
they'll	/dell: del
they'd	deid; ded
there's	Sea/: da/.'
there'll	deal; dal
there'd	dead; dad
oten t	la: nt/
can t	'koxntz
couldn't	kodnl
daren't	•leant
didn't	"didnt/
doesn't	/’dA/nt'
(Ion 7	/daunt/
hadn't	hxdm
hasn 7	.''hatznt/
haven 7	fhcvnt/
isn't	/Ίζη!.
mightn't	/’mail nt/
musln 7	/’mAsnt
needn't	?'ni:dnV
oughtn't
àà,
used n't
wasn't
weren't
won't
wouldn’t
๖:! nt/
Ju:nt/
/’Jodnt/
■ju:snt/
■■พท/ท!.
'พวะท!.
waont/
■wudnt/
Meaning
you will
you had/would
he is/has
he will
he had/would
she is/has
she will
she had/would
ii is/has
ii had/would
we have
we will
we had/would
they are
they have
they will
they had/would
there is/has
there will
there had/would
are not
cannot
could not
dare not
did not
does not
do not
had not
has not
have not
is not
might not
must not
need not
ought not
shall not
should not
used not
was not
were not
will not
would not
Notes
1	1)0 not confuse it's (» it is/has} and แร (possessive).
2	Am not is only normally contracted เท questions to aren't ( น:ท!/).
I'm late, aren't II
vocabulary · 337 contractions: I'll, don’t, etc
3	Nolt the difference in pronunciation of can’t in British English (/ko:nt/) and
American English (/kxnt/).
4	Daren’t, mightn't, oughtn't, shan't and usedn’t are rare, especially เท American
English; needn't is rare in American English.
5	เท non standard English, ain't (pronounced ’eint/) is used as a contraction of
am not, are not, is not, have not and has not.
I ain Ί going to tell him. Don Ί talk to me like that - you ain Ί my boss.
'H's raining.' ‘No it ain't.'
I ain't got no more cigarettes.
lames ain't Ιχνη here for days.
6	For the contraction let's. ► 225.
7	May not is not normally contracted: mayn't is ver)' rare.
338	prefixes and suffixes
The following are some of the most common and useful English prefixes
and suffixes.
1 I	prefixes			
	prefix	mainly added to	usual meaning	examples
	a·	adj.	not. without	amoral, asexual	I
	Anglo·	adj.	English	Anglo-American
	ante	adj., verbs, nouns	before	antenatal antedate. anteroom
	anti-	adj., nouns	against	antisocial, anti-war
	arch-	nouns	supreme, most	archbishop, arch-enemy
	auto	adj, nouns	self	automatic, autobiography
	bi	adj., nouns	two	bilingual, bicycle
	bio-	adj., nouns	life	biodegradable. biochemist
	cenl(i)·	nouns _ ____	hundredth			centimetre, centilitre
	CO·	verbs, nouns	together (with)	co operate, co pilot
	counter	adj., verbs, nouns	against	counteract, counter· revolution(ary)
	cyber-	nouns	computer, internet	cybercrime, cyberculture
	de	verbs	reversing action take away	defrost, deregulate
		verbs		deforest
vocabulary · 338 prefixes and suffixes
Word Formation and Spelling
Section 30
prefix	mainly added to	usual meaning	examples
dis·	adj., verbs, nouns	not, opposite reversing action	disloyal, disappear. disorder disconnect, disinfect
e	nouns	electronic, internet	email, e·commerce, e-book
cco-	adj., nouns	environment	eco-friendly, ecotourism
en-	nouns	put in make	endanger, encircle enrich, enable
Euro-	adj., nouns	European	Eurocentric. Europop
ex·	nouns	former	ex-husband
extra-	adj.	exceptionally outside	extra-special extra terrestrial
/ore·	verbs, nouns	before	foretell, foreknowledge
geo·	adj., nouns	earth	geothermal.
hyper	adj., nouns	extreme(ly)	hypercritical, hypertension
ill-	past participles	badly	ill-advised, ill-expressed
in· (im- before p) (น· before /) (ir before r)	adj.	not, opposite	incomplete. insensitive impossible illegible
inter·	adj., verbs	between, among	international, intermarry
kilo	nouns	thousand	kilometre, kilogram
mal-	adj., verbs, nouns	bad(ly)	maltreat.
mega·	nouns	million	megabyte
micro·	adj., nouns	very small	microlight (aircraft), micrometer
mid	nouns	เท the middle of	mid-December, mid afternoon
milli-	nouns	thousandth	millisecond
mini-	nouns	little	minigolf, minicab
vocabulary · 338 prefixes and suffixes
prefix	mainly added to	usual meaning	examples
mis-	verbs, nouns	wrongly)	misunderstand, misconduct 	
mono	adj., nouns	one	monogamous, monorail
multi·	adj., nouns	many	multilingual, multi purpose
neo	adj., nouns	newfly)	neo · classical. neo-Nazi
non·	nouns, adj.	not	non-smoker, non-returnable
omni-	adj.	all	omnipresent
out	verbs	do/be more (han	outrun, outnumber
over·	adj., Serbs	too much	overconfident. overeat
pan	adj.	right across	panAmerican
photo	adj., nouns	light	photoelectric, photosynthesis
poly-	adj., nouns	many	polyglot, polygon
	adj., nouns	after	postmodern, postuw
I"···	adj., nouns	before	premarital, prewar
pro	adj., nouns	for, in favour of	pro-communist, pro-government 	Udj.)
ftseudo-	adj.	false	pseudo-academic
psycho·	adj., nouns	mind, mental	psycho-analysis
re·	verbs, nouns	again, back	rebuild, reconstruction
semi·	adj., nouns	half	semi-conscious.
			semicircle	J
socio	adj., nouns	society	socio-economic
sub-	ad)., nouns	below	substandard, subconscious.
			subway
suffer·	adj. nouns	more than, sp.	Itcial supernatural, suitermarket
tele·	nouns			distant	telescope
thermo·	adj. nouns	heat	thermo electric, thermometer	
al Hilary · 3.18 prefixes and suffixes
Word Formation and Spelling
Section 30
prefix	mainly added to	usual meaning	examples
trans·	adj., verbs	across	transatlantic, transplant
tri-	adj., nouns	three	tripartite, triangle
ultra-	adj., nouns	extreme, beyond	ultra-modern, ultrasound
un·	adj,, participles	not. opposite reverse action		uncertain, unexpected untie, undress
under-	verbs, participles	too little	underestimate, underdeveloped
บ	adj., nouns nouns	deputy	_____________	unilateral, unicycle 1 vice-chairman
2 suffixes that form nouns
suffix	mainly added to	usual meaning	examples ftritriLaiW (hrinifKT
~agc	verbs	instance of		 instance of	orcaxage, snnnKagc refusal, dismissal
•ance, -ancy	adj., verbs	proccss/state of	reluctance. performance,
-atlon	verbs verbs	process/state of product of	exploration, starvation
•ce	verbs	object of verb	payee, employee
-ence, ency	adj., verbs	process/state of	independence.
-er	nouns	belonging to 		teenager. Londoner
■er/or	verbs	person/thing (hill does			writer, driver, starter, editor
ess	noun»		female	lioness, waitress
ette	nouns	small	kitchenette	_
•Jul	nouns	amount held เท	spoonful, cupful
-hood	nouns	quality, group.	brotherhood. childhood
-tng	nouns	quantity of material	carpeting, tubing
	nouns	activity		farmings surfing
			
vocabulary - 338 prefixes and suffixes
i suffix	mainly added lo	usual meaning	examples
-ism	nouns	belief, practice	communism, impressionism
■try	adj.	quality of	elasticity, falsity
ment	verbs	process/result of	government, arrangement
ness	adj.	quality of		meanness, happiness
-ocracy	nouns	government by	democracy
•ology	nouns	study of	sociology	ไ
. phobe	nouns nouns	lover of hater, fearer of	Anglophile	 Anglophobe
■phobia	nouns	irrational fear of	arachnophobia (fear of spiders)
■ship	nouns	status, state. quality of	friendship, dictatorship
3 suffixes that form nouns or adjectives
suffix	mainly added to	usual meaning	examples
-ese	place nouns	inhabitant of, language of	Chinese, Vietnamese
■(i)an	nouns	supporter of,	Darwinian,
		related to	republican
	nouns	citizen of	Parisian, Moroccan
ist	nouns	practitioner of	pianist, racist
4 suffixes that form adjectives
suffix	mainly added to	usual meaning	examples
able/ iblel* 311)	verbs	can be (done)	washable.
			drinkable
al	nouns	related to	accidental
•centric	nouns	centred on	Eurocentric
•eci	nouns	having	wooded, pointed, 1 blue-eyed \
			
■fid	nouns	full of. providing	useful, helpful
-ic(al) (» 339)	nouns	related to	artistic, typical
•Uh	adj., nouns place nouns	rather (like) inhabitant of. language of	greenish, childish Scottish. Turkish
			
■น*e	verbs	can do. does	attractive. selective
			
vocabulary · 338 prefix» and suffix»
Word Formation and Spelling
Section 30
___________
sulfix~	mainly added ω~ usual meaning	examples
Ξγ--------------n°E	ฬิแ^	^'“'homflfiS
________________ ___ childlike
____________________
dike	nouns__________________________-- — ————-
------ท^-	with the quality of friendly, motherly
i---------------2 ฯ^
7-7	—	ฯ!ะร&'
________________
——--------------towards	backward.
■พd	a‘*·	northward I
—---------------ZT.“	นิ๒โ	creamy, wealthy
-V	nouns	uxe, ....
?	characterised by_________________!
_________
5 suffixes that form adverbs
suffix -ly ward(s)	mainly added to adj. adj.	usual meaning in an (adjective) way towards	examples calmly, slowly backwards. northward(s)
6 suffixes that form verbs			
suffix ate	mainly added nouns	to usual meaning causative	examples orchestrate. chlorinate
-CR	adj.	make, become	deafen, ripen. harden
dfy ise/ize	adj., nouns (► 343) adj., nouns	causative: make various	simplify, electrify modernise. symbolise
7	combining forms	____
for seeing), merry (measurement).
phonology telescope micrometry
8	negative words with no positive equivalent
ร™.»orๆ
kBM ««I».ธ™/^»·* "''ร'"''1’'· O'tov'·
unspeakable, unwieldy. unwitting
vocabulary . 338 prefixes and suffixes
9	productivity
Certain prefixes and suffixes are productive: the)· are often used to form
new words. And some can be added to almost any word of the right
grammatical kind.
I'm not anti-tourists, I just don't want them in our town.
I he place has got a real 1970s-like atmosphere.
But most are limited to certain words or kinds of word, and cannot be used to
invent new vocabulary items.
\ ’ll! ΠΠνΤνΜΠτΙ*, .ΉΙΖΙΙΙΙΙ ' vaiir IK)	» WAV IM wr rriKii.1^ I

339	-ic and -ical
Many adjectives end in -ic or -ical. There is no general rule to tell you which
form is correct in a particular case.
1 some adjectives normally ending in -ic
academic algebraic arithmetic	domestic dramatic egoistic	linguistic majestic	phonetic public semantic
artistic	emphatic	neurotic	strategic
athletic	energetic	pathetic	syntactic
catholic	fantastic	peda gogic	systematic
despotic	geometric	pedantic	tragic
Arithmetical, geometrical and pedagogical also occur.
Some of these words ended เท ical in older English (e g. fantastical, majeslical,
tragical).
New adjectives which come into the language generally end in -ic. except for
those ending in -logical.
2 some adjectives ending in -ical
biological (and many other adjectives ending in -logical)
chemical	logical	musical	tactical
critical	mathematical	physical	topical
cynical	mechanical	radical	typical
fanatical	medical	surgical	tyrannical
grammatical
3	differences of meaning
Rhythmic and rhythmical both exist with no difference of meaning. เท a few
other cases, both forms exist but with a meaning difference. » Section 31 for
classic(al), comictai), economical), eleclric(al), historic(al), magic(al)
and politic(al).
4	adverbs
Note that whether the adjective ends in -ic or -ical, the adverb ends in -ically
(pronounced 'tkli'). The one common exception is publicly (not publically).
vocabulary · 339 -ic and
Word Formation and spelling
Section 30
5 nouns ending เท -ics
.Many nouns ending เท ics are singular le g physics, athletics). Some can be
either singular or plural (eg. mathematics, politics). For details. ► 117.3.
340	apostrophes
We use apostrophes (') for three main reasons.
1	missing letters
Apostrophes replace letters เท contracted forms (► 337).
can't (- cannot) I'd (= I would/had)
it's ( it is/has) U'ho's (- who is/has)
2	possessives
We use apostrophes before or after possessive •ร (► 123).
the girl’s father Charles's U'i/e my parents' house
Possessive determiners and pronouns (eg. yours, its) do not have apostrophes.
This money is yours, (mji .. .-yeuF*,)
rhe cat had not had its food yet. (not ... H's food...)
Whose house did she stay in? (noi Who's...)
3	special plurals
Words which do not usually have plurals sometimes have an apostrophe when
plural form is written.
It is a nice idea, hut there are a lot of ifs.
Apostrophes arc generally used in the plurals of letters, and sometimes of
numbers and abbreviations.
He writes b's instead of d's.
It was เท the early I wo'ร (More usually:... เพ0ร.)
I know two MP’s personally. (More usually:... MPs.)
It is not correct to put apostrophes เท normal plurals.
HANS - HALF Place (not /&พํร-. ..)
341	capital letters
We use capital (big) letters at the beginning of the following kinds of words:
the names of days, months and public holidays (but not usually seasons)
Sunday	March	Easter
Tuesday	September	Christmas
(but normuj.y summer, autumn)
the names of people, institutions and places. Including stars and planets
lohn
the Foreign Office
the United States
The Super Cinema
the Pole Star
(um M1H.MAU V the earth, the รนท. the moon)
the Smiths
University
(Compare He leaches at a university.
North Africa
rhe KHz Hotel
the Far East
Mars
vocabulary · 341 capital letters
c Words derived from people's names have capitals if they refer to the people.
Shakespearean drama (but Io pasteurise): this refers to a chemical process,
not directly to the scientist Pasteur
d people's titles
Mr Smith Professor Blake	Dr Iones
(Monel Webb the Managing Director
the Prime Minister is attending the summit (Compare How is the Swedish
prime minister elected?)
e nouns and adjectives referring to nationalities and regions, languages, ethnic
groups and religions
He's Russian.	I speak German.	Japanese history
Catalan cooking	She’s Jewish.	He's a Sikh.
f the names of newspapers and magazines
International Herald Tribune New Scientist
The article the in such names is usually, but not always, capitalised,
I read it in lhe/the Guardian.
9	the first word (and often other important words) in the titles of books,
films and plays
The Spy who Loved Me Gone with the Wind
Λ Midsummer Night’s Dream
342	hyphens
1	What are hyphens?
Hyphens are the short lines (·) that we pul between words in expressions like
ticket-office or ex-husband. They arc not the same as dashes (-): ► 297.
2	Are hyphens disappearing?
The rules about hyphens are complicated, and usage is not very clear. Perhaps
because of this, people seem to he using hyphens less, especially เท compound
nouns. Many common short compounds are now often written ‘solid’, with no
division between the words (e g. weekend, wideawake, takeover); other less
common or longer compounds are now more likely to be written as completely
separate words (e g. train driver, living room). The situation at present is rather
confuted, and it is not unusual to find the same expression spelt in three
different ways (e g. bookshop, book shop, book shop). If one is not sure whether
to use a hyphen between words or not, the best thing is to look in a dictionary,
or to write the words separately without a hyphen.
3	When are hyphens used?
Hyphens are still often used in the following cases:
a compound nouns
» compound nouns where the second part ends เท -er
bottle opener
•	compound nouns where the first part ends เท -ing
writing-paper
•	compound nouns made with prepositions and adverb particles
sister-inlaw makeup	in-joke
vocabulary · 342 hyphens
Word Formation and Spelling
Section 30
compound adjectives
red-hot nice-looking blue-eyed
grey-green broken-hearted
When we use a longer phrase as an adjective before a noun, we often
When we use a font .
hyphens. Compare:
-	an out-of-work miner.
He's out of work
-	a shoot-to-kill policy
They were ordered to shoot to kill.
c compound verbs beginning with a noun
role-play househunt
d prefixes
เท British English, the prefixes anti CO: ex
are I
combinations
anti-war
coproducer
mid: non: pre-, past: pro- and serf-
เทแรท I ngusn, inc piciuw» """ - 1· γ ' "---1- ' '	■ 1.βΗ 1 h
often «penned from what follows by hyphens. เท American English the
ibinations are generally written as single words le g antiwar),
mti-ioar	midterm	pre-meeting
mid term
non-involvement
pro-hunting
ex-husband post-publication	self-study
เทtoilh British and American รุ่^·1^^?’2’ itTrl	y >T
In order IO avoid unusual or misleading combinations of letters.
un-American re-examine counterrevolution
numbers 21-99; fractions
ru-enh oพ thirty six two-thirds
word division
We also use hyphens to separate the parts offong^rds at the «^'^"en
or printed lines. (To see where to divide words, look เท a good dictionary )
is not completely in accordance with the controversial policy of the present govern
menl. which was...
343 -ise and -ize
Many English verbs and some nouns can be 'fHdt with eithcr i
เท่ American English?-ize is preferred เท these cases. Examples:
baptise.'baptize (BrE) _____	.
computerise!computerize (BrE) computerize (AmE)
mechanise! mechanize (BrE) -----------
realise! realize (BrE)
Most words of two syllables, anti a few longer words, have -ise in both British
and American English. Examples:
baptize (AmE)
mechanize (AmE)
realize (AmE)
advertise (mtt tidveriite)	devise
advise	disguise
comprise	enterprise
compromise	exercise
	franchise
improvise
revise
supervise
surprise
televise
vocabulary - 343 -ise and -
Capsize has ire in both British and American English.
Note also analyse (AmE usually analyze) and paralyse (AmE paralyze).
If in doubt, remember that in British English -ise is almost always acceptable.
Some British usage guides claim that ire is ’preferable’ in British English
on etymological and phonetic grounds, but this is not correct.
I or American English, consult an American dictionary.
344	-able and -ible __________________________
The suffix -able, as in readable, is far more common than -ible, as in audible.
(Both are pronounced the same: /obi')· Some common words spelt with ible:
accessible audible	eligible exhaustible	intelligible invincible	responsible reversible
comprehensible	fallible	legible	sensible
convertible	feasible	negligible	suggestible
credible	flexible	perceptible	susceptible
defensible	forcible	permissible	tangible
digestible	gullible	plausible	terrible
divisible	horrible	possible	visible
edible	indelible	resistible	
Negatives of these words are naturally also spell with ible·.
e g. inaudible. irresponsible.
345	-ly
1	adverb formation
We normally change an adjective into an adverb by adding -ly.
late -> lately	hopeful > hopefully	definite 4 definitely
right -> rightly	real -> really (koi reedy)	pale > palely
complete > completely (not eornpleily)
Exceptions:
true > truly whole -> wholly
due -> duly full -> fully
2	-y and
-y usually changes to -i- (► 348).
happy » happily dry -» drily os dryly
easy -> easily gay -> gaily
Exceptions:
shy > shyly sly -» slyly coy -> coyly
3	adjectives ending in consonant + le
■le changes to -ly after a consonant.
idle -> idly noble » nobly able -> ably
4	adjectives ending in -ic
If an adjective ends in -ic, the adverb ends in -ically (pronounced /iklif).
tragic -> tragically phonetic -> phonetically
Exception:
public -» publicly
vocabulary · 344
and เพ·
Word Formation and spelling
Section 30
346	final e
1	final -e dropped before vowels
When an ending that begins with a vowel (e g ing, able. -OUS) is added
to a word that ends in -e. we usually drop the -e.
hope -> hoping noh· -> notable shade -> shady
make -> making fame -> famous
An exception เท British English เร ageing (more common than aging).
Some words that end in -e have two possible forms before -able and age.
The form without -e is more common in most cases. Note:
likeable (usually with e)
moifefable (both forms common)
mileage (only with e)
Final -e is not dropped from words ending in -ee, -oe or -ye.
see -> seeing	canoe -» canoeist
2	final -e not dropped before consonants
Before endings that begin with a consonant, final e is not normally dropped
excite -> excitement complete -> completeness
definite -> definitely
Exceptions: words ending in -ue
due > duly true -> truly argue -> argument
เท words that end with ce or ge. we do not drop e before a or o.
replace -> replaceable murage -> courageous
(βιπ charge > charging, face > facing)
ludg(e)menl and acknowledgle)menl can be spelt with or without the e after g.
ro. word, ciwkn, เท -It. » แ a. 5. tor xlvrrln endir.K เ,. t,. » .«ร.
347	doubling final consonants
1	doubling before vowels
We sometimes double the final consonant of a word before adding ed. -er, est,
■ing. -able, -y (or any other ending that begins with a vowel).
stop -> stopped Sil -> sitting big -> bigger
2 Which consonants are doubled?
We double the following letters:
b:	rub -> rubbing
d:	sad > sadder
ff	big > bigger
I:	travel -> travelling
m: slim -> slimming
ท: win -> urinnable
p. slop > stopped
r. prefer -> preferred
I: sit -> sitting
vocabulary · 317 doubling final consonants
We double final i in gassing, gassed (but not usually in ocher words),
final r เท quizzes, fezzes. and final /in iffy (a colloquial word
for 'questionable', 'uncertain').
Final น’(in words like show, flow) is pan of a vowel sound, and is not doubled,
show -> showing /low -> flowed (not showwin» flowwed)
3	only at the end of a word
We only double consonants that come at the end of a word. Compare:
hop -> hopping BUT hope > hoping
fat -> fatter	BUT late -» later
plan -> planned BUT phone -> phoned
4	one consonant after one vowel letter
We only double when the word ends in one consonant after one vowel letter.
Compare:
fat -> fatter	nut fast -» faster (not fustier)
bet -> betting BUT beat -+ beating (not bealling)
5	only stressed syllables
We only double consonants เท stressed syllables. We do not double in longer
words that end เท unstressed syllables. Compare:
upset -> upsetting Bur 'visit > visiting
begin > beginning BUT open -> opening
refer -> referring BUT offer ‘offering
Note the spelling of these words:
gallop -> galloping -> galloped (not gnUoppm» gaHopped)
develop -> developing > developed (not developping, deeelopped)
6	exception: final I ■เท unstressed syllables
เท British English, we double -I at the end of a word after one vowel letter
in most cases, even เท unstressed syllables.
travel > ‘travelling equal > equalled
เท American English, words like this are most often spelt with one l·. traveling.
7	Other exceptions
Consonants are sometimes doubled at the end of final syllables that are
pronounced with full vowels (e g. led), even when these do not carry the
main stress.
kidnap ·> kidnapped handicap -> handicapped
worship -> ‘worshippers (AmE also ‘worshipers)
combat -» ‘combating oà combatting
Final ■ร is sometimes doubled in ‘focus(s)ing and focus(s)ed.
8	finale
Final -c changes to ck before -ed, -er, -ing. etc.
picnic -> picnickers panic -» panicking mimic -> mimicked
vocabulary - 347 doubling final consonants
Word Formation and Spelling
Section 30
9	Why double?
The reason for doubling is to show that a vowel is still pronounced short. Tilts is
because, in the middle of a word, a stressed vowel letter before one consonant is
usually pronounced as a long vowel or as a diphthong (double vowel). Compare:
hoping fhaupiQ/	later /‘leita(r)/	diner "dainafr)/
hopping /'hopiry	latter /’tetafr)/	dinner '■dina(r)/
348	y and /	____________
1	changing y to i
When we add an ending to a word that ends in -y, we usually change -y to i.
hurry -> hurried	Jury -> furious	merry -» merriment
marry -> marriage	easy -> easier	busy -> business
happy -> happily
Generally, nouns and verbs that end เท -y have plural or third person singular
forms in -ies,
story -> stories spy -> spies hurry -> hurries
2	exceptions
Two spellings are |>ossible for the nouns flyer/flier.
A machine that dries things is a dryer.
Words formed from the adjective dry. normally drier, driest, dryly!drily, dryness.
Words formed from the adjective sly. slyer, slyest, slyly, slyness.
3	no change before /■
We do not change -y to i before i (for example when we add -ing, ism, ish).
try -> trying Tory -> Toryism baby 4 babyish
4	no change after a vowel
We do not change -y to ./ after a vowel letter.
buy -> buying play -> played
enjoy -> enjoyment grey -> greyish
Exceptions:
say > said pay -> paid lay -> laid
5	changing ie to y
We change -ie to -y- before -ing.
die > dying lie -> lying (inn dye > dyeing)
349	ch and tch, k and ck
After one vowel, al the end of a word, we usually write -๗,· and -tch for the
sounds /k>' and T
back	neck	sick	lock	Sluck
catch	fetch	slilch	botch	hutch
vocabulary · 349 ch and tch, k and ck
Exceptions:
yak tic public (and many other words ending in -ic)
rich which such much allach detach
After a consonant or two vowels, we write k and -ch.
hank	work	talk	march	bench
break	book	week	peach	coach
350	ie and ei
The sound เ\ป (as เท believe] is often written ie, but not usually ei. However,
we write ei after c for this sound. English-speaking children learn a rhyme:
Ί before e, except after c'.
believe chief field grief piece shield
ceiling deceive receive receipt
Exceptions: seize. Neil. Keith, either, neither
351	spelling and pronunciation
เท many English words, the spelling is different from the pronunciation. This i
mainly because our pronunciation has changed a good deal over the last few
hundred years, while our spelling system has stayed more or less the same.
Here is a list of some difficult common words with their pronunciations.
1 usually two syllables, not three
The letters in brackets are usually not pronounced.
asp(i)rin
bus(i)ness
choc(o)late
different
om(e)lelte
resl(au)ranl
sev(e)ral
ev(e)ry
eifefning
marri(a)ge
meddfeine
(AmE three syllables)
2	usually three syllables, not four
lite letters in brackets are usually not pronounced.
comflor)lable	lemp(e)rature
int(e)resting	us(u)ally
iecret(a)ry(AmE four	syllables)	veg(e)table
3	silent letters
The letters in brackets are not pronounced.
•	clim(h) com(b) de(b)t dou(b)t dum(b)
•	mus(c)le
•	han(d)kerchief san(d)wich Wednesday
•	champa(g)ne forei(g)n si(g)n
•	borou(gh) bou(gh)t cau(gh)t dau(gh)ter hei(gh)t hilgh) li(gh)t
mi(gh)t nei(gh)bour ni(gh)t ou(gh)l ri(gh)t strai(gh)t thou(gh)t
throu(gh) ti(gh)t wei(gh)
vocabulary · 350 ie and
Word Formation and Spelling
Section 30
•	ufhfat ufhfen ufhfere ufhfelher w(h)ich w(h)lp พ(h)y
and similarly เท other words beginning wha, whe or whi. (Some speakers use
an unvoiced 1 พ/ in these words )
•	(h)onesi (h)onour (h)our
•	(k)nee (k)nife (k)nob (k)nock (k)noiv
and similarly in other words beginning kn.
•	ca(l)m cou(l)d ha(l)f sa(l)mon shou(l)d ta(l)k wa(l)k
wou(l)d autum(n) hym(n)
•	(p)neumatic (p)sychiatrisi (psychology (psychotherapy (p)terodacryl
and similarly in other words beginning pn, ps or pl.
•	cu(p)board ^'kAbad/
•	i(s)land i(s)le
•	cas(l)le Chris(t)mas fas(t)en lis(l)en of(l)en U'his(t)le
(Often can also be pronounced 'oftวท/.)
•	g(u)arantee gfu)ard g(u)errilla g(u)as g(u)esl g(u)ide g(u)ilt
g(u)itar gfu)y
•	(น')'ap (IVSite (tv)rong
•	(พ)ho (พ)hom (พ)เพ'e (พ)hose (พ)hole
any many Thames tern?,
5	Cha/1๙
ache archaeology architect chaos character chemist
Christmas mechanical Michael stomach
already bread breakfast dead death dreadful dreamt
head health heavy instead lead (the metal) leant leather
meant sweater	measure threat	pleasant pleasure r tread weather	ead (past) rec	idy steady
Θά — Cl				
break	great	steak		
gh - Ifl				
cough kof draught dru:ft/ enough VnAV	laugh lots/
rough CAÍ tough /tAf/
above brother colour come comfortable company cover
done	front	glove	government	honey	London	love
lovely Monday money month mother none nothing
one	onion	other	oven some son	stomach	ton(ne)
longue once won wonder worry
10	o = /นะ/
lose prove to
vocabulary · 351 spelling and pronunciation
ou -
country couple cousin double enough rough tough
trouble young
12	u or OU ร/ง/
bull bullet bush butcher could cushion full pull push
put should would
13 words pronounced with ill	
biology buy dial height	idea iron microphone science
society either (some British speakers) neither (some British speakers)	
14 Other Strange spellings	
area /'earia1	fruit 'fruit/
Australia ns'troil»	heard ha:d
bicycle .’baisikl/	heart ho:t
biscuit /'bisktt/	juice dzu:s/
Mood /blAd/	Leicester -lesta·
brooch braolp	minute 'mini!/
business "bizms/	moustache ท»'ร!น://
busy /'bizi/	(AmE mustache ?mASt«/, ma's!®//)
clothes klaoôz,	once WANs/
does IdhzJ	one /wan.1
doesn't /*dAZ(a)nt/	queue 1 kju:/
Edinburgh "cdinbra/	two /IU:/
Europe joarap	woman 'woman
foreign /'foron	women 'wimm
friend frond	Worcester /' พนร t a/
15 silent r
III	standard southern British English, r is not normally pronounced before a
consonant or at the end of a word.
hard ho:d'	first Ifโร:รบ	order .'๖:d»
car .’ko ะ/	four If yj	more /ma:/
But r is pronounced at the end of a word If a vowel follows Immediately.
four islands f air 'a 11 and?
more eggs lOiy.r ’egz/
Note the pronunciation of iron, and of words ending in re and ered.
iron a I an (AmE 'alarm)	wondered r'wAndad'
centre /*sentafr>	bothered /'bodad/
theatre /'©เะแวพุ่ (AmE /'Si-atar/-
We often add M after words ending in the sound /a·' even when this is not
written with r, if another vowel follows immediately.
India and Africa "indior and icfriko.1
เท most varieties of American English, and in many regional British accents,
r is pronounced whenever it is written.
vocabulary · 351 spelling and pronunciation
Section 31 Word Problems from
A to z
INTRODUCTION
This Section deals with a number of words which often cause problems ro do
with meaning and grammar. Some orher words are more conveniently explained
in the grammatical Sections: see the Index for references.
Note that a general usage guide like this only has room to cover a limited
selection of word problems. For a wider and more detailed treatment, a separate
reference book is needed.
Do you know what's wrong with these, and why?
o According to me. he's an idiot. ► 356
Õ เท 1840, the population of Ireland was higher than it is actually. ► 358
Õ 'I'm tired.' 1 also.' ► 369.3
o My sister looks just as me. ► 515
Õ The train's late, as usually. ► .181
o We arrived to the airport in the middle of die night. ► 3845
o When we were at first married we lived with my parents. ► 388
Õ My girlfriend won me at poker. ► 392
O You can't park before the station. ► 397
o My aunt has a little house besides the river. ► 400
o Can I lend your bike? » 408
Õ Thanks for taking me here. It’s lovely. ► 409
Õ Edinburgh is one of the most beautiful cities in England. ► 111
o Can you clean this suit until Friday? ► 613.6
Ο 1 asked the garage to control the brakes and steering. » 429
G The Prince always looks so handsome in an evening dress. ► 437.1
o We have a spare room for eventual visitors. ► 153
Õ I'm afraid that colour doesn't fit me. ► 467
o Chess is a very slow play. ► 555
õ I have big respect for our MP. ► 404.3
o He was driving fast indeed when he crashed. ► 199.1
o He's quite anti social, but instead he's very generous. ► 500 3
Õ No doubt the world is getting warmer. ► 534
o 1 don't like nowadays fashion. » 539
Q There's a supermarket right in front of my house. » 549.1
Õ It's good if a child can have an own room. ► 552.1
o From my point of view, war is always wrong. ► 557
o What's your principle reason for wanting to work here? ► 563
o Remember me to call Andy. ► 568.1
o Supper tonight is rests from lunch. ► 569
o If you shout at her she'll cry. She’s terribly sensible. ► 577
o I'm hot. Let's find some shadow to sit เท. ► 578
o When he laughs so, I want to scream. ► 582.2
vocabulary - Section 31 Word Problems from
352	about and on
Compare:
-	ต book for children about Africa and แร peoples
a textbook on African history
-	a conversation about money
a lecture on economics
We use about to talk about ordinary, more general kinds of communication.
On suggests that a book, talk, etc เร่ more serious, suitable for specialists.
353	about to
About . infinitive (with to) means 'going to very soon': 'just going to'.
Don't go out note - we're about to hair lunch.
I was about to go to bed when the telephone rang.
Not about to can mean 'unwilling to’.
I'm not about to pay 100 dollars for that dress.
about and around ► 376
354	above and over
1	'higher than': above or over
Above and over can both mean 'higher than'. Above is more common
with this meaning.
The water came up above over our knees.
('an you see the helicopter above over the palace?
2	'not directly over*; above
We use above when one thing is not directly over another.
We've got a little house above the lake, (not ... over the lake.)
3	'covering': over
We prefer over when one thing covers and/or touches another.
There is cloud over the South of England.
He pul on a coal over his pyjamas.
We use over or across (► 357) when one thing crosses another.
The plane was /lying over across Denmark.
Electricity cables stretch over, across the fields.
vocabulary · 352 about and Oft
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
4	measurements: above
Above is used in measurements of temperature and height, and in other cases
«■here we think of a vertical scale.
The temperature is three degrees above zero.
The summit of Everest is about 8000 metres above sea level.
She's well above average in intelligence.
5	ages, speeds, 'more than’: over
We usually use over, not above, to talk about ages and speeds, and to mean
You have to be over 18 to see this film.
The I'tolice said she was driving at over llOmph.
There were over 100.000 people at the festival.
6	books and papers
เท a book or paper, above means 'earlier on the page' or ‘on an earlier page'.
The above rules and regulations apply to all students.
Eor prices and delivery charges, see above
Our village is just above Cardiff on the map.
See over means ‘look on the next page'.
There are cheap Ilights at weekends: see over.
355	accept and agree
Before an infinitive, we usually use agree, not accept.
I agreed to meet them here- (More normal than I accepted to meet...)
356	according to
According to X means in X’s opinion', 'if what X says is true'.
According to Harry, it’s a good film.
The train gets bl at 8.27. according to the timetable.
We do not usually give our own opinions with according to. Compare:
According to Anna, her boyfriend is brilliant. (ะ If what Anna says is true,...)
เท my opinion, Anna's boyfriend is an idiot, (not According to me,...)
357	across, over and through
1	on/to the other side of (a line): across and over
Across and over can both be used to mean on or to the other side of a line,
river, road, bridge, etc’.
His village is just across over the border.
See if you can jump across, over the stream.	-*
vocabulary · 357 across, over and through
2	high things: over preferred
We prefer over to say 'on/to the other side of something high1.
Why are you climbing over the wall? (not .. .-across lhe wall?)
3	flat areas: across preferred
We usually prefer across to say on/to lhe other side of a Nat area or surface'.
He walked right across the desert.
It took them six hours to row across the lake.
4	the adverb over (to)
Nnte that lhe adverb over has a wider meaning than the preposition over.
We often use over (to) for short journeys.
I'm going over to lack's.	Shall we drive over and see your mother?
5	across and through
Hie difference between across and through is like the difference between
on and เท. Through, unlike across, is used for a movement in a three-
dimensional space, with things on all sides. Compare:
We walked across the ice. (We were on the ice.)
I walked through the wood. (I was เท the wood.)
- We drove across the desert.
We drove through several towns.
For 01— .nd «bw». ' JM. Fm a,ms ftom (Ami:. . MU.
358	actual(ly)
1	meaning and use
Actual means 'real'; actually means ’really’ or 'in fact
They are used to make things clearer, more precise or more definite.
It’s over 100 kilos let me look. Yes, lhe actual weight is 10H kilos.
I've got a new)ob. Actually, they've made me sales manager.
'Did you enjoy your tripr ‘Very much, actually.'
Actual and actually often introduce surprising or unexpected information.
It lakes me an hour to drive to work, although the actual distance is
only 20 miles.
She was so angry that she actually tore up the letter.
'How did you get on with my carT 'Well, actually. I'm terribly sorry, I'm afraid
He's twelve, but he actually still believes in Father Christmas.
They can be used to correct mistakes or misunderstandings.
The book says she died aged 17, but her actual age was 43.
‘Hello, lack. Nice to sec you.' 'Actually, my name's Andy.’
Actually is more common in British than American English.
vocabulary - 15H actuality,1
Word Problems from A to z
2	'false friends'
Actual and actually arc ’false friends’ for people who «peak some languages.
They do not mean the same as, for example, actuei(lement). aktuell, or
atiual(ment)c. We express these ideas with present, current, up to date; at this
moment, now, at present.
What's our current financial position1 (not ... OHf-aetued-fimHteútl-position?)
เท 1840 the population of Ireland was higher than it is now.
(SVYT	rfl/lM 1/	1
t ·" / · · · ·	Π UwllwWIlT· f
Few more aboui acluaiiy ami Mmilar dUcounr rrxukrtx » M 1. MU
359	afraid
1	afraid and fear
เท an informal Style, be afraid is more common than fear.
Don't he afraid, (noi Doni fear) She’s afraid that I might find out.
Are you afraid of the dark'	I’m not afraid tn say what I think.
2	I'm afraid = 'I'm sorry'
I'm afraid (that) often means I'm sorry to tell you (that). It is used to introduce
apologetic refusals and bad news.
I’m afraid (that) I can't help you.
I'm afraid (that) there's been an accident.
I'm afraid so/not arc used as short answers.
'Can you lend me a poundf ‘I'm afraid not.'
'It's going to rain.’' Yes. I’m afraid so.'
3	not used before a noun
Afraid is one of the adjectives that are not usually used before a noun in
'attributive position’ (► 183). Compare:
lack's afraid. lack's a frightened man. (sor ... OH afraid man.)
X» Information about Ing tormi and Inftnlllvn rtiri afiaul. » 105. IX
360	after: adverb
1	shortly after, etc
After can be used in adverb phrases like shortly after, long after,
a few days after, etc.
We had oysters for supper. Shortly after, I began to feel ill.
เท more exact expressions of time, later is more common.
They started the fob on the 16th and finished three weeks later
2	after not used alone
After is not normally used alone as an adverb. Instead, we use other expressions
like afterwards (ArnE also afterward), then or after that.
I'm going to do my etams. and afterwards I’m going to study medicine.
í v/»r	I
I > ·	I	» t « I
vocabulary
adverb
361	after all
1	two meanings
After ตน can mean in spite of what was said before' or ‘contrary to what
was expected*. Position: usually at the end of a clause.
I'm sorry. I know I said I would help you, bul I can't after all.
I expected to fad the exam, hut I passed after all.
Another meaning IS *we mustn't fot^et that..introducing an argument
or reason which may have been forgotten. Position: at the beginning
or end of a clause.
Of course you're tired. After all. you were up all night.
Let's finish the cake. Somebody's got to eat it, after all
2	not used for 'finally'
After all does not mean ‘finally*, 'at last’, in the end'.
After the theatre we had supper and urn/ to a nightclub; then we finally
went home, (not ... after all we went home.)
again and back ► 390
362	ago
1 word order: six weeks ago
Ago follows an expression of time.
I met her six weeks ago. (\Ό I... Hg>· ห· weeks.)	a long time ago
2	tenses
An expression with ago refers to a finished time, and is normally used with
a past tense, not a present perfect (► ->7.4),
She phoned a few minutes ago. (uor She has phoned...)
• Where’s MikeT' 'He was working outside ten minutes ago.'
3	the difference between ago and for
Ago says how long before the present something happened; for (with
a past tense) says how long it lasted. Compare:
tie died three years ago. three years before now)
รธ!-	>°à.
4	ago and before with time expressions: counting back
We use ago with a past tense and a time expression to ‘count hack' from the
present; to say how long before now something happened.
We can use before in the same way (with a past perfect tense) to count back
from a past moment. Compare:
I met that woman in Scotland three years ago (not .. . three years before.
before three years»
vocabulary · 361 after all
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
When ue gol talking, I found out that I had been at school U'ith her husband
ten years before, (not ... ten พ’^ ago.)
ago and before 1 met her three years ago. 1 had been at school with her husband ten years before.	
ten years before	three years ago
	
for other UÍÍÍ ๗ brfoa. ► 250. พ-
agree and accept ► «55
363	alike
The adjective alike means ’like each other’. Compare:
The tun boys arc alike in looks, but not in personality.
He's like his brother, (not He's alike his brother.)
Mike is not often used before a noun (► IK3). Compare:
His two daughters are very much alike.
He's got two very similar looking daughters, (νογ . alike daughters.)
364	all right and alright
The standard spelling is all right. Alright IS common in informal usage, but some
people consider it incorrect.
365	allow, permit and let
1 allow and permit
These words have similar meanings and uses. Permit is more formal. Both words
can be followed by object » Infinitive
We do not allow, permit people to smoke in the kitchen.
When there is no personal object, an ing form is used.
We do not allow/permit smoking in the kitchen.
Passive structures are common; personal subjects and gerund (-ing form)
subjects are both possible.
People are not allowed/permitted to smoke in the kitchen.
Smoking is not allowed'permitted in the kitchen.	-»
vocabulary
allow, permit and let
The passive structure with it is only possible with permit.
It is not permitted to smoke in the kitchen.
( DI ΓΤ	li kt 11Z1I /illrtijpvj frt ζ*μα1*λ 1
••'/I «I ··’	IIIIVWAH >” Jrrivnv ... I
Allow, but not permit, can be used with adverb particles.
She wouldn Ί allow me in Emily isn r allowed out al night
2	let
Let is the least formal of these three words, and is followed by object * infinitive
without to. Compare:
Please allow me to buy you a drink, (polite and formal)
Let me buy you a drink, (friendly and informal)
let is not usually used เท the passive.
I wasn't allowed to pay for the drinks, (not I wasn't let...)
Let can be used with adverb panicles; passives are possible เท this case.
She wouldn Ί let me in. I’ve been let down.
366	almost and nearly; practically
1	progress, measurement and counting
Almost and nearly can both express ideas connected with progress,
measurement or counting. Nearly is less common in American English.
I've almost nearly finished.
There were almost nearly a thousand people there.
Sometimes almost is a little 'nearer' than nearly. Compare:
It's nearly ten o'clock, l- perhaps 9.45)
It's almost ten o'clock. (- perhaps 9.57)
Very and pretty can be used with nearly but not almost.
I've very pretty nearly finished, (not ... very almost.. 1)
2	Other meanings
We can use almost to mean 'similar to, but not exactly the same', and to make
statements less definite. Nearly Is not used like this.
Our cat understands everything - he's almost human.
I \Y it	I
My aunt's got a strange accent, .'she almost sounds foreign.
(not ... She nearly sounds foreign )
I almost wish I'd stayed at home, (not l-Heariywish-...)
lake is almost like a father to me.
3	never, nobody, nothing, etc
We do not usually use nearly before negative pronouns or adverbs like never,
nobody, nothing. Instead, we use almost, or พ use hardly with ever, anybody,
anything, etc.
She's almost never hardly ever at home, (not ... nearly never...)
Almost nobody hardly anybody was there.
vocabulary - 366 almost and nearly, practically
Word Problems from A to 1
lion 31
4	everybody, everything, anybody, anything, etc
We also prefer almoit before everybody!-one!-thin#-where, and almost IS much
more common than nearly before anybody! one! thing!-where.
She likes almost everybody.	Almost anybody can do this job.
He's been almost everywhere. He eats almost anything.
5	practically
Practically can be used in (he same way as almost.
I've practically finished.	lake is practically like a father to me.
She's practically never at home.
367	alone, lonely, lonesome and lone
Alone means ‘without others around’, lonely (and informal .'VnE lonesome)
means 'alone and unhappy because of it'. Compare:
I like to be alone for short periods.
But after a few days I start getting lonely, lonesome.
Alone can be emphasised by all.
After her husband died, she น.«ร all alone.
Alone is not used before a noun (► 18X3). lone and solitary can he used
instead; lone is rather literary.
The only green thing was a lone, solitary pine tree.
368	along
The preposition along is used before nouns like road, river, corridor, line, words
that refer to things with a long thin shape.
I saw her running along the road.
His office is along the corridor.
To talk about periods or activities, we prefer through.
through the centuries (Nor along the centuries)
all through the journey (xoi all along the journey)
right through the meal
Note the special use of along as an adverb panicle in expressions like
Come along (ะ Come with me) or walking along (- walking on one’s way).
aloud and loudly - 520
already, still and let ► 595
vocabulary
along
369	also, as well and too
1	position
Also, as well and loo have similar meanings, bui they do no! go in the same
position in clauses. Also usually goes with the verb, in mid position (► 200y,
as well and too usually go at the end of a clause. As well is less common in
American English.
She not only sings; she also plays the piano.
She not only sings; she plays the piano as well.
She doesn't just sing, she plays the piano toil
As well and too do not go at lite beginning of a clause. Also can go at the
beginning of a clause to give more importance to a new piece of information.
It's a nice house, but it's very small. Also, It needs a lol of repairs.
2	reference
These words can refer to different parts of a clause, depending on the meaning.
Consider the sentence We work on Saturdays as well. This can mean three
different things:
a (Other people work on Saturdays, and) we work on Saturdays as well.
b (We do other things on Saturdays, and) we work on Saturdays as well.
c (We work on other days, and) we work on Saturdays as well.
When we speak, we show the exact meaning by stressing the word or expression
that also / as well / too refers to.
3	imperatives and short answers
As well and too are used เท imperatives and short answers, but not usually also.
Give me some bread as well, please. (More natural than Also give me ...)
'She's nice.' 'Her sister is as well.' (More natural than Her sister is also.)
‘I've got a headache.’ 7 have loo.' (More natural than I also have.)
เท very informal speech, we often use Me too as a short answer.
I'm going home.' 'Me too.'
More formal equivalents are So am I (► 309) or I am loo (but not I also).
4	too in a formal style
เท a formal or literary style, too can be placed directly alter the subject.
I, too, have experienced despair.
lor alm 111 aril. น.o and rHhtr in nqtaUvr <tauw«. · 22t.
lor alia and ท.». . «52.1.
370	alternatefly) and alternativefly)
Alternately) means 'first one and then the other', 'เท turns'.
We spend alternate weekends al our country cottage.
I'm alternately happy and depressed.
vocabulary
well and
Word Problems from A to z
Section
«พ ๒ similar.o'dljerenc -M*iVon
ร^ «OfÃwon the27th. Weข^»" 7"7
Yau could RO by air. or alternatively you could drive there
เท American English, ฟ™๙พ «ท be used with .he «me meaning
as alternatiivfly).
371	although, though, but and however.
contrast ____________________________________—-------
1	although and though: conjunctions
Both these words can be	â à
contrast. Whenwe say (Al)though A. B’. there is something unexpected or
^AHtho^h(A)B/don't like him. (B) I agree that *^''* '® ®°°๗ mana&T·
(B) I'd quite like to go out. (although (A) it is a bit late.
2	but and however	______
We can give the same meaning by putting but or houem with the contrasting.
' clause <'B‘).
that he's a good manager.
agree that he's a good manager.
(Λ) I don't like him. but (B) I agree
(A) I don 't like him. However. (B) /
(A) It is a bit late, but (B) /ฬฺ 5ฟ.ente'oKOOur
(A) It is a bit late; however, (B) I’d quite like to go our.
3	but and however, the difference	____
ระะ ธุ»" ^.°°°-. à. ώί«ρ « . >-àà> ๒ à
ระะรรรเ. àpâ."»	"°m “
by one or two commas, depending on its posilton.
However, the police did not believe hint
rhe police, however, dill not believe him.
The police did not believe him. however
4	though used as an adverb
We can use //rough as an adverb (often a. .he end of a sentence).
to mean 'however'.
^"r/on^	» economic and not political.
1·. 1,. ฟ1พ! ► «52.·.
hr MS he «พ’ร'''^' · - a.
vocabulary · 371 although, though, but and however, contrast
372	altogether and all together
Altogether means 'completely' or ‘considering everything’.
My new house isn Ί altogether finished.
Altogether, she decided, marriage was a hit of a mistake.
Altogether can also be used to give totals.
that’s £4.30 altogether.
All together usually means 'everybody/everything together'.
Come on, everybody sing. All together now...
I hey all went to the cinema together.
among and between ► 403
another and other(s) ► 550
373	any and no: adverbs
1	any and no with comparatives
Any can modify comparatives. This happens mostly in questions and negative
sentences, and after If (also ► 222).
Can you go any faster?
You don't look any older than your daughter. (ะ You don’t look
at all older...)
If I were any younger. I'd fall in love with you.
No can also be used in this way (but not some).
I'm afraid the weather‘ร no better than yesterday.
2	any/no different
We can also use any and no with different.
This school isn't any different from the last one.
Is lack any betterr 'No different. Still very Hi:
3	any/no good; any/no use
Note the expressions any good, use and nogood.'use.
IVas the film any good? This watch is no use II keeps stopping.
374	appear
1	linking verb: 'seem'
Appear can be a linking verb (► ท), used to say how things look or seem. It is
used in similar ways to seem (► 576 for details), but is less frequent, especially in
an informal style.
With this meaning, appear is followed by adjectives, not adverbs. We can use
appear or appear to be.
He appears (to be) very angry today. (.SOI He appears very angrily today.)
vocabulary · 372 altogether and all together
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
Before nouns we generally use appear Io be.
The boys on the bus appeared to he students.
Structures with preparatory there (► 20) or it (► 268) are possible.
There appears to be a problem with the oil pressure.
It appears that นพ may be mistaken.
2	appear and seem: differences
Stan can be used to talk both about objective facts and about subjective
impressions and feelings (► 576 for examples). Appear is mostly used to talk
abõul objective facts. Compare:
The baby seems/appears (to be) hungry.
She doeinΊ want logo on studying. It seems a pity, (svr H appears a pity.)
Seem is often used with like. This is not normal with appear.
It seemed like a good Idea. (More natural than It appeared like a good idea.)
Seem can be used in a special structure with can't (► 576.4). This is not possible
with appear.
I can't seem to make him understand, (but sot lean 1 appro· nr make
him understand.)
3	'come into sight'
Appear can also mean ‘come into sight’ or ‘arrive’. เท this case it can be
modified by an adverbial.
She suddenly appeared in the doorway.
K» aruoum with Joel. » 318.
375	arise and rise
Arise means 'begin', appear, ‘occur’, ‘come to one’s notice'. It is used mostly
with abstract nouns as subjects.
A discussion arose about the best way to pay.
I'm afraid a difficulty has arisen.
His·' usually means gel higher', come go up’.
Prices keep rising. What time does the รนท rise?
My hopes are rising.
Note that we usually say that people get up in the morning. Rise is only used
with this meaning in a very formal style.
Arise and rise are irregular verbs.
(a)rise - (a)rose - (a)risen
vocabulary · 375 arise and rise
376	(ล)round and about
1	circular movement, etc: (a)round
We use both round and around (AmE usually around) for movement or position
in a circle or a curve.
She walked (a)round the car and looked at the wheels.
I'd like to travel (a)round the world.
Where do you liver 'fust (a)round the corner:
2	touring, distribution: round
We also use round or around (AmE usually around) 10 talk about going to all
(or most) parts OÍ ย place, O! giving things to everybody in a group.
We walked (a)round the old part of the town
Can I look (a)round? Could you pan the cups (a)round. please?
3	indefinite movement and position
We use around or about (AmE usually around) to refer to movements or
positions that are not very clear or definite: here and there’, in lots of places',
'in different parts of, ‘somewhere tn and similar ideas.
lhe children were running around about everywhere.
Stop standing around about and do some work.
‘Where's lack? 'Somewhere around about.'
I like doing odd Jobs around, about the house.
We also use these words in some common expressions to talk about time
wasting or silly activity.
Slop fooling around, about. We’re late.
4	approximately
About and around can both mean ’approximately', not exactly'. About is more
common than around เท British English.
There were about around fifty people there.
'What time shall I come?''About.'Around eight:
lor nrtwr «ท ol Ih»«r »«ni. •ห > giocl dtaMuwy
as and like »SIS
377	as, because, since and for
All four of these words can be used to refer to the reason for something. (For as.
since and for referring to time. ► 251. 164. 579.) There arc some differences.
1 as and since
As and since are used when the reason is already known to the listener/reader,
or when it is not the most important part of lhe sentence. As- and since clauses
often come at the beginning of sentences.
As It's raining again, we'll have to stay at home.
Since he had not paid his bill, his electricity was cut off.
vocabulary · 376 (a)round and about
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
As- and ฝท»*clauses arc relatively formal; in an informal style, the same ideas
arc often expressed with so.
It's raining again, so we'll have IO stay at home.
2	because
Because puts more emphasis on die reason, and most often introduces new
information which is not known to the listener/reader.
Because I was ill for six months, I lost my job.
When the reason is the most important part of the sentence, the because clause
usually comes at the end. It can also stand alone. Since and as cannot lie used
like this.
Why am I leaving? I'm leaving because I'm fed up! (not ...I'm leaving «ร’
Why are you laughing?'' Because you look so funny.'
A because·clause can be used to say how one knows something.
You didn't tell me the truth, because I found the money in your room.
(ะ... I know because I found ...)
3	for
For Introduces new information, but suggests that the reason is given as an
afterthought. A /or clause could almost be เท brackets. For·clauses never come at
the beginning of sentences, and cannot stand alone. For, used เท this sense, is
most common in a formal written style, and is becoming rare.
I decided to slop and have lunch - for I was feeling hungry.
Fo« for ♦ object ♦ infl alt hr etaนพ (e g. What t uaai it fib/ to hat* luMch» 113.
378	as if a nd as though; like
1	meaning
As if and as though are both used to say what a situation seems like. The)· can
refer to something that we think may be true.
It looks as If though it’s going to rain.
Il	sounds as if though lack's going to change his job.
They can also be used to talk about things which we know are not true
I feel as if though I’m dying.
She was acting as if though she was in charge.
2	tenses
When we talk about things which we know are not true, we can use a past tense
with a present meaning after «ร if!though. This emphasises the meaning of
unreality. Compare:
-	She looks as if she is rich. (Perhaps she is.)
lie talks as if he was rich. (But he is definitely not.)
-	You look as though you know each other.
Why is he looking at me as though he knew me? I've never seen him before.
เท a formal style, นพ can be used instead of was in an ‘unreal* comparison.
Ihis is common เท American English.
He talks as if he were rich.
vocabulary · 37B as if and as though; like
3	like meaning 'as if/though'
l.ike is often used ill the same way as as Iflthough, especially เท an informal
style. Illis used to be typically American English, but it is now common
เท British English.
Il seems like H's going to rain.
He sat there smiling like it was his birthday.
เ-Of Ibe diffrrmcr brtwwn llU an<1 นเ. » SIS
379	as long as
1	tenses
After as long as, SVC use a present tense to express a future idea.
I'll remember that day as long as I live, (not ..«ร long <ts I tefU live.)
Tor other «onjunctlom wtikh -ir uwd in thI, พ»y. · ZU.
2	conditions
As!so long as is often used to state conditions.
You can take my car as, so long as you drive carefully. (=__on condition
that you drive carefully.)
3	emphatic use
Before a number, as long as can be used to suggest great length.
These meetings can last as long as four hours.
380	as such
Not ...สร such is used to say that something is not exactly what a word
or expression suggests.
So you went on a tour to lapanf ‘Well, not a tour as such - I went on
business. But I managed quite a lot of sightseeing.'
I'm not a teacher as such, but I've taught English to some of my friends.
381	as usual
Note (hat in this expression we use the adjective usual, not the adverb usually.
The train's late, as usual (not ... as
as well, also and too ► 368
vocabulary · 379 as IonK
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
382	as well as
1	meaning
As well as has a similar meaning (0 ‘not only... hut also'.
She’ร got a goat, as well as five cats and three dogs.
He's clever as น*น as nice. (= He’s not only nice, but also dever.)
She works in television as well as writing children's books
When some information is already known to the listener/reader, we pul this
with as well as.
As well as birds, some mammals can fly. (not Birds can-fly,
They speak Italian in parti of Switzerland as well as Italy, (not they speak
2	verbs after as well as
When we put a verb alter as well as, we most often use the Ing form.
Smoking is dangerous, as well as making you smell bad. (mot .. .as well as II
As well as breaking his'leg he hurt his arm. (mot ... <1. wen as เพ broke
After an infinitive in the main clause, an infinitive without to is possible.
I have to feed the animals as well as look after the children.
Note the difference between:
She sings as well as playing the piano. (- She not only plays, but also sings.)
She sings as well as she plays the piano, l Her singing is as good
as her playing.)
383	ask
1 ask and ask for
ask for. ask somebody to give something
ask without for. ask somebody to tell something
Compare:
lion Ί ask me for money, (not Don't ask me money.)
Don't ask me my name. (More common than Don't ask me for my name.)
- Ask for the menu.
Ask the price.
Ask is sometimes used without for when talking about asking for sums of money,
especially in connection with buying, selling and renting.
They’re asking £500 a month including tax.
How much is the car?’ 'I’m asking fifteen hundred.’
Note also the expressions ask a lot of somebody, ask too much of somebody,
ask a favour of somebody and ask (for) permission.	·*
vocabulary - 38.3 «st
2	infinitive structures
We can use infinitive structures after ask (► 97-98).
ask * infinitive
I asked lo go home, l- I asked permission to go home.)
ask · object ♦ infinitive
I asked lack to go home. (= I told lack I would like him to go home.)
ask · for · object * infinitive
I asked for the children to have extra milk.
I asked for the package to be sent to my home address.
Note the difference between these two sentences:
I asked lack to go home. (I wanted Jack to go home.)
I asked lack if I could go home. (I wanted to go home myself.)
384	at, on and เท: place
At is used to talk about position at a point.
It's very hot at the centre of the earth.
Turn right at the next comer.
Sometimes we use al with a larger place, if we just think of this as a point:
a stage on a journey or a meeting place, for example. Compare:
-	The plane stops for an hour at/in Trankfurl (a point on a journey)
She lives in Frankfort, (somebody’s home) (noi She lives at Frankfurt.)
Let's meet at the club, (a meeting point)
It was warm and comfortable in the club, (a place to spend time)
We very often use at before the name of a building, when we arc thinking not of
the building itself but of the activity that happens there.
I first heard her sing at the Usher Hall in Edinburgh.
Eat at the Steak House - best food in town.
Sorry I didn't phone last night - I was at the theatre.
At is particularly common with proper names used for buildings or
organisations. Compare:
I first met your father at/in Harrods.
I first met your father in a shop
-	She works at Legal and General Insurance.
She works in a big insurance company.
Al is used to say where people study.
He's at the London School of Economics.
We use at with the name of a city to talk about the dry’s university. Compare:
He's a student at Oxford. He lives in Cambridge.
At is also used before the names of group activities.
at a party at a meeting at a concert
at a lecture at the match
vocabulary - 384 at. on and in: pl
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
2 on
On is used to talk about position on น line (for example a road or a river).
His house is on the way from Aberdeen to Dundee.
Stratford is on the river Avon.
But in is used for the position of things which form part of the line.
there's a misprint in line 6 on page 22.
Who's the good looking boy in the sixth row>
On is used for position on a surface.
Hurry up - supper‘ร on the table!
Dun picture would look better on the other wall
There's a big spider on the ceiling.
On can mean 'attached to'.
Why do you wear that ring on your first finger?
There aren't many apples on the tree this year.
On is also used for position by a lake or sea.
Bowness is on Lake Windermere Southend-on-Sea
เท is used for position inside large areas, and in three-dimensional space
(when something is surrounded on all sides).
I don't think he's เท his office	Let’s go for a walk in the woods
She grew up เท Swaziland. I last saw her in Times Square.
He lived in the desert for three years.
4	public transport
We use on (and off) to talk about travel using public transport (buses, trains,
planes and boats), as well as (inotor)cycles and horses.
There'ร no room on the bus; let’s get off again.
He's arriving on the 3.15 train, (not .. . mrwifh the 3.15 train.)
We’re travelling on flight 604.
It took five days to cross the Atlantic on the Queen Elizabeth.
I'll go down to the shop on my bike.
But we use in and out (of) to talk about cars and small private planes and boats.
She came in a taxi.
He fell into the river when he was getting out of his canoe.
5	arrive
We generally use at (not to) after arrive. เท is used before very large places.
He arrives at the airport at 15.30. (not He arrives to the airport,. .)
What time do we arrive in New York?
6	addresses
We generally use at to talk about addresses.
Are you still at the same address?	She lives at 73 Albert Street
We use in (AmE on) if we just give the name of the street.
She lives เท Albert Street
We use on for the number of the floor.
She lives in a room on the third floor.
vocabular) · 384 at, on and in: place
At can be used with a possessive (especially เท British English) to mean
'at somebody's house or shop'.
‘Where's MeganT 'She's at Naomi's.'
I used to get my bread at a small baker's in the next street.
special expressions
Note these expressions:
in. at church	at home/work เท a picture	เท the sky เท a tent	เท a hat	in/at school/college in the rain
in bed(the) hospital / prison
on a farm working on the railway
bor the difference between al/tn ·η<| la ► น»ร.	For >mUr al ihool at. etc. · l»s
385	at/in and to
1	the difference
,1l and in are generally used for position (for the difference, ► 384); to is used for
movement or direction. Compare:
-	He works at the marker.
He gets to the market by bike.
-	My father lives in Canada.
I go to Canada to see him whenever I can.
2	expressions of purpose
If we mention the purpose of a movement before we mention the destination,
we usually use at/in before the place. Compare:
-	Let's go to Marcel's for coffee.
Let's go and have coffee at Marcel's, (noi Let's go and have coffee Io Marcel's.)
-	I went to Canada to see my father.
I went to see my father in Canada, (noi I went Io see my father Io Ganado?)
3	targets
After some Serbs, at is used with the 'target' of a perception or non-verbal
communication. Common examples are look, smile, leave, frown.
Why are you looking al her like that? Because she smiled at me.
At is also used after some verbs referring to attacks or aggressive behaviour.
Common examples arc shoot, laugh, throw, shout and point.
Il's a strange feeling to have somebody shoot at you.
If you can t laugh at yourself, who can you laugh at?
Stop throwing stones at the cat, darling
You don't need to shout at me.
เท my dream, everybody was pointing al me and laughing.
Throw to. shout to and point to are used when there is no idea of attack.
Please do not throw food to the animals.
Could you shout to lake and tell him it's breakfast time?
vocabulary
at/in and to
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
The train’s late again,' she said, pointing to the timetable.
Arrive is generally followed by at or in; never by to.
ϊϊί	a.r๗!* at Pal' ll™7°' lu"ch (*"·■· «"■** foPats..)
When did you arrive in New /faiand f (not .. -fff-tfiir awfamff)
><>' ห «nd into. . «%.
386	at, on and in: time
at ♦ clock time
at t weekend, public holiday
in ' part of day
in · longer period
on - particular day
1	dock times: at
Phone !ηΤα!ΐ โ1 hiI 0๗°/tf >o" "' *,5·
4' ‘s 1“"?2ly . out before what time in an informal style (► 386.7).
IV/wr time does your train leave?
2	parts of the day. in
I work best in the morning. three o’clock เท the afternoon
พ'*“เพ เย out in the evening
โ^^^.1!,. à '’พ (mostly used to mean ‘dunng one
'	)and"'"*?' during any night). Compare:
I had to ger up in the night.	I often work at night
" 1;;·*no p"p“luo"
màg/akternoon. etc we arc talking about, or if we
describe lhe morning/aftemoon, etc.
See you on Monday morning1
We met on a cold afternoon in early spring.
3	days: on
'7?5* on /“Kday. My birthdays on March 21st
They're having a party on Christmas Day.
เท an informal style we sometimes leave out on.
I'm seeing her Sunday morning
We.v?..?“'พ^1'.’,.^yi- M°nda>i· e’c)'» 'alk about repeated actions.
เve usually go and see Granny on Sundays
4	public holidays and weekends: at
?'*‘1’'? "'ahou‘ ’he "hole of the holidays at Christmas. New Year.
Easler;KI<1 Thanksgiving (AmE).
พ'*',* having the roof repaired al Easier	-A
vocabulary . 386 at. on and in·, time
Bill we use on to talk about one day of the holiday.
Come amt MV US on Christmas bay.
What are you doing on Easter Monday ?
British people say al tile weekend; Americans use on.
What did you do at the weekend?
5	longer periods: in
It happened เท the week after Christmas.
I was born เท March. Kent is beautiful เท spring.
Our house was built เท the 15th century. tie died เท 1616.
6	Other uses of in
เท can also be used to say how soon something will happen, and to say how
long something takes to happen.
Ask me again เท three or four days.
I can run 200 metres เท about 30 seconds.
The expression เท...'ร time is used to say how soon something will happen,
not how long something takes. Compare:
ΙΊΙ see you again เท a month’s time.
It'll be ready เท three weeks' time.
He wrote the book in a month (not ... in a month's time.)
เท American English, in can be used in negative sentences, like for, to talk about
periods up to the present.
I haven't seen her เท years
า expressions with no preposition
At!on:in are not normally used in expressions of time before next, last, this, that
(sometimes), one, any (เท an informal style), each, every, some, all.
See you next week.	Come any time.
Are you free this morning?	I didn’t feel very well that week.
I’m at home every evening.	We met one day เท late August.
We stayed all day.
these prepositions are not normally used, either, before yesterday, the day before
yesterday, tomorrow or the day after tomorrow.
What are you doing the day after tomorrow?
And prepositions are usually dropped in questions beginning What.'Which '
expression of time, and in answers which only contain an expression of time.
What day เร the meeting?
Which week did you say you're away?
What time are you leaving?''Eight o'clock.'
Now ih»1 ar „ uMalty pronoumvd stl. not trnJ (► Sts).
387	at all
1	at all with a negative
We often use at all to emphasise a negative idea.
I didn't understand anything at all. (·» I didn’t understand even a little.)
She was hardly frightened al all.
vocabulary · 3B7 at all
Word Problems from A to
Section
2	questions, etc
At all can also be used in questions, and with 'non affirmative' words like if,
ever and any.
Do you play poker at all? k- ... even a little?)
He'll come before supper if he comes at all.
You can come whenever you like - any time at all
3	Not at all.
The expression Not al all is used (especially in British English) as a rather formal
answer to I hank you (* 329.19) and to Do you mind if___?(► 528).
388	at first and first
We use at first to talk about the beginning of a situation, to make a contrast with
something different that happenSi happened later. At first... is often followed
by but.
At first they were very happy1 but then things started going wrong.
The work was hard at first, but I got used to II.
เท other cases, we usually prefer first.
That's mine - I saw it first! (svr.. .4 saw it at first)
We lived there when we were first married, l-... in the early days of our
marriage.) (xor .,. when we were al first married.)
First. I want to talk about the history of the problem; then I'll outline the
situation today; and then we'll discuss possible solutions, (not AtfifstrFwrmi
-à teJL \
««I* . · •/
Kx firuífy) M a diRXMine nwrkar. ► 301.1
at last, finally, in the end and at the end - 465
389	(a)wake and (a)waken
1	use
Wake is the most common of these four verbs. It can mean 'stop sleeping' or
'make (somebody else) slop sleeping. It is often followed by up, especially when
it means 'stop sleeping".
I woke up three times in the night.
Wake up! It's time to go to work, (not Wake?...)
Could you wake me (up) at half past six?
Waken is a more literary alternative to wake (up)
The princess did not waken for a hundred years.
Then the prince wakened her with a kiss.
Awake and awaken arc also rather literary words. The)1 are most often used to
talk about the waking of emotions, understanding, etc.
I slowly awoke to the danger that threatened me.	-*
vocabulary
(a)wake and (a)waken
At first I paid little attention, but slowly my interest awoke.
The sound of the church clock awakened a half-buried me mor)·.
2 awake and asleep (adjectives)
เท informal British English the adjectives awake and asleep are more common เท
predicative position (after be) than the verb forms anting and sleeping
Is the baby awake yet?
Everyone was asleep when I got home.
390	back (adverb) and again
Back and again can be used with similar meanings, but there are
some differences.
1	back with a verb
With a verb, we use back to suggest a return to an earlier situation, a movement
in the opposite direction to an earlier movement, and similar ideas. Again is not
normally used in this way with a verb.
Give me my watch back, (noi Give me my wtikh ttgam.)
I’m taking this meat back to the shop, (not I'm taking this meat hr
the shop again )
2	again with a verb
With a verb, again usually suggests repetition. Compare:
-	That II«5 lovely. Can you play it again?
When I’ve recorded your voice I’ll play it back.
-	Sam was really bad mannered. I'm never going to invite him again.
She comes to our parties but she never invites US back.
-	I don Ί think he got your email. You'd better write again.
If I write to you, will )<ou write back?
Note the difference between sell back (to the same person) and sell again.
The bike you sold me is too small. Can I sell it back to you?
If we buy this house and then have to move somewhere else, how easy unit it he
to sell it again ?
3	cases when back is not used
When the verb itself already expresses the idea of ‘return to an earlier situation
or ’movement in the opposite direction', back is not generally used.
Stefan can never return to his country. (More natural than Stefan can never
return back...)
Who opened the window? Could you close it, please? (not ... close it back
However, again can be used to emphasise the idea of'return to
an earlier situation’.
Stefan can never return to his country again.
Who opened the window? Could you close it again, please?
4	adverb particles, etc
With adverb particles and prepositional phrases, we can use both back and
again to suggest ‘return to an earlier situation', etc.
vocabulary
hack (adverb) and again
Word Problems from A to z
Sea ion 31
I stood up, and then I sal (back) down (again).
Me tasted the apple and spat it (back) out (again)
Go (back) to sleep (again).
I'll be (back) เท the office (again) on Monday.
5	ring/call back
Note dial ring back (British English only) and call back ran be used to mean
both 'return a phone call' and ’repeat a phone call'.
‘She’s not here just now: ‘Ask her to ring/call me back: (ะ return my call)
Ί haven't got time to talk now.’ ‘OK, I’ll ring/call back later.’ (- ring again)
6	word order
Back is an adverb particle (► 195). and am usually go between a verb and its
object, unless this is a pronoun (► 12.4). Again cannot.
Take back your money - I don 7 want it. (ok Take your money back .)
Count the money again, please, (sir Count again the money ...)
►or <>lh«r im of bad and ae»in. ter t r--5 dfcimrnry
j91 bath and bathe__________________________ ___________________
1	bath
Pronunciation:	bath bod) bathing 'bu:Hi(). bathed bu:Hl
This verb is not used in American English.
It can have an object.
It's your turn to bath the baby.
And it can be used to mean bath oneself.
I don't think he baths very often.
This use is rather formal: people more often say have/take a bath (and this is
also common in American English).
I'm feeling hot and sticky; I think m have a bath.
2	bathe
Pronunciation:	bathe .'be 1๕	bathing!' bcidiQ.·	bathed bcidd
Bathe is the American equivalent of the British verb hath.
It's your turn to bathe the baby. (ArnE)
I always bathe before I go to bed. (ArnE) (or ... lake a bath)
Bathe can also be used (in both British and American English) to talk about
putting water on a part of the body that hurts (for instance sore eyes).
Your eyes are wry red - you ought to bathe them.
And bathe can be used to mean 'swim for pleasure' เท British English.
NO BATHING fพ).พ THIS BEACH
This use is rather formal, people more often say have a swim, go for a swim, go
swimming or Just swim.
I .el's go for a swim in the river.
vocabulary . 391 bath and bathe
b changes for the worse
Go (not usually get) Is used before adjectives in some expressions that refer to
changes for the worse. People go mud (BrE), crazy, deaf, blind, grey or bald:
horses go lame, machines go wrong meat, fish or vegetables go bad: milk goes
sour, bread goes stale, beer, lemonade, musical instruments and car tyres
go flat.
lie went bald in his twenties. I he car keeps going wrong.
Note that we use gel. not go. with old, tired and ill.
5	come true, etc
Come is used in a few fixed expressions to talk about things finishing up all right.
The most common are come right (BrE) and come true.
I'll make all your dreams come true.
t rust me - it will all come right in the end.
Come ' infinitive can be used to talk about changes เท mental state or attitude.
I slowly came to realise that she knew what she was doing
You will come to regret your decision.
6	grow old, etc
Crow is used before adjectives especially to talk about slow and gradual changes
It is more formal than gel or go. and a little old-fashioned or literary.
Without noticing it he grew old
When they grew rich they began to drop their old friends.
As the weather grows colder. I think of moving to a warmer country.
Crow ♦ infinitive can be used (like come · infinitive) to talk about changes in
attitude, especially if these are gradual.
He grew to accept his stepmother, but he never grew to love her.
7	turn red. etc
Turn is used mostly for visible or striking changes of state. It is common before
colour words (and is not so informal as go).
She turned bright red and ran out of the room.
He turns violent after he's had a couple of drinks.
We can use turn before numbers to talk about important changes of age.
I turned fifty last week. It's all downhill from now on.
Turn into is used before nouns.
He's a lovely man, but when he gets jealous he turns into a monster.
A girl has to kiss a lot of frogs before one of them turns into a prince,
Turn to and turn into can both be used before the names of materials.
Everything that King Midas touched turned (in)to gold,
they stood there as If they had been turned (in)to stone.
To talk about a change of occupation, religion, politics, etc, we sometimes use
turn with a noun (with no preposition or article) or an adjective.
He worked in a bank for thirty years before turning painter.
t owards the end of the war lie turned traitor.
Al the end of her life she turned Catholic.
Turn (in)to can also be used to talk about changing one thing into another.
เท the Creek legend. Circe turned men into pigs
vocabulary · 394 become, get. go, grow, etc: changes
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
8	fall ill. etc
fall is used to mean 'become' in fall ill, fall asleep and fall เท love.
9	verbs related to adjectives: thicken, brighten, etc
A number of verbs which are related to adjectives have meanings like
■get more ..or 'make more ..Many of them end เท -en. Examples:
The fog thickened.	They're widening the road here.
The weather's beginning to brighten up. His eyes narrowed.
Could you shorten the sleeves on this jacket?
10 no change: stay, keep, remain
To talk about things not changing, we can use stay, keep or remain before
adjectives. Kemain is more formal.
Now do you manage to slay young and fit?	Keep calm
I hope you will always remain so charming.
Uray and remain are also sometimes used before noun phrases.
Promise me you will always stay'remain my little boy.
Keep can be used before -Ing forms.
Keep smiling whatever happens.
Vet ochrr U1M of (he wttfd* ฟ่เพ'นพ4»d in thK we non, see a flood dicthifUf >
395	been meaning 'come' or 'gone'
Been is often used as a past participle of come and go.
Cranny has been to see US twice since Christmas.
I haven 't been to the theatre for ages.
Have you ever been to Northern Ireland'?
Note that been is only used for completed visits. Compare:
-	The electrician's already been. (He has come and gone away again.)
Megan'ร come, so we can start work, (she has come and is still here.)
-	I've been to l.ondon three times this week.
Where's LucyT 'She's gone to London.'
396	before: adverb
1	'at any time before now/then'
We can use before to mean at any time before now'. เท British English, a present
perfect tense is normally used.
I think l've seen this film before. Have you ever been here before?
Before can also mean at any time before then before the past moment that we
arc talking about'. เท this case a past perfect tense is used.
She realised that she had seen him before.
vocabulary - :tW before: adverb
2	counting back from a past time: eight years before
We also use before after a time expression to 'count back’ from a past moment -
to say how much earlier something else had happened. A past perfect tense is
normally used.
When I went back to the town that I had left eight years before, everything
was different, (not .. that I had left before ergh· years ...)
To count back from the present, we use ago, not before (► 362).
I left school four years ago. (mh .. four years before - before-fotu-yea· ร)
3	before, before that and first
Before is not generally used alone to mean ’first’ or ’before that happens’.
Instead we use first or before that.
I want to get married one day. But before that first, I want to travel.
f κνγτ Util	/ tiff till Ift	\
V"/l · · · tn<Í	■	·”	f
397	before (preposition) and in front of
before, time
in front of. place
Compare:
I must move my car before nine o'clock.
It's parked in front of the station (not .. . before the station.)
Before is normally used to refer to time. However, it can refer to place:
a to talk about order in queues, lists, documents, etc
Do you mindf I was before in front of youÍ
Her name comes before mine in the alphabet.
We use 'a' before a consonant and 'an' before a vowel.
b to mean 'เท the presence of (somebody important)'
I came up before the magistrates for dangerous driving last week.
c in the expressions right before one's eyes, before one's very eyes.
for chr diffrrrnrr b»tw~n เท frotil o/and facing· oppoulr. » M9.	lor brfatr ท ■ conjunction. - 250.
398	begin and start
1	meaning; formality
Begin and start can both lie used with the same meaning.
I began started reaching when I was 24.
If Hannah doesn't come soon, let's begin start without her.
We generally prefer begin when we arc using a more formal style. Compare:
We will begin rhe meeting with a message from the President.
Damn! It's starting to rain.
vocabulary · 397 before (preposition) and เท front of
Word Problems from A to
Section 31
2	cases where begin is not possible
Start (but not begin) 1$ used to mean:
a start a journey'
I think we ought to start at six. while the roads are empty.
b ‘start working' (for machines)
The car won't start.
c make something start’
How do you start the washing machine?
The President's wife fired the gun to start the race.
399	below, under, underneath and beneath
1	'lower than': below or under
The prepositions below and under can both mean 'lower than’.
Look in the cupboard below under the sink.
2	not directly under: below
We prefer below when one thing is not directly under another.
The climbers slopped 300m below the lop of the mountain.
Λ moment later the รนท had disappeared below the horizon.
3	covered: under
We prefer under when something is covered or hidden by what is over it. and
when things are touching.
I think the cat's under the bed.
What are you wearing under your sweater?
The whole village is under water, (sol.. . Mow wafer.)
4	measurements: below
Bdow is used in measurements of temperature and height, and in other cases
where we think of a vertical scale.
The temperature is three degrees below zero.
Parts of Holland are below sea level.
The plane came down below the clouds.
She’s well below average in intelligence.
5	‘less than': under
We usually use under, not below, to mean Tess fewer than' or 'younger than'.
There were under twenty people at the lecture.
You can't see this film if you’re under 18.
6	underneath
Underneath is sometimes used as a preposition instead of under, but only for
physical position. Compare:
There’s a mouse underneath) the piano.
He’s still under 18. (not ... underneath 18.)
vocabulary · 39» below, under, underneath and beneath
7	beneath
Beneath is used mostly เท a rather literary style.
The ship sank stouty beneath the wavés.
It is common before abstract nouns in some fixed expressions.
He acts as if I Utas beneath his notice, (- not worth considering)
Her behaviour is beneath contempt (ะ really disgraceful)
8	adverbs
Below can be used as an adverb.
We looked over the cliff at the waves crashing on the rocks below.
Under can be used as an adverb panicle (► 195) with some verbs.
Λ lot of businesses are going under because of the economic crisis.
เท other cases we prefer underneath for adverbial use.
I can't take my sweater off - / haven't got anything on underneath.
(W\T	)
v*''· · ·	F
เท a book or a paper, 54V Mine means ‘look at something written later
in (he text*.
» 354 for d«toik
400	beside and besides
Beside is a preposition meaning ‘at the side of, by', ‘next to’.
They liléd in a little house beside the river.
Besides can be used like as well as (► 382), when we add new information to
what is already known.
Besides literature, we have to study history and philosophy.
Who was at the party besides lack and the Bensons'
Besides can also be used informally as a discourse marker (► 301.2) meaning
also', ‘as well', ‘in any case'. It is often used in speech to add a stronger, more
conclusive argument to what has gone before. เท this case, besides usually goes
at the beginning of a clause.
I don t like those shoes; besides. they're loo expensive.
It's too late to go out now. Besides, it's starting to rain.
401	bet
1	use
I bet (you) can be used in an informal style to mean I think it’s probable that'.
that is usually dropped.
/ bet (you) she's not at home.
(More natural than I bet (you) that she's not at home.)
I'll bet... is also possible.
I'll bet you she's not at home.
vocabulary · too beside and besides
Word Problems from A to z
Seaion
2	tenses
After I bet (you), we often use a present tense to refer to the future.
I bet (you) they don’t come Illis evening, (os I bet (you) they won't come...)
I bet (you) the Conservatives (will) lose.
3	two objects
When bet is used to talk about real bets, it can be followed by two objects:
the person with whom the bet is made, and the money or thing that is bet.
I bet you £5 it doesn't rain this week.
My father bet my mother dinner at the Hitz that she would marry him.
He lion, but she never bought him the dinner.
Bet is irregular (het - bet - bet).
402	better
1	'recovered'
When better means 'recovered from an illness', It can be used with completely
or quite (unlike other comparative adjectives).
Don’t start work again until you're completely better
2	correcting mistakes
We do not normally use better to correct mistakes.
She's gone to Hungary - or rather, Poland, (noI... or belter, Poland.)
403	between and among
1 between two
We say that something is between two people, things, or groups of things.
She was standing between Alice and Emily.
a long valley between high mountains
Between is often used to talk about distances or intervals.
We need two metres between the windows.
I'll be at the office between nine and eleven
Between is common before each.
I here seems to he leu and less time between each birthday.
2 between or among more than two
We usually say that somebody or something is between several clearly separate
people or things. We prefer among when somebody or something is เท a group,
a crowd or a mass of people or things which we do not see separately. Compare:
-	Our house is between the woods, the river and the village.
His house is hidden among the trees.
-	I saw something between the wheels of the car.
Your passport is somewhere among all these papers.	-»
vocabulary · 40.3 between and among
Among is normal before a singular (uncountable) noun.
They found an envelope full of money among all the rubbish.
3	dividing and sharing; difference
We can talk about dividing or sharing things between or among more than two
people or groups.
He divided all his money between among his children and grandchildren.
We shared the work between among the five of us.
We normally use between after difference.
There are enormous differences between languages.
What's the difference between between' and among’?
4	'one of*, etc
Among can mean one of, 'some of or 'included in'.
Among the first to arrive น1aร the ambassador.
He has a number of criminals among his friends.
404	big, large and great
1	concrete nouns: usually big or large
With concrete nouns - the names of things you can see, touch, etc - we mostly
use big and large. Big is most common เท an informal style.
Ger your big feel off my flowers.
She is น small woman, but she has very large hands.
It was a large house, situated near the river.
2	great with concrete nouns
Great is not normally used simply to talk about physical size. เท an informal
style, it is often used with concrete nouns to mean 'wonderful'.
I've just got a great new bike.
And it can also be used with meanings like 'large and impressive’.
Great clouds of smoke rose above the burning cathedral.
Another meaning is famous' or ‘important’.
/to you think Napoleon was realty a great man?
3	abstract nouns: usually great
Great is common with abstract nouns - the names of things you cannot see.
touch, etc.
I have great respect for her ideas, (not btgdarge respect]
His behaviour caused great annoyance (not big/laegeamufyamv)
You are making a great mistake
Iler work showed a great improvement last year.
Big can be used with countable abstract nouns เท an informal style.
You're making a big mistake. Big bargains for weekend shoppers
large is used with countable abstract nouns referring to quantities, amounts
and proportions.
We're thinking of giving your company a very large order.
Ihere was a large error in the accounts.
vocabulary · 101 big. large and great
Word Problems from A to
Section 31
She spent large sums on entertaining.
He wrote a large part of the book while he was in prison.
Hig and large are not generally used with uncountable nouns - but note
the fixed expressions big business, big trouble.
4 large and wide
Large is a false friend' for speakers of some languages. It does not mean wide'.
Ihe river is too metres wide, (not .. .•พ metres large.)
For uQdr and brnad. ► 412.
405	birthday and date of birth
Somebody's date of birth is the «kite (day, month and year) when they were
bom. A birthday is the anniversary (day and month) of that date.
Write your name, addrm and date of birth in Section I of the form
It's my birthday on Tuesday. Come and help me celebrate.
406	(a) bit
1	use
Λ bit is often used as an adverb with the same meaning as a little (► 163).
She's a bit old to play with dolls, isn't she?
Can you drive a bit slower? Wait a bit
Note that when a bit and a little are used with non comparative adjectives,
the meaning is usually negative or critical.
a bit tired a bit expensive a little (too) old
ÍUI ft Vi If ti ha kt tie J M liliL'	a*· I
\ r’’ 11	π ΙΠΤ nnnu VW IIIเพ nmrtwmiBj
2	a bit of a
Λ bit of a can be used before some nouns in an informal style. Ihe meaning is
similar to rather a (► 565).
He's a bit of a fool if you ask me. I've got a hit of a problem.
3	not a bit
The informal expression not a bit means 'not at all'.
I'm not a bit tired. 'Do you mind if I pul some music onT 'Not a hit.'
t-or a txt with <0«npatMr«· edirrtnrt and «hritn. » 20?.
407	born and borne
1 be born
To talk about coming into the world al birth, we use the passive expression
to be born.
Hundreds of children are born deaf every year.
vocabulary · 407 born and borne
To give a place or date of birth, we use the simple past: wait were born.
I Wilร bom in	(not / tint btifH in /9,j6)
My parents were born in Scotland.
2 the verb bear
The verb bear (bore, borne) is used to talk about accepting or tolerating
difficult experiences. It is most common in the expression can't bear (ธ hate,
can’t stand).
เท a very formal style, bear can be used with other meanings, including give
birth to' and ’carry1.
She bore fix children in seven years. (More normal: She had six children ...)
The king's body was borne away to the cathedral.
408	borrow and lend
Borrowing is taking (for a time).
Can I borrow your bicycle? (not Can I lend your bicycle?)
You borrow something from somebody.
I borrowed a pound from my brother, (not I borrowed my brothera pound)
■«‘tiding (AmE also loaning) is giving (for a time). You lend something to
somebody, or lend somebody something.
I lent my coal to losh, and I never saw it again.
Lend me your comb for a minute, wdl you? (not H&rrowmeyotfr ..)

409	bring and take
1	speaker’s/hearer's position
We mostly use bring for movements to the place where the speaker or hearer is.
and lake for movements IO other places. Compare:
-	This is a nice restaurant. Thanks for bringing me here.
let's have another drink, and then I'll take you home.
-	Λώรุะ^^^.^.
Let ร go and sec Aunt May on Sunday. We can take a picnic.
2	speaker's/hearer's past or future position
We can also use bring for a movement to a place where the speaker or hearer
already was or will be. Compare:
'Where's that reportT 7 brought it to you when you were เท Mr Allen's office.
Don't you remember?
I took the papers to lack'ร office.
-	I'll arrive at the hotel at six o 'clock. Can you bring the car at six-thirty·'
Can you take the car to the garage tomorrow? I icon Ί have time.
(not Can you bring Ihecctr Io ihcgttrrtge tomorrow?. . .)
vocabulary - 408 borrow and lend
Word Problems from A to z
Seclion 31
3	joining a movement
Bring (with) can be used to talk about joining a movement of the speaker's/
hearer's, even if take is used for the movement itself.
I'm taking the kids to the circus tonight. Would you like to come with US and
bring Susie?
4	somebody else s position
Sometimes when we are talking about somebody else (not the speaker or
hearer), that person can become the centre of our attention. เท that case, we use
bring for movements to the place where he/she is (or was or will be). This often
happens in stories.
He heard nothing lor months. Then one day his brother brought him a letter.
5	American English
Americans often use bring where British English has take.
Let's go and see Aunt May on Sunday. IVf can bring a picnic
410	bring up and educate
Bring up and the noun upbringing are mostly used for the moral and social
training that children receive at home, tducate and education are used for the
intellectual and other training that people get at school and university.
Lucy was brought up by her aunt and educated at the local school.
Their kids are very badly brought up - always screaming and fighting.
(noi Their kids are eery badly educated .)
Which is belter: a good upbringing and a bad education, or the opposite?
411	Britain, the United Kingdom, the British Isles
and England
(Great) Britain is normally used to mean the island which includes England,
Scotland and Wales; British is used for the people of these three countries.
Great Britain and Northern Ireland together are called the United Kingdom;
some people also use Britain in this wider sense.
The British Isles is a geographical, not a political, term. It is the name for
England, Scotland, Wales, the whole of Ireland (which includes both Northern
Ireland and the Republic of Ireland, also called Eire'), and the smaller islands
round about.
Note that England is only one pan of Britain. Scotland and Wales are not in
England, and Scottish and Welsh people do not like to be called 'English'.
An informal word for a British person is Bril. Briton is used mainly in news
reports and newspaper headlines (e g. THRU BRITONS Dtf. IN AIR CRASH),
arid to refer to the ancient inhabitants of Britain.
vocabulary - >11 Britain, the United Kingdom, the British Isles and England
412	broad and wide
1	physical distance
To calk about the physical distance from one side of something to the other,
we more often use wide.
The old city has very wide streets. The car's too wide for the garage.
Broad can also be used เท this physical sense, especially in more formal
descriptions.
Across the broad valley, the mountains rose blue and mysterious.
She wore a simple green dress with a broad black belt.
Note also: broad shoulders; a broad back; wide eyes; a wide mouth.
Wide is used in expressions of measurement; note the word order.
The river is about half a mile wide, (not ... wide half a mile.)
2	abstract meanings
Both words can express more abstract meanings. Common expressions:
broad agreement (= agreement on most important points)
broad-minded (- tolerant) broad daylight (« full, bright daylight)
a wide variety/rang.· (of opinions, etc)
tot ocher common op.ruIon. -Sth broad and น^. wr a good rlrcilonary.
but, although, though and however ► 371
413	but meaning 'except'
1	use
We use but to mean 'except’ after all, none, every, any, no (and everything,
everybody, nothing, nobody, anywhere, etc).
He eats nothing but hamburgers. Everybody's here but George.
I've finished all the fobs but one.
Note the expressions next but one, last but two, etc (mainly BrE).
Jackie lives next door but one. (- two houses from me)
I was last but two in the race yesterday.
But for expresses the idea 'if something had not existed happened'.
I would have been in real trouble hut for your help.
But for the storm, I would have been home before eight.
Note also the structure who/what should___but (used to talk about surprising
appearances, meetings, etc).
I walked out of the station, and who should I see but old Holly?
I looked under the bed. and what should I find but the keys Host last week?
2	pronouns after but
After but. we usually use object pronouns (me, him, etc). Subject pronouns
(/, he, etc) are possible เท a more forma) style before a verb.
Nobody but her would do a thing like that. (More formal: Nobody but she.. J
vocabulary · 412 broad and wide
Word Problems from A to z
Seaion 31
3	verbs after but
The verb form after but usually depends on what came before. Infinitives are
normally without to.
She's not interested in anything but skiing, (interested เท... skiing)
That child does nothing but teat ch TV. (does ... watch)
Can't (help) but · infinitive without to is sometimes used with the meaning of
'can't help .. .ing' (► 118). Cannot but... is very formal; can't help but... IS
especially common in American English.
One cannot (help) but admire his murage. (ร One has to admire ...)
I can’t help but wonder what's going to happen to US all.
Infinitives with to are used after no alternative!choice!option but ..
The train was cancelled, so I had no alternative but to lake a taxi.
4	but meaning Only'
เท older English, but was used to mean only', but this is now very unusual.
She is hut a child.
Note, bur ท เแนฟพฺ pfonouiKcd ’bMl. not iKur (» SIS).
414	byไ time
1	not later than
By can mean not later than'.
I'll be home by five o'clock. (ะ at or before five)
‘Can I borrow your carr ' Yes, hut I must have it back by tonight.'
(- tonight or before)
By can also suggest the idea of'progress up to a particular time'.
By rhe end of the meat, everybody was drunk.
Before a verb, we use by the time (that).
I'll be in bed by the lime you gel home.
By the time that the guards realised what was happening, the gang were
already inside the bank.
2	other meanings
By can also be used to talk about time in the rather literary expressions by day
and by night (ะ during the day/night).
He worked by night and slept by day.
Note also day by day. hour by hour etc.
The situation is getting more serious day by day. ( ... each day.)
And one can pay by the hour, by the day etc.
เท this job we're paid by the hour.
You can rent a bicycle by the day or by the week
vocabulary · 414 by. time
415	by and near
By means 'just at the side of; something that is by you may lie doser than
something that is near you. Compare:
We live near the sea. (perhaps five kilometres assay)
We live by the sea. (We can see it.)
416	by (method, agent) and with (tools, etc)
1	the difference
By and with can both be used to say boss somebody docs something, but there
is an important difference.
We use by to talk about an action - what VST do to get a result. We use with to
talk about a tool or other object - what we use to get a result. Compare:
-	/ killed the spider by hitting it. (Note the ing form after by.)
I killed the spider with a shoe, (nor ...bye· shoe.)
-	'/ got where I am by hard work.'
‘No you didn't. You got there with your wife’ร money.'
Without is the opposite of both by and with in these cases. Compare:
-	I got her to listen by shouting.
It's difficult to gel her to listen without shouting.
-	We'll hair to get it out with a screwdriver.
We can't gel it out without a screwdriver.
By is also used to refer to means of transport (by bus, by train, etc), ► 142.1.
2	passive clauses
เท passive clauses, by introduces the agent - the person or thing that is
responsible for the action (► 58).
I was interviewed by three directors.
My car was damaged by a falling branch.
We generally prefer with to refer to a tool or instrument used by somebody.
Compare:
He was killed by a heavy stone. (This could mean Ά stone fell
and killed him'.)
He was killed with a heavy Slone. (This means 'Somebody used a stone
to kill him’.)
417	call
Call (with no object) can mean both 'telephone' and visit'. This sometimes
causes confusion.
'Alice called this morning.'' You mean she came here or she phoned''
ocabulary · 415 by and near
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
418	can't help
If you say that you cannoli can't help doing something (especially
เท British English), you mean that you can’t stop yourself, even if you don't
want to do it
She’s a self ish unman, hut somehow you can’t help liking her.
Excuse me -1 couldn't help overhearing what you said.
Sorry I broke the cup - / couldn't help it.
Can't help can be followed by but ♦ infinitive without to (► 413.3), with the
same meaning as can’t help.. .Ing. This is common in American English.
I can't help but wonder what I should do next.
419	care, take care (of), care (about) and
care for
1	take care of
Take care of normally means ’look after’ or take responsibility for
Nurses take care of sick people.
It’s no good giving Daniel a rabbit: he's too young to lake care of it.
Ms Satage takes care of marketing and I'm responsible for production.
Take care (without a preposition) means ‘be careful'. Some people use it as a
formula when saying goodbye.
Take care when you're crossing the road, children.
Bye. Ruth: Bye. Mike. Take care:
2	care (about)
Care (about) is used to say whether you feel something is important to you.
This is very common in negative sentences. About is used before an object, but
is usually left out before a conjunction.
Most people care about other people’s opinions.
fvnr mEi taata* ad a a Atta' lata ultU’t “ -	1
I don't care whether it rains - I'm happy.
I'll never speak to you again ’ ‘I don't care:
Your mother's upset with you.' Ί couldn't care less.' (- I don’t care at all.)
3	care for
Care for can be used to mean look after’.
He spent years caring for his sick mother.
Another meaning is like’or 'be fond of, but this is not very common
in modern English.
I don't much care for strawberries.
vocabulary - 419 care: lake care (of), care (about) and care for
420	city and town
Most people simply use city to talk about large and important towns examples
in the UK are Belfast. Cardiff, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Manchester, Liverpool arid
lundon.
City can be used in a more exact way to talk about a town that has been given a
special status by the king or queen (in Britain) or by the state (in some other
English-speaking countries).
The City IS also a name for London’s financial centre.
I'm not sure what his job is: something เท The City.
The two words can be used more or less interchangeably เท American English,
with city often preferred in more prestigious contexts. Compare:
The City of Pasadena Is governed by a Mayor and a City Council.
(not //n* ÍONVJ of AwíWÍtWí 45 พฟ่ . · 1)
Pasadena is a small town on the outskirts of Houston.
(not ... λ small city...)
421	classic and classical
Classic usually refers to a famous traditional style.
He's a classic 1960s hippy who has new changed.
She buys classic cars and restores them.
Classical refers to the culture of ancient Greece and Rome, or to European works
of art of the so-called 'classical’ period in the 18th century.
She's studying classical languages and literature at Cambridge.
Classical miáic IS used to refer to the work of composers like Bach, Mozart or
Szymanowski, in contrast to popular music or jazz.
It's hard to learn classical guitar.
422	close and shut
1	use
Close klooL and shut can often be used with the same meaning.
Open your mouth and close shut your eyes.
I can't close shut the window. Con you help me?
The shop closes shuts at five o 'clock.
You can shut, but not close, somebody something in or out of a place.
I shut the papers in my desk drawer and locked it (not I dosed the papers ...)
Site shut him out of the house.
2	past participles
The past participles closed and shut can be used as adjectives.
The office is closed shut on Saturday afternoon.
Shut is not usually used before a noun.
a closed door (NOT a shut floor} closed eyes (not shuteyes)
ocabulary · 420 city and town
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
3	cases where dose is preferred
We prefer close for slow movements (like Howers closing at night), and dose is
more common in a formal style.
As น'.· watched, he closed his eyes for the last lime.
Compare:
Close your mouth, please, (dentist to patient)
Shut your mouth! (a rude way of saying ‘Be quiet!’)
We close roads, railways, etc (channels of communication). And we close (- end)
letters, bank accounts, meetings, etc.
423	cloth and clothes
Cloth (pronounced k<M) is material made from woo), cotton, etc, used for
making clothes, curtains, soft furnishings and so on. (เท informal English, it Is
more common to say material or fabric.)
His suits were made of the most expensive cloth.
Λ doth is a piece of material used for cleaning, covering things, etc.
Could you pass me a cloth? I've spilt some milk on rhe floor.
Clothes (pronounced /klaudz/) are things you wear: skirt, trousers, etc.
Clothes has no singular; instead of rt clothe, we say something to wear
or an article / a piece of dothing.
I must buy some neu' clothes; I haven't got anything to wear.
424	come and go
1	speaker's/hearer's position
We use come for movements to the place where the speaker or hearer is.
‘Maria, would you come here, pleaser 'I’m coming.' (koi ...I'm going.}
When did you come to live here?
(on the phone): Can I come and see you?
We use go for movements to other places.
I want to go and live in Greece. Let's go and see Daniel and Chloe.
เท 1577, he went to study in Home.
2	speaker's/hearer’s past or future position
We can use come for a movement to a place where the speaker or hearer already
was or will be at the time of the movement. Compare:
-	What time did I come to see you in the office yesterday?
I went to lack'ร office yesterday, but he wasn't in.
-	Will you come and visit me in hospital when I have my operation?
He's going into hospital next week.
-	Sarah can’t come to your birthday party.
She's going to see her mother.	-»
vocabulary · 121 come and go
3	joining a movement
Come (u>ith) can be used to talk about joining a movement of the speaker’s/
hearer’s, even If go is used for the movement itself.
We’re going to a concert tonight. Would you like to come with US?
4	somebody else's position
Sometimes when we arc talking about somebody else (not the speaker or
hearer), that person can become the centre of our attention. In that case, we use
come for movements to the |>lace where he/she is (or was or will be). This often
happens in stories.
lie waited till four o'clock, hut she didn't come.
5	come to; come from
Come to can mean arrive at.
Go straight on till you come to a crossroads.
Come from is used (in the present) to say where people's homes are or were.
She comes from Scotland, but her mother's Welsh.
Originally I come from Hungary, but I’ve lived here for twenty years,
(sill tirtgmtdlyl CMoe from-Httngttry...)


425	comic and comical
Comic is the normal adjective for artistic comedy.
comic verse comic opera Shakespeare ร comic technique
Comical is a rather old-fashioned word meaning 'funny'.
a comical expression
426	complement and compliment (noun and
verb)
A complement adds to the quality of something, or goes well with it.
Ihe verb complement has a similar meaning.
Dinner at Antonio's - the perfect complement to your evening at the opera.
They have very different personalities, but they complement each other.
A compliment is an expression of praise or admiration. The verb compliment has
a similar meaning.
My new hairstyle is getting a lot of compliments.
I must compliment you on your exam results.
Both nouns are pronounced /komplimant/. Both verbs arc
pronounced /’kjmpliment/.
For Ihe gr»mmKK«*l mejntftg of	4ee I AnguAgc Terminology
vocabulary
comic and comical
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
427	continual(ly) and continuously)
Continually} and continuous(ly) are both commonly used for uninterrupted
actions, processes, etc.
There has been continual/continuous fighting on the border for
the last 48 hours.
Cue been working almost continually/continuously since yesterday evening.
Continual(ly) is preferred for things that happen repeatedly, often annoyingly.
I can't work with these continual interruptions.
She's continually taking days off.
428	contrary
1	on the contrary and on the other hand
On the contrary is used to contra 19-control the stccring.)has been said or
suggested is not true. If we want to give the other side of a question, we use
on the other hand, not on the contrary. Comp are ะ
-	Ί suppose the job was boring?' ‘On the contrary, it was really exciting.’
The job was boring but on the other hand it was well paid.
(not . .. ^nethecontrary, it was well paid.)
-	He did not make things easy for his parents. On the contrary, he did
everythin? he cm lid tn annoy and worry them.
He dil Of! the contrary, it IVãS well paidfntS' Qn the other hand, he could often
be wonderfully sweet and loving.
We can emphasise a contrast with in contrast.
Daytime temperatures in the desert are very high. In contrast, the nights can be
bitterly cold, (not Qn the contrary, the night. . .)
2	contrary and opposite
We use opposite (► 548), not contrary, to talk about contrasting words.
'Short is the opposite of 'tali', and also of 'long', (not . . . the contrary
of 'tall'. . .)
429	control
Control is a 'false friend’ for people who speak some languages. It generally
means manage, direct, not check or inspect. Compare:
-	The crowd was too big for the police to control. (= . . . to keep in order.)
The police were checking everybody's papers, (not . . . controlling
I I'lJ rrnmY 3 pwprrj. f
-	I found the car difficult to control at high speeds.
I took the car to the garage and asked them to have a look at the steering.
(not ... to control the tWering.)
However, the noun control is used with the meaning of 'inspection point' in
expressions like passport/customs control.
vocabulary · 429 control
430	country
1	countable use
Country (countable) = 'nation', ‘land*.
Scotland is a cold country. Mexico is the country I know best.
How many countries are there in Europe'
2	uncountable use
Country (uncountable) -- ‘open land without many buildings'.
I like wild country best, (not I like a wild country best.}
The expression the country (the opposite of the town) is very common.
IVr lii<e in the country just outside Manchester.
Would you rather live เท the town or the country?
For mfoonMxm «boot countable and uncounrable nouiu. » I 11 120
date of birth and birthday ► 105
431	dare
1	uncommon
In modern English. dare is not a very common verb. เท an informal style, people·
generally use otiler expressions.
He's not afraid to say what he thinks. (More natural than He dares to say what
he thinks.}
2 negative use; daren't
Dare is, however, quite often used in negative sentences. It can be followed by
an infinitive with or without to.
She doesn’t dare (to) go out at night.
The old lady didn’t dare (to) open the door.
A special negative form daren’t (* infinitive without to) exists in British English.
The third person singular Is also daren't, without ■ร.
She daren't tell him what she thinks.
3	special expressions
Don't you dare! is sometimes used to discourage people from doing
unwanted things.
'Mummy, can I draw a picture on the wallr Don't you dare!'
Him·dare you? is sometimes used as an indignant exclamation.
How dare y ou? Take your hands off me at once!
vocabulary · 430 country
Word Problems from A to
Section 31
And I dare say (sometimes written I daresay) is a rather old fashioned
expression meaning Ί think probably’, Ί suppose’.
I dare say it'll rain soon I daresay you 're ready for a drink.
Children use the expression / dare you * infinitive to challenge each other to do
frightening things.
I dare you to run across the road with your eyes shut.
432	dead, died and death
Dead is an adjective.
a dead man Mrs McGinty is dead,
t hat idea has been dead for years.
Died is the past tense and past participle of the verb die.
Shakespeare died in 1616. (not Shakespeare dead .)
She died เท a car crash, (not She is dead in ...)
So far SO people have died in the fighting.
Note the spelling of the present participle dying (► 348).
Death is a noun meaning the end of life’.
After his death his wife went to live in Canada.
for eipre.UiXH like Ihrdrad(ธ <Jej<J propk). · I«
433	different
1	modifiers: any different, etc
Different is a little like a comparative: unlike most adjectives, it can be modified
by any and no, (a) little and not much.
I hadn't seen her for years, but she wasn't any different.
How’s the patient, doctorr No different:
His ideas are little different from those of his friends.
The new school isn't much different from the old one.
Quite different means ’completely different' (► 564.3).
I thought you'd be like your sister, but you’re quite different.
Unlike comparatives, different can also be modified by pcry.
She's very different from her sister.
2	prepositions: different from/to
brom is generally used after different·, many British people also use to.
เท American English, than is common.
American football is very different from/to soccer. (AmE ... different from
than soccer.)
Before a clause, different than is also possible in British English.
The job’s different than I expected, (or ... different from, to what I expected.)
Eor the difference between different and other, ► 5502.
vocabulary · 433 different
434	disinterested
A disinterested person has no reason to support one side or another in a
disagreement or competition.
The referee was not exactly disinterested: his brother-in-law was playing for
one of the teams.
Disinterested is also often used to mean 'uninterested'.
divorce ► 523
435 do. general-purpose verb; do and make
The general-purpose verb do has several uses, and can sometimes be confused
with make.
Learn more about what we do and what we make at megamega.com.
(advertisement)
1	do for indefinite activities
We use do when we do not say exactly what activity we are talking about -
for example with words like thing, something, nothing, anything, what.
Then he did a very strange thing, (nui Then-h
Do something! I like doing noÁfiOf Then he made a very strange thing.)
What shall we do?
2	do for work
We use do when we talk about work and jobs.
I'm not going to do any work today.	Could you do the shopping for me?
It's time to do the accounts.	I wouldn't like to do your job.
I did (- studied) French and German at school.
Has Ben done his homework?
Could you do the ironing first, and then do the windows if you've got time?
3	do .. .ing
We use do in the informal structure do . . .ing to talk about activities that take
a certain time, or are repeated (for example jobs and hobbies). There is usually
a determiner (e.g. the, my, some, much) before the -ing form.
During the summer I'm going to do some walking and a lot of reading.
I hate doing the ironing.
Note that the -ing form in this structure is noun-like, and cannot have an object.
(not Tm going to do seme watching i v.)
But do can be used with a compound noun that includes verb + object.
I want to do some bird-watching this weekend.
It's time I did some letter-writing.
vocabulary · 434 disinterested
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
4	make for constructing, creating, etc
We often use make to talk about constructing, building, creating, etc.
I've Just made a cake.	Lei's make a plan.
My father and I once made a boat.
5	do instead of make
We sometimes use do in place of make, to sound casual about a creative
activity - as if we are not claiming to produce any very special results.
' IVhat are we going to eatr ' Well. I could do an omelette:
6	common fixed expressions
do good, harm, business1 one's best, somebody a favour, sport, some exercise,
one's hair, one's teeth, one's duty, SOmph
make a journey, an offer, arrangements, a suggestion, a decision, an attempt,
an effort, an excuse, an exception, a mistake, a noise, a phone call, money,
a profit, a fortune, love, peace, war, a bed, progress
Note that we say make a bed, but we often talk about doing the bed(s) as part of
the housework. Compare:
He's old enough to make his oum bed now.
I'll start on the vegetables as soon as I've done the beds.
We use take, not make, in take a photo, and have, not make, in have an
(interesting) experience.
for Information I foul cauMtive MnKtiiret »«ti mat·. · 107
436	doubt
( louses after the verb doubt can be introduced by whether, if or that.
Economists doubt whether interest rales will fall in the near future.
I doubt if she'll come this evening.
The directors doubt that new machinery is really necessary.
เท an informal style, people sometimes use no conjunction.
I doubt we’ll have enough money for a new car.
After negative forms of doubt, we normally use dun or no conjunction.
I don't doubt (that) there will be more problems.
for no rfochl meaning prob**·. · «4.
down ► 614
437	dress
1 noun
rhe countable noun dress means an an ide of women’s clothing (it goes from
the shoulders to below the hips).
This is the first time I’ve seen you wearing a dress.
vocabulary · 437 dress
ไhere is also an uncountable noun dress (not used with the article a/an).
It means ‘clolhing·, 'clothes'. Il is not very common in modern English, and is
used mostly to talk about special kinds of clothing (for example national dress,
evening dress, battledress).
He looks good in evening dress, (not ... fn-an-evertíng-dreas?)
2	verb: putting clothes on
The verb dress can be used to talk about putting clothes on oneself or somebody
else. Undress is used for taking clothes oil.
It only takes me five minutes to dress เท the morning.
Could you dress the children for me?
I'm going Io undress in front of the fire.
เท informal English, we use ger dressed, undressed to talk about dressing or
undressing oneself.
Gel dressed and come downstairs at once!
Put on and take off are generally used when clothes are mentioned.
I put on a sweater, but it was so warm that I had to take it off again.
Can you lake lack'ร boots off for him I
3	verb: wearing clothes
To say what somebody is/was wearing on a particular occasion, we can use the
form be dressed in (note the preposition).
I didn't recognise him because he was dressed เท a dark suit.
Au	.· Pin ill \
I	· · · r«I · ^·Ί 1< mr»l « · a III» a · ·พ|Γ| > a a I
She was dressed in orange pyjamas.
lie wearing and have on (especially Ami·.) are also very common.
She was wearing orange pyjamas.
She had on orange pajamas. (AmE)
The active form dress (in) can lie used to give the idea of repetition or habit.
She always dresses เท green. He dresses well.
Noto also the expression well dressed.
438	drown
Both active and passive forms of drown are common when we talk about
accidental drowning.
He (was) drowned while trying to swim across a river.
439	due to and owing to
Due to and owing to are similar to 'because of. Due to is more common
than owing to.
Phrases beginning due/owbig to are often separated from the rest of their
sentence by a comma.
Due Owing to the bad weather(,) the match was cancelled.
IVe haw had to postpone the meeting,) due owing to the strike.
vocabulary
drown
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
Some people believe it is incorrect to use due to at the beginning of <1 clause in
this way, but the structure Is common เท educated usage.
Due to can also follow the verb be. Owing to IS not usually used like this.
His success was due to his mother, (not ... was owmg to his mother. I
440	during and for
During is used to say when something happens; for is used to say how long
it lasts. Compare:
-	My father was in Germany during the summer.
My father was เท Germany for six weeks, (not . . . during six นพkร.)
-	It rained during the night for two or three hours.
ru come and see you for a few minutes during the afternoon.
Foe for. tim. in and from. » M.
441	during and in
We use both during and เท to say that something happens inside 3 particular
period of time.
We'll be away during เท August.	1 woke up during/in the night
We use during to stress that we are talking about the whole of the period.
The shop's closed during all of August. (รท! ... in aU of August.}
And we use during when we are talking about an event, activity or experience
(not simply a period of time).
He had some strange experiences during his military service.
(.KOI.. .iH-his-mihMryseiviee.)
I’ll try to phone you during the meeting, (not ... in the meeting}
I met them during my stay in China.
early, soon and quickly ► 591
442	east and eastern, north and northern, etc
1	adjectives: the difference
We often prefer eastern, northern, etc when we are talking about vague,
indefinite or larger areas, and east, north, etc for more clearly defined places
(e.g. the names of countries or states). Compare:
-	the northern part of the country
the north side of the house
-	the southern counties of Rrilain
the south coast
southern Africa (an area)
South Africa (a country)
-	the northern United States
North Carolina
vocabulary · 442 east and eastern, north and northern, etc
However, place names do no! always follow this rule. Note the following:
Northern Ireland	North/East/West Africa	North/South America
East/Soulh. etc Asia Ilin Western/Eastern, etc Europe
South Australia Bin Western Australia; the Northern Territory
the North South Atlantic/Pacific	the Northern/Southern hemisphere
2	'belonging to'
We use eastern, northern, etc to mean 'belonging to’ or 'typical of.
a southern accent a group of northern poets
3	capital letters
Capital letters are used at the beginning of East, Eastern, North, Northern, etc
when these come in official or well established place names.
North Carolina Western Australia
And capitals are used เท the West, the North, etc when these are names of well
defined regions.
Unemployment is high in the North. My sister Hires in the South west.
เท other cases, adjectives, nouns and adverbs generally begin with small letters.
We spent the winter in southern California.
I live in north landon. lhere's a strong north wind.
The รนท rises in the east. By sunrise we were driving south
4	prepositions
Note the difference between in the east, etc of... and Io the east, etc of.
I live in the east of Scotland.
Denmark is about 500km to the east of Scotland.
443	economic and economical
Economic refers to the science of economics, or to the economy of a country.
economic theory economic problems
Economical means 'not wasting money, time or effort'.
an economical little car an economical housekeeper
7	tens not lying' said the Minister. 7 was just being economical
with the truth.'
educate and bring up ► 410
444	efficient and effective
If somebody /something is efficient, he/she/it works in a well organised way
without wasting time or energy.
He's not very efficient: he works very slowly, and he keeps forgetting things.
Our bus service is even less efficient than our train service.
If something is effective, it has the right effect: it solves a problem or gets a result
My headaches much better. Those tablets really are effective.
I think a wide black bell would look very effective with that dress.
vocabulary · 443 economic and economical
Word Problems from A to
on 31
445	elder and eldest
Elder and eldest can doused Instead of,older ^oldest«•1^^’‘'1'. 111
the order of birth of the members of a family. The)· are only used attributive!)
(before nouns). Compare;
-	My elder/older brother has just got married.
He's three years older than me. (not ... elder than me.)
-	His eldest oldest daughter is a medical student.
She's the oldest student in her year.	_______.....___
Elder brother/skter are used when a person has only one	à IS
older, eldest Is used when there are more. An elder son/daughter is the older of
two; an eldest son/daughter is the oldest of two or more.
446	electric and electrical
Electric is used with the names of particular machines that work by electricity.
an electric motor electric blankets
Note also: an electric shock an electric atmosphere (full of excitement).
Electrical is used before more general words.
electrical appliances	electrical equipment
electrical component	electrical engineering
447	else
1	use
wwW)'. someone, something, somewhere. ทุทฟ**/)·. everybody, nobody, etc;
question words; whatever, whenever, etc little, much.
Would you like anything else'
I'm sorry. I mistook you for somebody eke.
Where eke did you go besides Madridr
Whatever eke he may be. he's not a mathematician._______	___
We know when Shakespeare was horn and when he died, hut we don t know
much eke about his life.
เท a formal style, else is sometimes used after all.
When all eke fails, read the instructions.
2	word order
Note that else comes immediately after the word it modifies.
What eke would you tike? (not น*** wouM you Me พ*?)
3	else'ร
Else has a possessive else's.
You're wearing somebody else's coat.
vocabulary · 447
4	singular only
There is no plural sirucrure with else.
I didn’t sec any other people, (not ... any else people.}
5	or else
Or else means 'otherwise', 'if not'.
Let's go, or else we'll miss the train.
Or else is sometimes used with no continuation, as a threat.
You’d belter stop hitting my little brother, or else!
6	elsewhere
This is a formal word for somewhere else.
If you are not satisfied with my hospitality, go elsewhere.
448	end and finish: verbs
1	both used
these verbs have similar meanings, and are often both possible.
What time does the concert end finish?
Term ends finishes on tune 23.
2	completing an activity
When we talk about completing something that we are doing, we usually
prefer finish.
She's always starting something new, but she never finishes anything
You'll never finish that hamburger - it's too big for you.
Are you still reading the paper? ‘No. I’ve finished'
3	changes
End is more common when there is an important change.
I decilied it was time to end our affair.
It's time to end the uncertainty - the Prime Minister must speak out.
The Second World War ended เท 1945.
We also prefer end to talk about a special way of bringing something to a close
or 'shaping' the end of something.
How do you end a letter to somebody you don't know?
The ceremony ended with a speech from the President.
End is often used to talk about physical shapes.
The road ended in a building site, (not The road finished ..)
Nouns that end in ■ร have plurals in -es.
4	-/ng forms
แทนh, but not end, can be followed by an -Ing form (► 100).
I finished teaching al 3.00. (not I ended hwhing...)
England, Britain, the United Kingdom and
the British Isles » 411
ocabulary - 448 end and finish: verbs
Word Problems from A to z
section 31
449	enjoy
Enjoy normally has an object.
'Didyou enjoy the partyr 'Yes, I enjoyed it very much .’
(11 /	Itutu it )
To talk about having a good time, we can use enjoy myself yourself. etc.
I really enjoyed myself when / went to Rome.
‘We're going to Paris for the weekend.' 'Enjoy yourselves'
'Enjoyโ with no object is possible เท informal English. Il is often used by waiters
in restaurants.
One chicken curry and one fillet of sole. Enjoy!
Enjoy can be followed by -Ing.
I don't enjoy looking after smalt children, (not ... enjoy to look ...)
450	enough__________	_____________________________
1	adjective/adverb + enough
Enough usually foltows adjectives and adverbs.
Is it warm enough for you? (not .. . enough warm,..)
You're not driving fast enough
2	enough + noun
Enough can be used before a noun as a determiner (► 171).
Hate you got enough milk? There aren't enough glasses.
Enough is occasionally used after a noun, but this is rare in modern English
exctfonfy «vtarf rtmeenough ...	I was fool enough to believe him.
Before another determiner (article, possessive, etc) or a pronoun. พ use
enough of. Compare:
I don't know enough Spanish to read this, (not ... enough of Spanish...)
I don't understand enough of the words in the notice.
3	position with adjective + noun
When enough modifies an adjective and noun together, it comes before the
adjective. Compare:
We haven't got enough big nails.
(ะะ We need more big nails - enough modifies big nails.)
We haven't got big enough nails.
(= We need bigger nails - enough modifies big.)
4	enough + infinitive; structure with for
We can use an infinitive structure after enough.
She’s old enough to do what she wants.
I haven’t got enough money to buy a car.
Infinitives can be introduced by for · noun/pronoun.
It's late enough for the staff to stop work.
There was just enough light for US to see what we were doing.
vocabulary - 450 enough
5	It's small enough to put in your pocket, etc
The subject of the sentence can be the object of the following infinitive.
(For more about this structure, ► 101.4.) Object pronouns are not normally usd
after the infinitive in this case.
rhe radio's small enough Io put in your pocket.
(not ... to put it เท your pocket.)
those tomatoes aren't ripe enough to cal (sot ... Io eat them.)
However, object pronouns are possible in structures with for.
the radio u<as small enough for me to put (it) in my pocket.
those tomatoes aren't ripe enough for the children to eat (them).
For other emmplrs oi/ur ♦ object ♦ เภทภ!!hr. ► nz.
6	the = enough; leaving out enough
The article the can be used to mean enough'.
I hardly had the strength to lake my clothes off.
I didn Ί quite have the money to pay for a meal
Time and room are often used to mean 'enough time' and 'enough room'.
Do you hair lime to look at this draft?
There isn’t room for everybody to sir down.
451	espedal(ly) and special(ly)
especially and specially
Especially and specially can often both be used with the same meaning.
It was not (e)spec tally cold.
especially meaning 'above all'
Especially is often used to mean ‘above air.
We play a lol of tennis, especially on Sundays.
The children are very noisy, especially when we have visitors.
I like all kinds of fruit, especially apples.
Especially follows a subject.
All my family like music. My father, especially, goes to as many concerts
he can. (ร» II... Especiallymy fathergnes. ..)
especially before prepositions and conjunctions
We prefer especially before prepositions and conjunctions
We go skiing quite a lot, especially in Eebruary.
I drink a lot of coffee, especially when I’m working.
specially with past participles
Specialty is used with a past participle to mean 'for a particular purpose’.
These shoes were specially made for me.
The song was specially written for his birthday.
vocabulary · 451 especial/ly) and special(ly)
Word Problems from A to z
Section
31
5	especial and special
The adjective especial IS rare. We normally use special.
He took special trouble over his work.
452	even
1	meaning
Even suggests the idea of a surprising extreme: 'more than we expect';
not even suggests 'less than we expect'.
She's rude to everybody. She's even rude to the police.
He can't even write his own name.
2	position
Even most often goes with the verb, in mid position (► 2(X>).
She has broken all her toys. She has even broken her bike.
(νογ Ftfcrt site has broken )
He speaks lots of languages. He even speaks Esperanto.
They're open every day. They're even open on Christmas Day.
Even goes at the beginning of a clause when it refers just to the subject;
and it can go just before other words and expressions that we want
Anybody can do this. Even a child can do it.
I work every day, even on Sundays.
I haven't seen my family for months - not even my parents.
3	even and also
Also (► 369) is not used to talk about surprising extremes.
Everybody helped with the packing - even the dog. (not .. . also the dog.)
4	even if and even though
Even is not used alone as a conjunction, but we can use even before
if and though.
Et en if I become a millionaireI will always be a socialist.
(not ... Even I become...)
Even though I didn't know anybody at the party, I had a nice time.
f V/|T	1
I ·ΌΙ	» • •/
I wouldn't marry you even if you were the last man in the world.
We sometimes use if to mean even if.
I'll do it if it kills me. (ะ... even if it kills me.)
5	even so; even now
Even so means 'however', ‘in spite of that'.
He seems nice. Even so. I don't really trust him. (not .. .dwendumgh. I don't
Even now can mean ’เท spite of everything that has happened’.
He left her ten years ago, but even now she still loves him.
vocabulary - 452 even
453	eventually)
Eventual and eventually mean 'final(ly)’, ‘in the end', 'after all that'. We we
them to say that something happens after a long time or a lot of effort.
The chess game lasted for three days. Androv นพ the eventual winner.
Ihe car didn't want to start, but eventually I got it going.
Eventual and eventually arc false friends' for people who speak some languages.
Ihey do not mean the same as, for instance, French éventuel/éventuellement.
Dutch eventueci or Polish ewentualny/ewentualnie, and are not used to express
the idea of possibility. For this meaning we use possible, perhaps, if,
may. might, etc.
เท our new house I'd like to have a spare bedroom for possible visitors.
(not .. . eventual Visitors.)
I'm not sure what I'll do next year. I could look for a job here, or I might
go to America, (not Eventually ill go in America . ..)
454	ever
1	ever meaning 'at any time'
Ever Is a ’non affirmative word' (► 222). It is used especially in questions to
mean 'at any time’. Compare:
Do you ever go to London by train? (■ at any time)
I always go to London by train. (= every time)
I sometimes go to Birmingham by train.
I never go to Cambridge by train. (ะ at no time)
Ever is possible in negative clauses, but never is more usual than not ever.
I don't ever want to see you again, (or I never want,..)
We also use ever after if, and with words that express a negative idea
(like nobody, hardly or stop).
Come and see US if you are ever in Manchester.
Nobody ever visits them. I hardly ever see my sister.
I'm going to slop her ever doing that again.
2	with comparatives, superlatives, as and only
Ever is used in affirmative clauses in comparisons and with only.
You're looking lovelier than ever.
What is the best book you've ever read7
It's the largest picture ever painted- He's as charming as ever.
She's Ihe only woman ever to lune climbed this mountain in winter.
3	ever ♦ perfect
Ever is often used with perfect tenses (► 47, 53) to mean ‘at any time
up to now/then‘.
Have you ever been to Greece?
Had you ever thought of getting married before you met Georgia?
vocabulary · 453 eventuality)
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
4	ever and before; ever before
Ever and before can both be used IO mean at any time in the past’, but there
is a difference, before (or ever before) refers to ÍI present event, and asks whether
it has happened at another time.
Have you (ever) been to Scotland before? (The hearer is probably in Scotland.)
Ever (without before) does not refer to a present event.
Have you ever been to Africa? ( The hearer is not in Africa.)
5	ever meaning 'always*
Ever is not normally used to mean 'always*.
I shall always remember you. (not / skttU ever remembet-you. I
But ever is sometimes used to mean 'always' in compound expressions with
adjectives and participles.
his ever open mouth	an ever-increasing debt
evergreen trees	his ever-loving wife
Ever also means 'always* in forever (or for ever} and ever since, and in a few other
expressions like ever after and Yours ever (used at the end of letters).
I shall love you forever. I've admired him ever since I met him.
455	ever so, ever such
These expressions arc often used เท informal British Fnglish to mean 'very'.
She's ever so nice. It's ever such a good film.
tor ibe dlfiereme betuven HI and such. » S97.
456	except and except for
1	except for before nouns
We generally use except for before noun phrases.
I've cleaned the house except for the bathroom
The garden was empty except for one small bird;
2	except (for) after all, any, etc
After generalising words like all, any, every, no, everything, anybody, nowhere,
nobody, whole, we often leave out for.
I've cleaned all the rooms except (for) the bathroom.
He ate everything on his plate except (for) the beans.
Nobody came except (for) lack and Emily.
But this does not happen before all, any, nobody, etc.
Except for the ba throom, all the rooms are clean, (not Exeermhedmthm&m,
vocabulary · 156 except and except for
3	except before prepositions and conjunctions	1,, ร,,,11,,,,,1,
We use except, not except for, before prepositions and conjunctions.
It's the same everywhere except in Scotland, (not . .. exceptfof^m-Scodand )
He's good-looking except when he smiles.
This room is no use except as a storeroom.
The trip was nice except that there wasn't enough snow.
4	except (for) + pronoun
After except (for) we use object pronouns, not subject pronouns.
Everybody understood except (for) me. (not . . . except I.)
We're all ready except (for) her.
5	except + verb: He does nothing except eat.
A common structure is do . .. except + infinitive without to.
He does nothing except eat all day.
I'll do everything for you except cook.
In other cases an -ing form is usually necessary.
She's not interested in anything except skiing.
You needn't worry about anything except having a great time.
6	except and without
Except (for) is only used to talk about exceptions to generalisations.
In other cases, without or but for may be better. Compare:
Nobody helped me except you.
Without / But for your help, I would have failed, (not Except for your help,
/liUM λΙ aÍ	\
For the use of but to mean 'except', ► 413.
457	expect, hope, wait and look forward
1	expect and hope, difference of meaning
Expecting is a matter of thinking rather than feeling. If I expect something to
happen, I have a good reason to think it will in fact happen. Hoping is more
emotional. If I hope for something to happen, I would like it to happen, but I do
not know whether it will. Compare:
-	I'm expecting Jack to phone at three o'clock.
I hope he's got some good news.
-	Lucy's expecting a baby. (- She’s pregnant.)
She's hoping it will be a girl.
One can expect good or bad things, but one only hopes for things that one wants.
I expect it will rain at the weekend. But I hope it won't.
2	expect and wait, difference of meaning
One waits when somebody or something is late, when one is early for
something, or when one wants time to pass so that something will happen.
Waiting is often physical - the word suggests, for example, standing or sitting
somewhere until something happens.
vocabulary · 457 expect, hope, wait and look forward
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
Compare:
-	I'm expecting a phone call from lack at three o'clock. I hope he calls on time
I hate waiting for people to phone, (not I hate expecting people to phone.)
-	He expects to get a hike for his birthday. (ธ He thinks he'll get one.)
It's hard to unit for things U‘hen you're five years old.
-	I expected her at ten, but she didn Ί turn up.
I united for her till eleven, and then went home.
Can't unit often expresses impatience.
I can't unit for the weekend!
When we say that we expect a person, this usually means that he/she is coming
to our home, office, etc. Compare:
Come and see me this afternoon. I'll expect you at 4.00.
Let's meet al the theatre. I'll be there at 6.00. (not I'll expert you M6.00.)
3	look forward: meaning
Look forward means 'think about (something เท the future) with pleasure'.
One looks forunrd to something that seems certain to happen, and that one is
glad about.
He's looking forward to his birthday.
'Seeyou on Sunday.' Ί look forunrd to it.'
4	all four expressions compared
Compare:
I expect to hear from her. (- I’m pretty sure I'll get an email from her.)
/ hope to hear from her. (- I'm not sure whether she’ll write, but I would like
her to.)
I'm uniting to hear from her. (- I need her email to come; perhaps it's late.)
I look forunrd to hearing from her. (= I feel pleasure at the thought that I will
hear from her.)
5	prepositions
Before an object, we use expect (with no preposition), hope for, unit for, and
look forunrd to.
We're expecting rain soon.
We're hoping for a lot of rain - the garden's very dry’.
We've been waiting for rain for weeks.
I'm looking forunrd to the autumn.
I expect lack to arrive about ten o'clock (not I expect for him to arrive ...)
I'm hoping for him to come up with some new ideas.
I'm still uniting for him to pay me back that money.
After look forunrd to, we use the -ing form of a verb (► JO I.2).
I look forunrd to talking to him. (not ... to talk to him.)
I look forunrd to hearing from you. (เท an email / a letter)
6	simple and progressive forms
Before an infinitive, simple and progressive forms of hope, expect and look
forunrd to ran often be used with little difference of meaning.
We hope We're hoping to get to Scotland next weekend.
We expect / We’re expecting to hear from Lucy today.
I look forunrd ' I'm looking forunrd to the day when the children
leave home.	-»
vocabulary · 157 expect, hope, unit and took forunrd
7	that-dauses
Expect and hope can be used before a rhe Γ clause.
I expect (that) she'll be here soon. I hope (that) I'll recognise her.
BUI Mil I'm loaning that she arrives.
Progressive forms of expect are no! normally used before /Irak clauses.
I expect that we'll have a lol to talk about. (Nor T’m-expeeitHgthalweU ..)
Hope (that) is often followed by a present tense with a future meaning (► 190).
I hope (that) she doesn't miss the train.
8	expect: other points
Expect is often used with object + infinitive to talk about people's duties.
We expect you to work on the first Saturday of every month.
Passive versions of the structure are also common.
Staff are expected to start work punctually at &30.
I expect (that) an be used to talk about the present or past, with the meaning
1 suppose". I have good reason to think'.
I expect you’re all tired after your journey.
Sarah isn't here. I expect she was too tired to come.
We can say that we expect something of somebody, to express our feelings about
how somebody ought to behave.
My parents expected too much of me when I was al school. They· were terribly
upset when I failed my exams.
For and »flrr wail. » 99. For น»·*. น «ท.
458	experiment and experience
An experiment is a test which somebody does to see what the result will be, to
prove something, or to see how well something works. Experiment is generally
used with the verb do. There is also a verb to experiment.
We did an experiment in the chemistry lesson, to see if you could get chlorine
gas from salt, (noi We did an experience ...)
I'm experimenting with a new way of organising my work.
An experience is something that you live through; something that happens to you
in life. Experience Is generally used with the verb have. There is also a verb
to experience.
I had a lot of interesting experiences during my year in Africa.
/vflf I MUirL at Ld	ไ
Have พน ever experienced the feding that you were going mad'
f enr	1๙11. ร'	I ijrai /rw/jirบ / '
I I	ΛizCrvrrrvrm^w	I » « I I
The uncountable noun experience means 'the knowledge that you get from
doing things*.
Hales person wanted - experience unnecessary.
vocabulary · 458 experiment and experience
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
459	explain
After explain, we use to before an indirect object.
Can you explain to me how to get to your house?
(not Can you explain ทน·...?)
I explained mv nrohlem to her. ( \< II I explained her my problem I
(not Can you explain me
facing, opposite and in front of ► 549
460	fairly, quite, rather and pretty.
adverbs of degree * 1 2 3
These four modifiers differ somewhat in strength, though their exact force
depends on the context. This entry gives a brief explanation of their use with
gradable descriptive words (► 189) in British English. Note also that quite and
rather (in the senses discussed here) are more common in British than
American English, as is fairly. For more information about quite and rather,
► 564-565?
1	fairly
Fairly generally modifies adjectives and adverbs. It does not suggest a very high
degree: if you say that somebody is fairly nice or fairly clever, for example, he or
she will not be very pleased.
‘How was the film? ‘Fairly good. Not the best one I've seen this year.’
I speak Russian fairly well - enough for everyday purposes.
2	quite
Quite (especially in British English) can suggest a higher degree than fairly.
‘How was the film? ‘Quite good. You ought to go.’
It's quite a difficult book - I had trouble with it.
He's lived in St Petersburg so he speaks Russian quite well.
Quite can also modify verbs and nouns.
I quite enjoyed myself at your party. The room was quite a mess.
3	rather
Rather is stronger than quite. It can suggest ‘more than is usual', ‘more than was
expected', 'more than was wanted', and similar ideas.
‘How was the film?1 ‘Rather good -1 was surprised.’
Maurice speaks Russian rather well. People often think he is Russian.
I think I’ll put the heating on. It's rather cold.
I've had rather a long day.
Rather can modify verbs (especially verbs that refer to thoughts and feelings)
and nouns.
I rather think we're going to lose. She rather likes gardening.
It was rather a disappointment.
For word order rules and other details of the use of rather, ► 565.
vocabulary · 460 fairly, quite, rather and pretty: adverbs of degree
4	pretty
Pretty (informal) Is like rather, bui only modifies adjectives and adverbs.
"How’s thingsr ' Pretty good. You OKT You’re driving pretty fast.
Pretty well means 'almost.
I’ve pretty well finished.
461	far and a long way
1	far in questions and negatives
Far is most common in questions and negative clauses.
How far did you walk?	the youth hostel is not far from here.
In affirmative clauses ห usually prefer a long way.
We walked a long way. (not We walked far.)
The station is a long way from here. (More natural than The station is
far from here.)
2	far in affirmative clauses
However, far is normal เท affirmative clauses with too, enough, as and so.
‘She's gone far enough.' "A bit too far.'
It’s ready as far as I know	'Any problemsT ‘OK so far.'
3	far with comparatives, etc
Far is also used (in all kinds of clauses) to modify comparatives,
superlatives and loo.
She's far older than her husband. This bike is by far the best
You're far too young to gel married.
4	before a noun: a far country
Far can be used as an adjective before a noun, meaning 'distant'. This is rather
formal and old fashioned.
long ago1 in a far country, there lived a woman who had seven sons.
462	farther and further
1	distance
We can use both farther and further to talk about distance. They mean the same
Further is not generally used in this sense in American English, and is becoming
much less common in British English.
Edinburgh is farther further away than York.
2	'additional'
Further (but not farther) can mean 'additional’, 'extra', more advanced’.
For further information, see page 6. College of Further Education
vocabulary · 461 far and a long way
Word Problems from A to
Section 31
463	feel
Feel has several different meanings. Progressive forms can be used with some
meanings, but not with others. Feel can be a linking verb (► 11), followed by
an adjective or noun complement. It can also be an ordinary verb, followed by
a direct object.
1	linking verb: / feel fine.
Feel can be used to talk about one's physical or mental sensations. Adjective or
(in British English) noun complements are used.
I feel fine.	Do you feel happy?
Andrew was beginning to feel cold.
Mien Louise realised what she had done, site fell a complete idiot. (BrE)
เท this sense feel is not normally used with reflexive pronouns (myself, etc).
lie always felt inferior when he was with her.(Mare natural than He always felt
himself inferior...)
Io	talk about feelings that are going on at a particular moment, simple or
progressive forms can be used. There is little difference of meaning.
I feel fine. / I'm feeling fine.
How do you feel? / How are you feeling?
2	linking verb: That feels nice!
Feel can also be used to say that something causes sensations. Progressive forms
1 hat feels nice!	The glass felt cold against my lips.
3	linking verb: feel like·, feel as if/though
Feel can be followed by like or as if/though.
My legs feel like cotton wool.
Alice felt as if though she was เท a very nice dream. (Alice fell like she was...
is also possible, ► 378.)
4	feel like meaning 'want'
Feel like ran also mean 'want', 'would like'.
I feel like a drink. Have you got any beer?
เท this sense, feel like is often followed by an ing form.
I felt like laughing but I didn't dare.
Compare:
I felt like swimming l- I wanted to swim.)
I felt like as if I was swimming. (ะะ It seemed as if I was swimming.)
5	reactions and opinions
Feel is often used to talk about reactions and opinions. Progressive forms are not
usually used เท this rase.
I feel sure you're right, (not I'm feeling sure...)
He says he feels doubtful about the new /dan.
I hut clauses are common.
I feel (that) she's making a mistake.	■*
vocabulary
A structure with object t to be f complement is possible in a formal sty le, but it
is not very often used.
I felt her to be unfriendly. (More normal: I fell that the M unfriendly.}
There is also a stnicture/ee/ it (+ to be) ' adjective noun
We frit it necessary to call the police.
I fell it (to be) my duty to call the police.
6	'receive physical sensations'
Feel can be used with a direct object to talk about the physical sensations that
come to US through the sense of touch.
I suddenly felt an insect crawling up my leg.
Progressive forms are not used, but we often use can feel to talk about a
sensation that is going on at a particular moment.
I can feel something biting me!
7	'touch'
heel can also be used with a direct object to mean 'touch something to learn
about it or experience if. Progressive forms are possible.
Feel the photocopier. It's very hot.
' What are you doing? ‘I'm feeling the shirts to see if they're dry.'
464	female and feminine; male and masculine
Female and male refer to the sex of people, animals and plants.
A female fox เร called a vixen.	A male duck is called a drake.
Feminine and masculine are used for qualities and behaviour that are felt to be
typical of men or women.
She has a very masculine laugh. It น«ร a very feminine bathroom.
Feminine and masculine are used for grammatical forms in some languages.
The word for 'moon' is feminine เท French and masculine in German.
465	finally, at last, in the end and at the end
1	finally
Finally can suggest that one has been waiting a long time for something.
เท this sense. It often goes in mid position (with the verb, ► 200).
After trying three limes, she finally managed to pass her exam,
losh has finally found a job.
Finally can also introduce the last element in a series, like lastly (► 284.1).
We must increase productivity. น'· must reduce unemployment. And finally,
we must compere in world markets.
2	at last
At last also suggests - very strongly - the idea of impatience or inconvenience
resulting from a long wait or delay.
lames has paid me that money at last.
When at last they found him he was almost dead.
vocabulary · 464 female and feminine, male and masculine
Word Problems from A to 2
Section 31
At last can be used as an exclamation. (Finally cannot be used in this way.)
At last! Where have you been?
Note that lastly (introducing the last item เท a series) is not the same as at last.
Firstly, น'.· nerd to increase profits. Secondly.... Thirdly. ... And lastly, น*
need to cut down administrative expenses, (not ... And al last we need Io
3	in the end
เท the end suggests that something happens after changes or uncertainty.
iVe made eight different plans for the weekend, but in the end we
went to Brighton.
I left in the middle of the film. Did they gel married in the endT
The tax man will get you in the end.
Another use of in the end is to mean ‘after we have considered everything·.
เท the end, you can Ί get fit without exercise.
เท the end, Mother knows best.
Al the end simply refers to the position of something. There is no sense of
waiting or delay.
A declarative sentence has a full stop at the end.
I wish I was paid at the beginning of the week and not at the end.
finish and end ► t >8
466	finished
Finished can be used as an adjective meaning ‘ready·.
Is the report finished yet ?
With personal subjects, to be finished IS often used in an informal style with the
same meaning as to hat e finished.
How soon will you be have finished, dear?
I went to get the car from the garage, but they weren’t hadn’t finished
first and at first ► i88
vocabulary
finished
467	fit and suit
These words do not mean exactly the same.
Fit refers to size and shape: if your clothes fit you, they are neither too big
nor too small.
These shoes don't fit me - have you got a larger size?
Suit refers to style, colour, etc.
Red and black are colours that suit me very well, (not . . . colours that fit me
very well,)
Do you think this style suits me?
Suit can also be used to say whether arrangements are convenient.
Tuesday would suit me very well for a meeting.
468 for: purpose and cause
1	people's purposes: / went for an interview.
For can be used to talk about somebody’s purpose in doing something, but only
when it is followed by a noun.
We stopped at the pub for a drink.
I went to the college for an interview with Professor Taylor.
For is not used before a verb in this sense. The infinitive alone is used to express
a person's purpose (► 112).
We stopped at the pub to have a drink.
(not . . . for having a drink OR for to have a drink)
I went to the college to see Professor Taylor.
(not . . . for seeing Professor Taylor )
2	the purposes of things: -ing forms and infinitives
T1	___1 for seeing Professor Taylor.)	,	ๆ z	9 r
For can be useti before iné -ing lorm 01 á verb to express the purpose of
a thing - what it is used for - especially when the thing is the subject.
Is that cake for eating or just for looking at?
An altimeter is used for measuring height above sea level.
When the clause has a person as subject, an infinitive is often used to express
the purpose of a thing.
We use altimeters to measure height above sea level.
3	causes of reactions
For . . . ing can also be used after a description of a positive or negative reaction,
to explain the behaviour that caused it.
We are grateful to you for helping US out.
I’m angry with you for waking me up.
They punished the child for lying.
He was sent to prison for stealing.
for1 as 1 because and since ► 377
for and during ► 440
vocabulary · 467 fit and suit
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
469	for, since, in and from: time
1	for
We use for for duration - to say how long something lasts.
for ♦ period of time
I studied the guitar for three yean al school.
That house has been empty for six months.
We go away for three, weeks every summer.
My boss will be in Italy for the next ten days
To measure duration up to the present, we use a present perfect tense (► 52.1),
not a present tense.
I’ve known her for a long time, (not I know her for a long time.)
We've lived here for 20 yéars. (not Wehveherefor^Uyears.)
Λ present tense with for refers to duration into the future. Compare:
How long are you here for? (= Until when ...?)
How long hate you been here for' (- Since when ...?)
We can often leave out for in an informal style, especially with How long...?
And for is not usually used before all.
How long hair you been waiting (for)I
We've been here (for) six weeks.
I’ve had a headache all day.
2	for and since with perfect tenses: the difference
For and since can both be used with a present perfect to talk about duration up
to the present. They are not the same. Compare:
for · period
I've known her for three days, (not ... since three days.)
It's been raining for weeks
since . starting point
I've known her since Tuesday.
It's been raining since the beginning of the month.
With a past perfect, for and since refer to duration up to a particular past
moment.
She'd been working there for a long time, (not ... since « long lime,)
She'd been working there since 1988.
3	in after negatives and superlatives
After negatives and superlatives, in can be used to talk about duration.
Illis is normal in American English.
I hair n't seen him for.'in months
It was the worst storm for!in ten years.
vocabulary · 469 for, since, in and from: time
4 from and since
From and since give the starting points of actions, events or states: the)’ say when
things begin or began.
from/since · starling point
I'll be here from three o'clock onwards.
I work from nine Io five.
From now on. I’m going to go running every day.
From his earliest childhood he loved music.
I've been waiting since six o’clock. I've known her since lanuary.
We use since (with a perfect tense) especially when we measure duration from a
starting point up to the present, or up to a past time that we are talking about.
/'tv been working since six o'clock, and I'm getting tired, (not I've been
wo^ingfrom six o'clock. .)
I had been working since six o’clock, and I was getting tired.
From is used in other cases.
Ihc shop was open from eight in the morning but the boss dldn Ί arrive till
tftt (I /	V*	I
I'll be at home from Tuesday morning (on), (not ... since Tuesday morning)
From is sometimes possible with a present perfect, especially in expressions that
mean ‘right from the start'.
She's been like that from her childhood (co.... since her childhood.)
From· Since the moment they were married, they've quarrelled.
From! Since the dawn of civilisation, people have made นพ.
470	forget and leave
We can use forget to talk about accidentally leaving things behind.
Oh damn! I've forgotten my umbrella.
However, we normally use leave If we mention the place.
Oh damn! Vve left my umbrella at home, (not I’ve forgtrttrn my umbrella
from and since: time ► 169
471	fun and funny
Fun is normally an uncountable noun. It can be used after be to say that things
or people arc enjoyable or entertaining.
The party was fun, wasn't พ?(ร or The partywarfunny.)
Anne and Sam are a lot of fun.
เท informal English, fun can also be used as an adjective before a noun.
That was a really fun party.
vocabular) · 470 forget and leave
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
Funny is «tn adjective, and is used to say that something makes you laugh.
Why are you wearing that funny hat?
.Note that funny has another meaning: ‘strange', 'peculiar*.
*A funny thing happened ' 7)0 you mean funny ha -ha or funny peculiar ?
further and farther ► 162
game and play - 555
472	get: basic structures and meanings
Get is one of the commonest words เท English, and is used in many different
ways. It is sometimes avoided in a very formal style, but it is correct and natural
in most kinds of speech and writing. The meaning of gel depends on what kind
of word comes after it. With a direct object, the basic meaning is 'obtain', 'come
to have'; with other kinds of word, the basic meaning is 'become', 'come to be'.
1	get + noun/pronoun: I got an email.
With a direct object (noun or pronoun), get usually means receive', fetch',
obtain', 'catch' or something similar. The exact meaning depends on the object.
I got an email from Lucy this morning.
Can you come anil get me from the nation when I arrive?
If I listen to loud music I get a headache.
If you gel น number 6 bus, il stops right outside our house.
Ger can be used with two objects (► a).
I^t me get you a drink.
Other meanings are sometimes possible.
I didn’t get the joke. (= understand)
I'll get you for this! (ะ punish, make suffer)
Get ·* noun is not normally used to mean 'become'. To express this meaning,
we can use get to be ♦ noun (► 172.5 below).
Wayne's getting to be a lovely kid. (not Wayne ’s gelling a lovely kid.)
2	get + adjective: getting old
Before an adjective, get usually means ‘become’.
As you get old. your memory gels worse.	My feel are getting cold.
With object . adjective, the meaning is make somebody/something become*.
It's time Io get the kids ready for school. I can't get my hands warm
We must get the house clean before your mother arrives.
lot go· «l|«ilvr (go m·. go blind tv) uxl the dilk'rerxc» belwtvn grl go. breomr. turn. CH. · '->
3	get + adverb particle or preposition: get out
Before an adverb particle (like up. away, out) or a preposition, get nearly always
refers to a movement of some kind. (For the difference between ger
and go. ► 473.)
I often get up at five o'clock.	I went to see him, hut he told me to get out.
Would you mind getting off my foot?	-*
vocabulary · 472 gel: basic structures and meanings
เท some idioms the meaning is different - e g. get to a plan· (- arrive at...):
ger orvr tomething (■ะ recover from); gel on with somebody l- have a good
relationship with)
With an object, the structure usually means 'make somebody/something move'.
You can't get hint out of bed in the morning
Would you mind getting your papers off my desk?
Have you ever tried to get toothpaste back into the tube?
The car's OK - it gets me from A to ห.
4	get ♦ past participle: get washed, dressed, married, etc
Ger can be used with a past participle, Ihis structure often has ป้ reflexive
meaning, to talk about things that we do to ourselves'. Common expressions are
get washed, gel dressed, get lost, get drowned, gel engaged married'divorced.
You've got five minutes to get dressed	She's getting married in lune.
5	get.. .ing; get + infinitive
Get.. .ing is sometimes used informally to mean 'start.. .ing’, especially
in the expressions gel moving get going.
We'd belter gel moving - it's late.
With an infinitive, get can mean 'manage', have an opportunity or ‘be allowed’.
We didn't get to see her - she was too busy.
Mien do I get to meet your new boyfriend?
Get ♦ infinitive can also suggest gradual development.
He's nice when you get to know him.
You'll get to speak English more easily as time goes by.
6	got and gotten
เท British English the past participle of gel is got. เท American English the past
participle is gotten (eg. You've gotten US in a lot of trouble) except in the
structure have got (► 24).
fl 1. Λ (น»» T. auufcuy (eg r m paid on fndayl). » 60.
»"· CMIMIK* and other นพ* OÍ grt -	· writ r<wm » แห.
473	get and gc>2 movement
Go is used to talk about a whole movement.
Ger is used when we are thinking mainly about the end of a movement -
the arrival. Compare:
-	Igo to work by car and Lucy goes by train.
I usually get there first.
-	I went to a meeting in Hristol yesterday.
I got to the meeting at about eight o’clock.
We often use gel to suggest that there is some difficulty in arriving.
It wasn't easy to get through the croud.
I don t know how we're going to gel over the river.
Can you tell me how to get to the police station?
For ger and go meaning 'become', » 394.
get, become, go, grow, etc: changes ► 394
ocahulary - 473 get and go: movement
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
474	give with action nouns
1	give a cough, etc
We can replace certain verbs by a structure with give and a noun. This often
happens in British English, for example, with verbs referring to sounds made by
people (e g. cough, cry’, scream, chuckle, laugh, shout),
He gave a cough to attract my attention.
Suddenly she gave a loud scream a nd 'fell to the ground.
2	give somebody a smile, etc
rhe structure is also used with an indirect object (เท both British English and
American English) to replace transitive verbs, especially in an informal style.
Common expressions:
give somebody a smile, a look, a kiss, a hug a call
give something a push, a kick give it a try, a go, a shot
give it a miss (BrE) not give it a thought
She gave me a strange look I'll give you a call if I hear anything.
'Perhaps salt will make it taste heller.' ΌΚ, let's give it a try.'
'Are you coming to the filmr 'No. I'm tired. I'll give it a miss'. (BrE)
He seemed to be in a bad temper, but I didn't give it a thought.

go and come » 424
go and get movement ► 473
go, become, get, grow, etc: changes ► 394
475	go!come for a ...
We can use the structure go/come for a ... เท some fixed expressions referring to
actions, mostly leisure activities. Using this structure makes the action sound
casual and probably rather short. (Compare go.. ,ing, ► 471'».) Common
examples:
go/come for a walk, a run, a swim, a ride, a drive, a drink, a meal
go for a bath, a shower
We need some fresh air. Let's go for a walk.
Would you like to come for a drink this evening?
I'm going for a shower. Can you answer my phone if it rings?
This structure is only used with certain action nouns - we would probably not
say, for example. Came for a climb with US or I'm going for a read.

vocabulary · 475 go/come for «...
476	go/come .. ring
1	go .. .ing
We use go with an -mg form to talk about activities เท which people mow about
and which do not have a fixed beginning or end, The structure is common in
expressions referring to sport and leisure activities - for example go climbing
go dancing, go fishing go hunting, go riding1 go sailing, go shooting, go skating
go skiing, go swimming go walking.
Let's go climbing next weekend.	Did you go dancing last Saturday?
Go.. ing is also used to talk about looking for or collecting things.
I think I'll go shopping tomorrow.
เท lune all the students go looking for jobs.
Anne's going fruit-picking this weekend.
We do not use go.. -ing to talk about activities that have a more definite
beginning and end (mh go boring go watching a football match).
2	come .. .ing
Come. . .mg is also possible in certain situations (for the difference between
come and go, ► 124).
Come swimming with US tomorrow.
3	prepositions
Note that prepositions of place, not direction, are used after go/come.. .ing.
I went swimming in the river, (sot I went swimming to lhe 'fee/.)
She went shopping at Harrods, (not . . Io Harrods. I
477	gone with be
Gone can be used like an adjective after be, to say that somebody is away, or that
something has disappeared or that there is no more.
She's been gone for three hours - what do you think she's doing?
You cun go out shopping but don't be gone too long.
Wien I came back my car was gone. Is the butter all gone?
tor hrrw น»«ง a» Λ past pamiplc ๙ go or cow. ► m
grateful and thankful ► 601
great, big and large ► 401
grow, become, get, go, etc: changes ► 394
vocabulary » 476 go/come.. ing
Word Problems from
Section 31
478	half
1	half (of)
We use half or half of mostly before a noun with a determiner (article,
possessive or demonstrative). We do not normally put a or the before half
เท this case.
She spend* half (of) her lime travelling (not She spends a'lhe half. ..)
I gave him half (of) a cheese pie Io keep him quiet.
When half (of) is followed by a plural noun, the verb is plural.
Half (of) my friends live abroad, (not Half of my friends lives ...)
Of is not used in expressions of measurement and quantity.
I live half a mile from here, (not .. .half of a mile...)
I just need half a loaf of bread, (not .. . hidf of a loaf. ..)
The train was half an hour late. (AmE also... a half hour...)
We use half of before pronouns.
' Did you like the booksr 'I've only read half of them '
2	no following noun
Half can be used without a following noun, if the meaning is clear.
I've bought some chocolate. You can have half, (not ... the half)
3	the half
We use the before half if we are saying which half we mean. Before a noun, of is
used in this case.
Would you like the big half or the small half?
I didn’t like the second half of the film.
4	half a and a half
Half usually comes before the article a/an. but it is possible to pul it after เท
expressions of measurement.
Could I have half a pound of grapes? ('»... a hidf pound ..)
5	one and a half
The expression one and a half goes with a plural noun. Compare:
I’ve been waiting for one and a half hours, (not ... oneand a half hour.)
I've been wailing for an hour and a half
For more information Jtout number* and counting c<pcoMk)n«v ► 122.
For hatfl ค dock Urn (eg hatfpait fu«>, ► 325.
479	happen to .. ______
Happen can be used with a following infinitive to suggest that something
happens unexpectedly or by chance.
If you happen to see Imogen, ask her to phone me.
One day I happened to get talking to a woman on a train, and she turned out
to be a cousin of my mother's.	~-
vocabulary · 479 happen to...
In sentences with ι/or in case, the idea of by chance can be emphasised เท
British English by using should before happen, but this is no longer
very common.
1*1 me know if you should happen to need any help.
I'll take my swimming things, in case I should happen to find a poo! open.
480	hardly, scarcely and no sooner
These three expressions can be used (often with a past perfect tense, ► 53)
to suggest that one thing happened very soon after another. Note the
sentence structure:
... hardly ... U'hen/before...
... scarcely... when/before...
... no sooner ... than ...
I had hardly, scarcely closed my eyes when the phone rang.
She was hardly scarcely inside the house before the kids started screaming
I had no sooner dosed the door than somebody knocked.
We no sooner sat down in the train than I fell sick.
In a formal or literary style, inverted word order is possible (► 270.7).
Hardly had I dosed my eyrs when I began to imagine fantastic shapes.
No sooner had she agreed to marry him than she started to hair doubts
481	hear and listen (to)
1	hear: meaning
Hear is the ordinary word to say that something 'comes to our ears'.
Suddenly I heard a strange noise, (wr Suddenly I listened to a strange noise.)
(.'an you hear me?
2	listen (to): meaning
Listen (to) is used to talk about paying attention to sounds that are going on. in
progress. Il emphasises the idea of concentrating, try ing to hear as well as
possible. You can hear something without wanting to, but you can only listen to
something deliberately. Compare:
I heard them talking upstairs, but I didn't really listen to their conversation.
Listen carefully, please.' 'Couldyou speak louder? I can't hear you very well'
I didn 't hear the phone because I was listening to the radio.
3	complete experiences: hear
Listen (to) is mostly used to talk about concentrating on experiences that are
going on. in progress. To talk about the result of listening: experiencing or
understanding the whole of a performance, speech, piece of music, broadcast or
other communication, we generally use hear. Compare:
vocabulary
hardly, scarcely and no
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
-	When she arrived. I uas listening to a recording of Brendel (Slaying Beethoven.
I	/ 1JWJ < M4UlfjM0	I
· · · ·	·”»Α · · •/
/ once heard Brendel play all the Beethoven concertos, (not / once listened to
fkl/w ไ
I"'	J* · · · J
-	/ U'l’jft I had more time to listen to the radio, (not ... Io hear the radio )
Did you hear listen to the news yesterday?
4	hear not used in progressive forms
Hear Is not usually used in progressive forms. To say that one hears
something at the moment of speaking, can hear is often used, especially
เท British English (► 84).
I can hear somebody coming, (not I am hearing. ..)
5	listen and listen to
When there is no object, listen is used without to. Compare:
Listen(not Ltstendel) Listen to me' (not Listen me1}
There are nmilx diftrrerxri between น». toot lai) «τκΙ autih . 575
482	hear, see. etc with that-clause
The present tense forms I hear (that)... and / see (that)... are often used to
introduce pieces of news which one has heard or seen.
I hear (that) Alice is expecting a baby.
I see (that) the firemen are going on strike.
Some other verbs can be used like this. Common examples are understand and
gather. These arc often used to check information.
7	understand you're moving to a new job.' 'Yes. that's right.’
■ I gather you clidn Ί like the party.'' What makes you say thatf
483	help
After help, we can use object · Infinitive (with or without to).
Can you help me (to) find my ring? I SOI Can you help me finding my ringฦ
I hank you so much for helping US (to) repair the car.
Our main task is to help the company (to) become profitable.
Help can also be followed directly by an infinitive without an object.
Would you like to help pack?
484	here and there
We use here for (he place where the speaker/writer iz, and there for other places.
(on the telephone) 'Hello, is Tom thereV 'No, I'm sorry, he's not here
(NOT	he 5	there )
Don Ί stay there in the corner by yourself. Come over here and talk to US. -t
vocabulary · -184 here and there
Note that here and there cannot normally be used as nouns.
This place is terrible.. แ is terrible here- (an NOT Here-iHeefiblo.)
Did you like that placer OR Did you like it there? (mrr NOT Did you like there?)
For tort «nd there! toOoard b. piurjl noun».» ITO*
485	high and tall
1	What kind of things are tall?
We use tall mostly lor people, trees, buildings with many floors, and a few other
things which are higher than they are wide (e.g. factory chimneys
or electricity pylons).
How tali are you? (not How high are you?)
There are some beautiful tall trees at the end of our garden.
เท other cases we usually prefer high.
Mount Elbrus is the highest mountain in Europe.
The garden 'ร got very high น1alls.
2	measurements
เท measurements, we use tall for people, but we prefer high for things. Compare:
I'm Im ร? tall. That tree is about 30m high.
3	distance above the ground
We use high to talk about distance above the ground. A child standing on a chair
may be higher than her mother, although she is probably not taller.
That shelf is too high for me to reach.	The clouds are very high today.
4	parts of the body
Parts of the body can be long, but not tall.
Alex has got beautiful long legs, (not .. Mil legs.)
486	hire, rent and let
1 hire and rent
Hire and rent can mean: pay for the use of something’. เท British English, rent is
used for arrangements involving a long period of time (one rents a house or a
list) For shorter periods (e.g. paying for a car. a boat, evening dress) rent and
hire can both be used.
How much does it cost to rent a two-room flat?
I need to hire/rent a car for the weekend.
Hire (out) and rent (out) can also mean ’sell the use of something’.
There's a shop in High Street that hires/rents (out) evening dress.
เท American English, rent is the normal word for both longer and shorter
arrangements; hire, in American English, normally means‘employ’.
vocabulary · 485 high and tail
Word Problems from A to 2
Section 31
2 let
Let is used เท British English, like rent (out), to talk about selling the use of
rooms, houses, etc.
We lei the upstairs room to a student
487	historic and historical
Historic is used especially for historically important places, remains,
customs, etc, and for moments which ’make history'.
We spent the summer visiting historic houses and castles in France.
Our two countries are about to make a historic agreement.
Historical means 'connected with the study of history·' or 'really existing
in history'.
historical research a historical novel historical documents
Was King Arthur a historical figure?
488	holiday and holidays
เท British English, the plural holidays is often used for the long holiday' of the
year. เท other cases we normally use the singular holiday. Compare:
Where are you going for your summer hoiidayis)?
We gel five days' Christmas holiday this year.
Next Monday is a public holiday.
Hie singular is used in the British expression on holiday (note the preposition).
I met Marianne on holiday in Norway. (NOV... on-in holidays ...)
Americans more often use the word vacation. (เท British English, vacation is
mainly used for the periods when universities arc not teaching.) Holiday is most
often used in American English for a day of pubtidy observed celebration (such
as Thanksgiving) when people do not have to work.
489	home
1	articles and prepositions
No article is used เท the expression at home (meaning 'in one's own place').
Is anybody al home? (wr 1,. «น the home?)
At is often dropped, especially in American English.
Is anybody home?
Home (without to) can be used as an adverb referring to direction.
I think I II go home, (not ... to home.)
There is no special preposition in English to express the idea of being at
somebody's home (like French chez, German bet, Danish/Swedish/Nonvegian
hos, etc). One way of saving this is to use at with a possessive.
We had a great evening at Philip's.
Ring up and see if lacqueline is at the Smiths’, could you?
vocabulary · 489 home
2 house and home
House is an emotionally neutral word: it just refers to a particular type of
building. Home is used more personally: it is the place that somebody lives in.
and can express the idea of emotional attachment to a place. Compare:
There are some horrible neu· houses in our village.
I lived there for sbÍ years, but I never really fell it was my home.
490	hope
1	tenses after hope
After / hope, we often use a present tense with a future meaning.
I hope she likes (- will like) the flowers. I hope the bus comes soon.
2	negative sentences
เท negative sentences, we usually put not with the verb that comes after hope.
I hope she doesn’t wake up. (νογ I don’t hope she wakes up.)
3	special uses of past tenses
We can use I was hoping... to introduce a polite request.
/ was hoping you could lend me some money’.
I had hotted... refers to hopes for things that did not happen.
I had hoped that lennifer would study medicine, but she didn Ί want to.
Siu more altoiM Ihr น»» ot pau น·ท»ห เท polite tpqueut » JI I. »<* I hope MM. » ws
hope, expect, wait and look forward ► 157
491	hopefully
One meaning of hopefully is 'full of hope', ’hoping'.
She sat there waiting hopefully for the phone to ring.
Another meaning is ‘it is to be hoped that' or ‘I hope'.
Hopefully, inflation will soon be under control.
Hopefully I'm not disturbing you?
492	how
1	use and word order
How is used to introduce questions or the answers to questions.
How did you do Ilf Tell me how you did น. I know how he did it.
vocabulary
Word Problems from A to z
Seclion 31
We also use how in exclamations (► 223). The word order is not the same
as In questions, compare:
-	How cold is il?
How cold il is!
-	How do you like my hair?
How I love weekends! (not How do I love weekends!)
-	How have you been?
How you’ve grown! (not How have you grown!)
When how is used in an exclamation with an adjective or adverb, this conies
immediately after how.
How beautiful the trees are! (NOT How the trees are beaufiftd!)
How well she plays! (not Howdte fdrtys writ!)
2	with adjectives/adverbs: how, not how much
We use how. not how much, before adjectives and adverbs.
How tall are you? (not How much fall are you?)
Show me how fast you can run. (not .. ■ how mueh fast...)
3	comparisons: how not used
เท comparisons we use as or like (► 515) or the way (see below), not how.
Hold il in both hands, as like / the way Mummy does.
(not . . . how Mummy does.)
4	how, what and why
These three question words can sometimes be confused. Note particularly
the following common structures.
How do you know? (not Mtydo you know?)
What do you call this? (not How do you caú this?)
What's that called? (not How fUhat crdled?)
What do you think? (NO, Howdoyou think?)
What? Mutt did you say? (not How? Hou- did you say?)
Why should I think that?
Both What about...? and How about...? arc used to make suggestions,
and Io bring up points that have been forgotten.
What How about eating out this evening?
What How about the kids? Who's going to look after them?
เท exclamations (> 223), what is used before noun phrases; and how is used
before adjectives (without nouns), adverbs and verb phrases.
What a wonderful house! How wonderful!
How you've changed!
5	how much, how many, how old, how far, etc
Many interrogative expressions of two or more words begin with how.
these are used to ask for measurements, quantities, etc. Examples:
How much do you weigh? How many people were there?
How old are your parents?	How far is your house?
How often do you come to New York?
vocabulary · 492 how
Note that English does not have a special expression to ask for ordinal numbers
(first, second, etc).
‘It's our wedding anniversary.' 'Congratulations. Which one'รุ
(not . . . the how-martyelhf)
6	the way
lhe way (► 620) can often be used instead of non interrogative how.
Note that the way and how are not used together.
Look al lhe way those cats wash each other. OK Look at how those cats ...
t VAT	I
rhe umy you organise the work is for you to decide, cm Hou. you organise...
(sot the นพุ how you organise . ..)
R>r houwz. ► ?$2 (conjunction). ► 371 (ahrrb)
R>r how rbutM X oh|em rtc (eg i*m I aik me how ihr fowrvy MwyrAu die wit up thf
money ฬ ycuf buunexj). ► 266
493	how and what... like?
1	changes: How's Ron?
We generally use how to ask about things that change - for example people’s
moods and health. We prefer urhat... like to ask about things that do not
change - for example people’s character and appearance. Compare:
-	' How's Ron? 'He’s very well:
What's Ron likeรุ He's quiet and a bit shy.'
-	'How docs she took today?'Tired.'
■ What does she look likeรุ 'Short and dark, pretty, cheerful-looking.'
2	reactions: How was the film?
We often use how to ask about people's reactions to their experiences.
What... like is also possible.
How mas the filmรุ 'Very good: (on What was the film like.. .7)
How's your sieakl How 'ร the new job?
however, although, though and but ► 371
if and when ► 623
494	ill and sick
III	and sic* are Ixith used to mean ’unwell’. (เท American English ill is less usual
except in a formal style.)
Ceorge didn't come in last week because he was ilbsick.
Ill	is not very common before a noun
I'm looking after my sick mother. (More normal than ... my ill mother.)
Be sick can meant vomit (= bring food up from the stomach) in British English
I was sick three limes in lhe night.
vocabulary · 493 how and what... like?
Word Problems from A to
Section
495	immediately, the moment, etc: conjunctions
เท British English, immediately and directly can be used as cunjunctions,
to mean ‘as soon as'.
Tell me immediately you have any news.
I knew something was wrong immediately I arrived.
Directly I walked เท the door, I smelt smoke.
The moment (that), the instant (that), the second (that) and the minute (that) can
be used in the same way (in both British and American English).
Telephone me the moment (that) you get the results.
I loved you the instant (that) I saw you.
As with other time conjunctions, we use present tenses when talking about
the future.
I'll let you know the moment I have some definite information.
in, at and on: place ► 384
in, at and on: time ► 386
in and during ► til
in and for. time - 169
496	in and into, on and onto: prepositions
1	position and direction
We generally use in and on to talk about the positions of things where they
are; and into and onto to talk about directions and destinations - where things
are going. Compare:
-	Λ moment later the ball was in the goal.
Ihe ball rolled slowly into the goal, (sot ... "เพ slowly m the goal)
-	She น1«ร walking เท the garden.
Then she walked Into the house.
-	The cal's on the roof again.
How does it get onto the roof?
Note that into and onto are normally written as single words. On to is also
possible in British English.
2	in and on for movement
After some verbs (e g. throw, jump, push, put, fall} we can use both เท and info,
or on and onto, to talk about directional movement. We prefer into!onto when
we think of the movement itself, and in!on when we think more of the end of
the movement - the place where somebody or something will be. Compare:
-	The children keep jumping into the flowerbeds.
Go and jump in the river.
vocabulary · 496 in and into, on and onto: prepositions
- เท lhe experiment, tee pul glowing magnesium into jars of oxygen.
Could you pul the ham in the fridge?
He was trying to throw his hat onto the roof.
Throw another log on the fire.
We use in and on after sit down and arrive.
He sal down in the armchair, and I sat down on the floor.
(Nor He sal down into. ,.o»i sal down onto ...)
We arrive in Athens at midday, (not usually We arrive into Athens.. i
3	info for change
We normally use into after verbs suggesting change.
When she kissed the frog, it changed into a handsome prince.
(not . . . ciwftjÇfvl tfi ft	Jffffin*.)
Can you translate this Into Chinese? (not ... translate this in Chinesen
Cut can be followed by into or เท.
Cut the onion in(to) small pieces.
And note the expression in half.
I broke it in half, (not ... into half.}
4	in and on as adverbs
In and on are used as adverbs for both position and movement.
I stayed เท last night. Come in! (noi Geme-totfe!)
What hair you got on? Pul your coal on.
in and later ► 506
in/at and to ► 385
497	indifferent
Indifferent Is not the opposite of different. It is used to say that one has no
interest in something that other people might be concerned about.
He's quite indifferent to people’s opinion of his work.
You can’t he indifferent to climate change.
Another meaning is 'not very good'.
The team's performance has been indifferent all year.
เท front of and before ► 397
in front of and opposite ► 519
in order that and so that ► 588
vocabulary · 497 indifferent
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
498	in spite of
เท spile of is used as a preposition. เท spite of + noun means more or less
the same as although ♦ clause.
We went out in spite of the tain. (ะ... although it was raining.)
We understood him in spite of his accent. (:-... although he had a strong
accent.)
เท spite of is the opposite of because of Compare:
She passed her exams in spile of her terrible teacher.
She passed her exams because of her wonderful teacher.
เท spite of can be followed by an ing form.
เท spite of having a headache I enjoyed the film.
เท spite of cannot be followed directly by a àt clause. Instead, we can use
in spile of the fact that.
He is good company, เท spite of the fact that he talks all the time
This is rather heavy: although means the same, and is more common.
เท more formal English, despite can be used in the same way as in spile of.
เท the end, at the end, at last and finally - 465
499	indeed
1	very... indeed
Indeed can be used to emphasise wry with an adjective or adverb. This is rather
formal, and is unusual in American English.
I was very pleased indeed to hear from you.
He was driving very fast indeed. Thank you very much indeed.
Indeed is unusual in this sense without very, and is not normally used after
extremely or quite.
•’tr I ■	w»·* พ· «πτκ
“ หเ··’ ’·’,νι,ιΛ *f *···« ’ ' Λ··* "Π1Γ jwr ··<»·’ · »·-
2	indeed with verb
Indeed can also be used after he or an auxiliary verb เท order to suggest
confirmation or emphatic agreement. This is rather formal. It is common in
short answers (► 308).
We are indeed interested in your offer, and would be glad to have prices.
'แร cold.' 'll is indeed:
'Henry made a fool of himself' 'He did indeed:
500	instead and instead of
1 preposition: instead of
Instead is not used alone as a preposition; we use the two words instead of.
I'll have tea instead of coffee, please, (nor.. . fnsiettdfoffee...)
vocabulary · 500 instead and instead of
Can yon uork with Sophie instead of me today, please?
Instead of is not usually followed by an infinitive.
I stayed in bed all day instead of going to work, (not ... instead of (to)
KV Ivirvrn. I
2	instead of and without
Instead of suggests that one person, thing or action replaces another. Without
suggests that one person, thing, etc is not together with another. Compare:
- Ruth was invited to the reception, but she was ill. so loti went instead of her.
(1-OU replaced Ruth.) (not ... loti went without her.)
Max and lake were invited, but Max was ill, so lake went without him.
(.Normally they would havegonc together.)
She often goes swimming without telling her mother. (Swimming and telling
her mother should go together.) (not She often goes swimming instead of
tehmg her mother-)
3	adverb: instead
Instead (without of) is an adverb. It usually begins or ends a clause.
She didn't go to Greece after all. Instead, she went to America.
Don't marry lake. Marry me instead.
We do not use instead to mark a contrast, in the sense of ‘on the other hand'.
He's a rather anti social person. On the other hand, he's very generous.
Í Sgt*	ไ
V"'1	9 J y FR )
501	its and it's
These two words are often confused by native speakers of English as well as by
foreign learners.
Its is a possessive word (like my, your).
Every country has its traditions, (sol.,, it's traditions.)
It's is the contracted form of it is or it has.
It's raining again, (not แร-faining again.)
Hate you seen my camera? It's disappeared, (not ... แร disappeared )

502	it's time
1	followed by infinitive
It's lime (or it is time) can be followed by an infinitive.
It’s time to buy a new car.
To say who should do something, we use for * object · infinitive (► 113).
It's time for her to go to bed.
vocabulary · 501 its and it's
Word Problems from A to
Section 31
2	followed by past tense with present or future reference
It's time can also be followed by a subject with a past tense verb.
The meaning is present.
It's time she was in bed. It's lime you washed those trousers.
I'm getting tired. It's time we went home.
The expression It's high time... is often used in this structure, to say that
something is urgent.
It’s high time you got a job-
journey, travel, trip and voyage ► 612
503	just
1	meanings
lust has several meanings.
a time
lust often emphasises the idea of'at this moment’ or close to the present’.
I'll be down in a minute - I'm just changing my shirt. I- right now)
Alice has just phoned, (ะ a short time ago)
Sam's still around. I saw him just last week. (ะ as recently as)
เท expressions like just after, just before and just when, just suggests closeness to
the time in question.
I saw him just after lunch. (ะ... very soon after lunch.)
b Only’, 'scarcely’
lust can mean 'only', ’nothing more than', ’scarcely'.
Complete set of garden tools for just £15.99!
I just want somebody to love me - that'ร all.
We just caught the train.
This meaning can be emphasised by only.
There was only just enough light to read by.
Can'Could I just...? can make a request seem less demanding.
Could I just use your phone for a moment?
c 'exactly'
lust often means exactly’.
■ What's the timer 'Its just four o'clock.'
Thanks. That's just what I wanted.
She's just as bad-tempered as her father.
d emphasiser
lust can emphasise other words and expressions, with the sense of ‘simply’,
’there's no other word for it'.
you're just beautiful.	I just love your dress.
vocabulary · 503 just
2	tenses
When just means 'a moment ago’, past and present perfect tenses are both
possible in British English. A present perfect is preferred when we are
giving news. Compare:
lack('s) just called. His wife’s had a baby, (lire news is the baby, not the
phone call.)
เท American English a past tense Is also very common.
'Where's SamT 'He just went out:
Alice (has) just left I just had a brilliant idea.
3	just now
lust now can mean either at this moment’ or 'a few moments ago'. Compare:
She's not in just now. Can I take a message?
I saw lake just now. He wanted to talk to you.
When just now means 'a few moments ago', two positions are possible:
a in end-position, usually with a past tense.
I telephoned Anna just now.
b เท mid position (► 200) with the verb, with a present perfect or past tense.
I('ve) just now realised what I need to do.
kind of, sort of and type of ► 592
504	know
1	know how + infinitive
Know is not followed directly by infinitives. We use know how to (► III).
I know how to make Spanish omelet les. (no 11 know to make ..)
2	object + infinitive
เท a formal style, know is sometimes followed by object ♦ infinitive.
they knew him to be a dangerous criminal.
The passive equivalent is quite common in a formal style.
He was known to be a dangerous criminal.
เท a less formal style, tkal clauses are more usual.
ไhey knew that he was a dangerous criminal.
Know means ’experience’ in the common structure I've never known - object ♦
infinitive, an infinitive without to is possible เท British English.
I've never known it (to) rain like this.
3	tenses
Know cannot usually be used in progressive forms (► 4).
I know exactly what you mean, (not I am knowing...)
A present perfect tense is used to say how long one has known somebody
or something. (► 52 for more details.)
We've known each other since 1994. (noI Wekm-wemh other einee 1994;)
vocabulary · 504 know
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
4	know and know about/of
Know · object is used mainly to talk about knowledge that comes from
direct personal experience. เท other cases, we normally use know about, of.
have heard of or another structure. Compye:	1
'You don't know my mother, do youT 'No, I've never met her.·
We all know about Abraham Lincoln, (not We all know Abraham Lineobt.)
5 know and find out, etc
Know is not normally used to talk about finding something out: to know
something is to have learnt it. not to team it. To talk about getting knowledge
we can use for example find out. gel to know, learn, hear, can tell.
She’s married: ■ Where did you find that outr (not .. -Wheredid you
I น/ท/touavel round the world and gel Io know people from different
countries, (not ... and know people ..)
He's from Liverpool, as you can tell from his accent, (not .. .-asyeu can Know
from his accent.)
b / know and I know it
Note the difference between these two short answers.
I know refers to facts - it could be completed by a à clause.
'You're late/ Ί know/ (- I know (hat I m late.)
I know II generally refers to things - It replaces a noun.______
Ί went to a nice restaurant called rhe Elizabeth last night. I know it
(- I know the restaurant.)
tor พหเ ot น.เท«(«น ioow. . mi >
large, great and big ► 104
505	last, the last, the latest
1 last week, month, etc; the last week, month, etc
last week, month, etc (without the) is the week, month etc just before this one
If I am speaking in July, last month was lune; in 2016. last year was 2015.
rhe last week, month, etc is the period of seven/thirty. etc days up IO toe
moment of speaking. On luly 15th 2016. the last month is the period Bom
June 16th to July 15th; the last year is the 12 months starting เท July 2015.
ocahulary · 505 last the last, the latest
Compare:
- I was ill hut นeek. but I'm OK this week, (noi I "ê dl Ike last week ...)
I've had น cold for the last นพเ. I feel terrible.
We bought this house last year.
We've lived here for the last year, and we're very happy with the place.
The difference between next and the next is similar. » 533
2	the last three ..etc
Note the word order in expressions with numbers.
I've been busy for the last three months, (not ... for t In-three hut months.)
We generally say the last few days! weeks, etc, not the last days/ weeks, etc.
The last few days have been busy, (wot The kuI days ...)
3	the last in a series
The last can also mean the last in a series'.
เท the last week of the trip something funny happened.
This is going to be the last Christmas I'll spend at home
4	latest and last
We can use latest to talk about something new. and last to mean the one
before’. Compare:
Her latest hook’s being published next week, (not Her last book...)
She thinks it's much better than her last one.
- He's enjoying his latest job. (not He's enjoying his last job )
Hut it doesn’t pay as much as his last one.
f,n l.™> wilh ทน <1 Ihr Ian แพ
506	later and in
With a time expression, we generally use later to mean 'after that lime', and in
to mean 'after now'. Compare:
She got married on her 18th birthday; six months later she was divorced.
Penny's coming on fufy 1st, and Torn will arrive about a week later.
I'll see you เท a few days, (no: I'll see you a few days lateri)
But without a time expression, later can be used to mean 'after now’.
Bye’ See you later'
vocabulary · 506 later and in
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
507	lay and lie
There are three similar verbs thai can be confused: lay (regular except for
spelling), lie (irregular) and lie (regular).
1	lay
Lay is a regular verb except for its spelling. Its forms arc:
infinitive: (to) lay	past participle: laid
ing form: laying	past: laid
lay means 'put down carefully' or put down flat'. Il has an object.
Lay the tent dou/ท on the grass and I'll see how to put it up.
I laid the papers on the table and sat down, (not l-lar...)
Note the expressions lay a table ( I Hit plates, knives, etc on a table) and
lay an egg (a bird’s way of having a baby).
2	lie (irregular)
The forms of the irregular verb lie arc:
infinitive: (to) lie past: lay
•Ing form: lying past participle: lain (used mostly เท a formal literary style)
Lie (irregular) means ‘be down', ‘be become horizontal'. It has no object
Don't lie เท bed all day. Get up and do some work, (soi Don'thty...)
I lay down and closed my eyes, (not I laid down ..)
3	lie (regular)
The regular verb lie (lied) means 'say things that are not true’
You lied to me น/hen you said you loved me.
4	dialect forms
เท many British and American dialects, different forms of lay and irregular lie are
used. Lay is often used in cases where standard English has lie.
I’m going to lay down for a few minutes. (Standard English ... lie down ...)
508	learn
1	forms
Learn is often irregular in British English (learn)learnt) and normally regular in
American English (learn learned). For otiler verbs like this, ► 1.2.
2	learn (how) to...
To talk about consciously learning a method or technique for doing something,
we can use learn to... or learn how to...
She enjoyed teaming (how) to look after young animals
It's time you learnt (how) to change the oil in the car.
vocabulary · 508 learn
When we talk about less conscious skills and other kinds of knowledge,
we generally use learn to....
Children usually learn to walk at around one year old.
เท the new job, I soon learnt to keep my mouth shut.
leave and forget ► 170
509	left
The past participle of leave - left - can be used in a special way, to mean
remaining', 'not used', 'still there*.
What did you do with the money that was left ?
After the explosion, only two people were left alive.
Left is common after there is and have got.
There's nothing left เท the fridge.
I haven't got any money left: can you get the rickets?
lend and borrow ► I(น'.
510	lesser
Lesser is used in a few expressions (in a rather formal style) to mean 'smaller’
or not so much'.
the lesser oj two evils a lesser-known writer
511	lest
Lest has a similar meaning to in case (» 248) or so that... not (► 588). It is rare
in British English, and is found mostly in older literature and in ceremonial
language. It IS a little more common เท formal American English.
They kept watch all night lest robbers should come.
We must take care lest evil thoughts enter our hearts.
lest can be followed by a subjunctive verb (► 232).
The government must act. lest the problem of child poverty grow worse.
512	let
1	followed by infinitive without to
Let is followed by object + infinitive without to.
We usually let the children stay up late on Saturdays, (noi .. ,4et the children
to stay / staying. ..)
She didn't let me see what she was doing. (.ร·or... let me saw...)
vocabulary
left
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
Note the expressions lei___know (ะ tell, inform) and lei... hair (- send. give).
I'll let you know my ira tri datei next week.
Could you let me half the bill for the car repair?
let no of means 'stop holding'.
Don't let go õf Mummy's hand.
2	not used in passives
This structure is unusual in passive forms: we prefer allow.
After questioning he was allowed to go home.
3	with object + preposition / adverb particle
Irt can he followed by an object and a prepositional phrase or adverb particle
expressing movement.
You’d better let the dog out of the car.
Let him in. could you? those kids let my tyres down.
This structure is also common in the passive.
lie was let out of prison early for good behaviour.
For let Inirodixir* first And third person on perlite, (c« left go far « นธนไ let me เท'·.
let fie prayert firgm). · 225. For mo-e about Infinitive -«hoot พ.· 91.
let, allow and permit ► 165
let, rent and hire ► 4H6
lie and lay ► 507
513	life: countable or uncountable noun
when we talk about life in general, or about a kind of life, life is normally
uncountable.
Life is complicated. Anna enjoys life.
I think I uould enjoy city life, (not . . . a ehy life.)
When we describe particular people’s lives, life is normally countable.
My grandmother had a hard life, (not .. . had hard life )
My mother's parents lived interesting lives.
514	like: verb
1	not used in progressive forms
Like is not usually used in progressive forms (► I).
' What do you think of the soup?' Ί like it.' (NOT... I'mMingil.)
vocabulary - 514 like: verb
2	not used without an object
like cannot normally be used without an object.
'How do you feel about balletr Ί like it: (not ...I like.)
For exceptions, ► 514.7 below.
3	very much: position
We can use I Tty much with like, but nut very alone.
I very much like his latest film, (not I eery like his latest film.)
Very much does not come between like and its object (► 196).
I like you and your sister very much. <« I very much like you and your sister.
(noi I Me eery muth you and your sister.)
4	like.. .ing: enjoyment
To talk about enjoying activities in general, we can use like.. ./ng (especially
common in British English) or like + infinitive.
I really like walking ' to walk เท the woods.
Children always like listening / to listen to stories.
To talk about enjoying something on one occasion, we use like,, .ing.
I really liked working with him on his boat last week.
Like « object · verb is possible.
I don't like people phoning to phone me เท the middle of the night.
5	like + infinitive: choices and habits
We can use like * infinitive to talk about choices and habits.
I like to do the shopping early on Saturday mornings.
When I'm pouring tea I like to put the milk in first.
Not like to can mean think it better not to'.
‘Why didn't you tell me before?’ Ί didn't like to disturb you al home.'
Like ♦ object . infinitive is possible.
She likes the children to go to bed early during the week.
6	would like
We use would like · infinitive as a polite way of saying want', especially in
requests and offers.
I 'd like two kilos of tomatoes, please.
'Would you like to danceΓ ■ Fes. ok: (not Would you like dancing?...)
Do you like...? is not used in this way.
Would like to can be used instead of repeating a whole infinitive (► 2H0).
'How about playing tennis?' ‘I’d like to.'
Polite requests often begin If you would like...; the following clause is
sometimes dropped.
if you would like to take a scat, I'll sec if Mr Smithers is free.
If you would like to come this way...
Would is sometimes dropped in this structure.
If you like to come this way...
I ท- u«ubf Mr wilh . pnfccl เท(หห-»T (m I	Mr to hair หห rta/เ . MX
vocabulary · 514 like: verb
Word Problems from A to 1
Section 31
7 if you like, etc
When wc oiler people a choice, we often use like to mean 'want (to)· เท
subordinate clauses. Note that to is not used.
'Can I KO nou>?' 'If you like: (noi Ify&H /rte-f®)
Do It any way you like.	Come when you like.
You can sit wherever you like.
515	like and as: similarity, function ______________
We can use like or as to say that things arc similar.
We can also use as to talk about function - the jobs that people or things do.
1	like (similarity): like me
Like can be a preposition. We use like, not as, before a noun or pronoun to talk
about similarity.
like ‘ noun'pronoun
My sister looks like me. (not .. ■ as me.)
lie ran like the wind, (koi ...พ, the wmd.)
Like his parents, he is a vegetarian.
We can use very, quite and other adverbs oi degree before like.
He's very like his father. She looks a hit like Queen Victoria.
We can use like to give examples.
She's good at scientific subjects, like mathematics, (noi .. as mathematics)
เท mountainous countries, like Peru. ...
2	as (similarity): as I do
As is a conjunction We use it before a clause, and before an expression
beginning with a preposition.
as . clause
as ‘ preposition phrase
Nobody knows her as I do.
We often drink tea with the meal, as they do in China.
เท 1939, as in 1911, everybody seemed to want war.
On Friday, as on Tuesday, the meeting will be at 8.30.
3	like I do (informal)
เท modern English, like is often used as a conjunction Instead of as. this is most
common in an informal style.
Nobody loves you like I do.
4	inverted word order: as did all his family
เท a very formal style, as is sometimes followed by auxiliary verb · subject (note
the inverted word order, ► 270).
She นพ a Catholic, as were most of her friends.
He believed, as did all his family, that the king was their supreme lord. -»
vocabulary · 515 like and as: similarity, function
5	as you know1 etc
Some expression* beginning with as are used IO introduce facts which are
common ground' - known IO both speaker; writer and listener; reader.
Examples are as you know, as we agreed, as you suggested.
As you know, next Tuesday'ร meeting has been cancelled.
I am sending you the bill for the repairs, as we agreed
There are some passive expressions of this kind - for example as is well known;
as was agreed. Note that there is no subject it after as in these
expressions (► 256).
As is well known, more people gel colds in wet weather, (not At it ά well
I am sending you the bill, as was agreed, (not .. .as it เพagreed.)
6	comparison with as and like after negatives
After a negative clause, a comparison with as or like usually refers only to
the positive part of what comes before.
I don't smoke, like Megan (Megan smokes.)
I am nor a Conservative, like Joe. (Joe is a Conservative.)
Before a negative clause, the comparison refers to the whole clause.
Like Emily, I don't smoke. (Emily doesn’t smoke.)
Like lames. I am not a Conservative. (James is not a Conservative.)
7	function or role: He worked as a waiter.
Another use of as is to say what function or role a person or thing has -
what jobs people do, what purposes things are used for, what category they
belong to, etc. เท this case, as is a preposition, used before a noun.
He worked as a waiter for two years, (not ... like a waiter.)
Please don't use that knife as a screwdriver.
A crocodile starts life as an egg.
Compare this use of as with like.
As your brother, I must warn you to he careful. (I am your brother.)
Like your brother. I must warn you to be careful. (I am not your brother, hut
he and I have similar attitudes.)
Not* that as oítrn çronouncrd 37,' (► II
to< co fl part Mini with as	as. ► 20X tor atilt. ► 363. tor ftttf tnvead OÍ as if. »
tor tikr used III |OWI two infinitive structure·. ► N .4.
like and as if - 37Λ
516	likely
1	meaning
Likely is an adjective with a similar meaning to probable.
I don't think a Labour victory is likely.	Mud's a likely date for the electionI
The opposite is unlikely.
Snow is very unlikely.
Note also the informal adverb phrases very/rnost likely.
I think she’ll very/most likely be late.
vocabulary · 516 likely
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
2	it is (บท)likely + that-clause
We can use // as a preparatory subject or object for a rWdause (- 268-269).
Il	s likely that the meeting will go on late.
I thought it unlikely that she would come back.
3	infinitive after be (un)likely
fíe 1’ ''1"/''*๗·’'often followed by an infinitive.
I'm likely to be busy tomorrow.	Do you think it s likely to rain'
He ร unlikely to agree
listen (to) and hear ► 481
little and small ► 580
lonely and alone » -0,7
(a) long way and far ► 161
517	long and (for) a long time
1	long in questions and negatives
long (meaning (for) a long time') เร most common เท questions and negative
clauses, and with restrictive words like hardly, seldom.
Have you been waiting long'	It doesn't take long to get to her house.
She seldom stays long.
2	(for) a long time in affirmative clauses
เท affirmative clauses we usually prefer (for) a long time.
a‘°"K ,ime' . ๗'.'' à ' «"***· (Ml I —kmg. ..)
It takes a long time to get to her house, (not แ hikes long...)
3	long in affirmative clauses
However. long is used เท affirmative clauses with loo. enough, as and so, and เท a
few other common expressions.
The meeting went on much loo long.
Ijv been working here long enough Time to get a new job.
You can slay as long as you want.
Sorry ! took so long I 'll be back before long.
. * [๘'* àràg all daylong (also all nighl/week'year long)
à used เท affirmative clauses to modify adverbs and conjunctions.
We used to tor in Paris but that was long before you were born.
long after the accident he used to dream that he was dying.
Long ago, in a distant country, there lived a beautiful primess. (rather formal)
vocabulary · 517 long and (for)
time
4	for a long time in negative clauses
When for a long time is used in a negative clause, it sometimes has a different
meaning from for lonn. Compare:
-	She didn’t รpeak for long. ( She only spoke for a short time.)
She didn't speak for a long lime. (Illis could mean 'She was silent for a long
time' - the same as For 1a long time she didn't speak).
-	He didn't work for long. (■ะ I le soon stopped working.)
He didn't work for a long time. (This could mean 'He was unemployed
for a long time' - the same as For a long time he didn't work).
The reason for the difference is to do with the 'scope of negation': in the first
and third sentences, not goes with for long, but in the second and fourth
for a long lime is outside the influence of not (it could go at the beginning
of the clause).
5	How long are you here for?
Questions like How long are you here for? refer to the future. Compare:
'How long are you here forT 'Until the end of next week.'
How long have you been here forT 'Since last Monday.'
6	comparative
Ihe comparative of for a long time is (for) longer.
I hope you'll stay longer next time, (not ...fora longer lime:)
518 look
1	linking verb (= 'seem')
Look can mean 'seem' or 'appear'. เท this case it is a linking verb (► 11) and can
lie followed by adjectives or (เท British English) nouns.
You look angry - what'ร the matter? (not You look angrily...)
I looked a real fool when I fell เท the river. (BrE)
The garden looks a mess (BrE)
To talk about a temporary appearance, we can use simple or progressive forms;
there is not much difference of meaning.
You look / You're looking very unhappy. What‘ร the matter?
Look can be followed by like or as i/l» 378). Progressive forms are not usually
used เท this case.
She looks like her mother.
It looks as if H's going to rain, (not It's looking as tf...)
She looks as if she's dreaming
She looks like she's dreaming, (informal) (not She looks like dreaming.)
Look like.. .ing... (informal) is used with future reference เท British English.
It looks like being a wet night. (= It looks as if it will be ...)
Ixtok · infinitive is also sometimes used in Informal British English.
The team look to repeat their success. (-It looks as if they will...)
vocabulary · 518 look
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
2	ordinary verb (= 'direct one's eyes’)
When look means ‘direct one’s eyes’, it is used with adverbs, not adjectives.
Before an object, a preposition is necessary (usually at).
The boss looked at me angrily, (koi I he boss looked al me angry.)
Λ preposition is not used when there is no object.
look’. H's changing colour, (koi Loolt-fdL. ..)
3	not followed by if
Before if or whether, we use see or look to see. not look.
Could you see If Anna's in the kitchen? (not Could you look if Anna's
in tin* kifrhrrt z)
'What are you doingr 'I'm looking to see whether these batteries are OK.
(not Ten looking whether. ..)'
4	look after and look for. fetch
These are not the same. Look after means 'take care of; look for means ’try to
find'. Compare:
Could you look after the kids while I go shopping?
I spent ages looking for her before I found her.
Fetch, not look for, is used in British English, if we know where people or
things are.
I 'm going to the station at three o’clock to fetch Daniel.
tor/ooi'nuxl in persuading. » น·'!.’.	Kir I hr (Mrience brs-fcn ti»! (at). iron* น nd พ·. · 7.
tor orher 11 «•เ of look, tee a B>xl dictionary
look (at), see and watch ► 575
look forward, hope, expect and wait ► 457
519	lose and loose
lose (pronounced Iนะ/?) is an irregular verb (lose - lost - lost).
IMS? (pronounced 'เบะร/) is an adjective (the opposite of tight).
I must be losing weight - my clothes all feel loose, (koi I must be
iruiklitu k. nil ί 1
■พ*·r»jL พ»·ΑΠΙ · « · J
520	loudly and aloud
Loudly is used (like loud) to talk about the strength of a noise.
The opposite is quietly.
They were talking so loudly I couldn't hear myself think.
Aloud is often used with the words read and think, to say that words are spoken,
and not just said’ silently in the head.
She has a very good pronunciation when she reads aloud
What did you sayT Oh, nothing. I was fust thinking aloud:
vocabulary · 520 loudly and aloud
521	magic and magical
Magic is the more common word, and is used in a number of fixed expressions.
a magic wand (- a magician's stick)
the magic word a magic carpel
Magical is sometimes used instead of magic, especially in metaphorical senses
like ’mysterious’, ’wonderful’ or ‘exciting’.
It was a magical experience.
522	make: prepositions
We usually say that something is made of a particular material.
MM things seem to be made of plastic these days.
AH oar furniture is made of wood·
When a material is changed into a completely different form to make something
we often use make from.
Paper is made from wood. (noi Paper is made of wood)
When we talk about the process of manufacture, we can also use out of
He made all the window frames out of oak: it took a long time.
To mention one of several materials (e.g. in cooking), we can use make with.
'The soup's good: Ύα / make it with lots of garlic.'
F<»< tjuulhú ttructufe* make (e.g He made US ► 107.
make and do ► 415
male and masculine ►
523	marry and divorce
1	get married/divorced
เท an informal style, gel married and gel divorced are more common than marry
and divorce when there is no object.
Ι/du and toe got married Iasi week. (Lulu and loe married...
is more formal.)
The Robinsons are getting divorced.
เท a more formal style, marry and divorce are preferred.
Although she had many lovers, she never married.
After three very unhappy years they divorced.
2	no preposition before object
Before a direct object, marry and divorce arc used without prepositions.
She married a builder, (not She married with a builder.)
Andrew's going to divorce Carola.
vocabulary · 521 magic and magical
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
3	get/be married to
We can also use get'be married to with an object.
She gal married to her childhood sweetheart.
I’ve been married to you for 25 years and I still don't understand you.
524	the matter (with)
We use the matter (with) after something, anything, nothing and what.
It means 'wrong (with)’.
Something's the matter with my fool. Is anything the matter?
Nothing'ร the matter with the car - you're just a bad driver.
What's the matter with I-rank today?
There is often used as a preparatory subject' (► 20).
There's something the matter with the TV.
Is there anything the matter?
525	maybe and perhaps
These two words mean the same. They are both common. เท British English.
perhaps is used more often than maybe in a formal style, and in this case it may
go in mid position (► 200).
Maybe·Perhaps It'll stop raining soon.
lultui Caesar is perhaps the greatest of Shakespeare's early plays.
Perhaps is often pronounced ’praps' by British people.
526	mean
1	questions
Note the structure of questions with mean.
Excuse me. What does 'hermetic' mean? (run What means hermetic'?)
Note also the preposition in What do you mean by 'hermetic'? (ะ In what sense
are you using the word?)
2	mean and think, meaning and opinion
Mean and meaning are ’false friends’ for speakers of some European languages.
They are not usually used for think or ’opinion’.
I think that Labour will win the next election. ("ท I mean that labrna
1» ulJ Utiti \
Wui 1*1’· · · · I
what's your opinion? (.KOT What's your meaning?)
3	structures
Mean (■ intend, plan) can be followed by (object) * infinitive.
Sorry - I didn't mean to Interrupt you.
Did you mean lack to pay for everybody?
vocabulary
mean
Mean l- involve, have as a result) can be followed by a noun or an -ing form.
The Fantasians have Invaded Utopia. This means war!
If you decide to try the exam, it will mean studying hard.
4	/ mean
I mean is used informally as a ‘discourse marker' IO introduce explanations or
additional details.
He's funny - I mean, he's really strange.
It was a terrible evening. I mean, they all sat round and talked politics.
Would you like to come out tonight? I mean, only if you want to, of course.
When I mean introduces a comment it can be close to / think or I feel, but it is
not followed by that.
A hundred fsounds for a thirty-hour week. I mean. H's not right, is it?
(hill Mil / (hill it'i not	I
เท informal speech. I mean often acts as a connector or filler', with little
real meaning.
let’s go and see lake on Saturday. I mean, we could make an early start...
I mean is also used to introduce corrections.
She lives in Southport - I mean Southampton.
5	What do you mean ...?
What do you mean ...? can express anger or protest.
What do you mean. I can't sing?
What do you mean by waking me up at this time of night?
6	no progressive form
Mean is not normally used in progressive forms when it refers to meanings.
What does that strange smile mean? (NOr when is that strange smile meaning?]
But perfect progressive forms can be used to refer to intentions.
I've been meaning to phone you for weeks.
527	means
1	singular and plural ending in •ร
Both the singular and the plural of means end in ร
เท the Pith century a new means of communication was developed -
the railway, (sot... - Mew mean of ernnmumenbon . ..)
There are several means of transport on the island.
2	by all/any/no means
Ry all means is not the same as by all possible means. It is used to give
permission or to encourage somebody to do something, and means of course'
or ‘it is all right to ..Compare:
Can I borrow your sweater?" 'By all means.'
By all means gel a new coat, but don't spend more than £1.10.
We must help her by all possible means. (ร'ท We must help Iter byฟเmeans >
vocabulary · 527 means
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
By no means (or not try any means) is not the opposite OÍ by all means. It เร
similar to definitely not, or not by a long way.
'Is that all you've got to say? By no means *
Galileo was by no means the first person to use a telescope.
528	mind: do you mind, etc
1	meaning and use
Mind can mean 'dislike', 'be annoyed by', 'object io'. We use mind mostly เท
questions and negative clauses.
1)0 you mind the smell óf tobaccoรุ 'Not al all.'
1)0 you mind if we leave a bit earlier today!	I don't mind if you use my car.
After mind, we can use an Ing form, or object · -/ng form.
1)0 you mind uniting a few minutes! (wr .. .-t&^érúf-...)
I don't mind you coming in late if you don’t wake me up.
2	Would you mind...?
We can use Would you mind...? to ask people to do things, or to ask for
permission.
Would you mind opening the window1 (ะ Please open ...)
Would you mind if I opened the window!
3	Do/Would you mind my.. .ing?
เท น slightly more formal style, we can use my. your, etc with an ing form
after mind (► 94.3-94.4).
Do you mind my smoking! (More informal:... me smoking!
(oa ...if I smoke!)
4	answers
After Would. Do you mind...?, we use Vo or Not al all (more formal) to give
permission (but we often add more words to make the meaning quite clear).
Do you mind if I look at your paper รุ ‘No. please do / that'ร OK / sure.'
5	tenses
เท subordinate clauses after mind, a present tense is usually used if we want to
express a future meaning (► 231).
I don't mind what the children do after they leave home.
(NOT I t	the (h f	wdl du . 11)
529	miss
1	'fail to contact', 'be late for*
Miss often expresses the idea of failing to contact somebody/something, or being
late for somebody something.
How could he miss an easy goal like that!
Ihe station's about five minutes' walk, straight ahead. You can't miss it.
If you don’t hurry we’ll miss the train, (not ... lose the train.)
You've just missed her - she went home five minutes ago.
vocabulary
miss
An -big form can be used after miss.
I got in too late and missed seeing the news on TV.
2	‘be sorry to be without’
We can use miss to say that we are sorry because we are no longer with
somebody, or no longer have something.
Will you miss me when I'm away?
He's not happy in the country - he misses city life.
Note that regret is not used in the same way. Compare:
I miss working with you. (ะ I'm sorry I’m no longer with you.)
I regret working with you. l- I’m sorry I was with you.)
3	'notice the absence of'
Another meaning of miss is ‘notice that somebody something is not there’.
The child ran away in the morning, but nobody missed her for hours.
4	miss not used
Miss is not used simply to say that somebody has not got something.
เท some of the villages they haven't got electricity, (not ... they miss
Wrt’/FKV/v)
เท a formal style, the verb or noun lack can be used to express this idea.
... they lack electricity.
I am sorry that lack of lime prevents me from giving more details.
5	missing
Missing is often used as an adjective, meaning lost'.
When did you realise that the money was missing?
Ihc missing children were found at their aunt'ร house.
We can use missing after a noun. This often happens in clauses beginning with
there is.
There's a page missing from this book.
เท an informal style, a structure with have... missing is also possible.
We've got some plates missing - do you think Luke's borrowed them?
He had several teeth missing
the moment: conjunction - 195
530	name
Λ person's name is the whole expression that identifies them for example
Andy Harlow, William Shakespeare, Carol lane Griffiths. Naseem Khan, Li Wei.
rhe word name does not mean just one or other part of this - though of course
only one part may be used, depending on the situation.
Name, please?' ‘Alan Bennett.‘
Hi. Come in. What's your name.' 'Jenny.'
My name's Smith. I have an appointment with Mr Andrews.
vocabulary · 530 name
Word Problems from A to z
Section 3 I
The surname, family name or last name is the part which, in many cultures, IS
typically passed from parents to children for example Harlow. Shakespeare.
First names, Christian names or given names (AmE) are the parts which children
are given at birth (or example jessica. George Thomas, Alice Catherine.
(The expression Christian name is generally avoided in multi cultural contexts.)
Americans often use (WO given names, or one and an initial (e.g. Philip c
VI alter, F. Scott Fitzgerald. The second of these is generally called the middle
name'. British people use middle names less often.
Note that the terms first name and last name can sometimes cause confusion,
since in some cultures it is common to give the family name first.
531	near (to)
Near can be used a» a preposition. Near to Is also possible with the same
meaning, but is less common.
We live near (to) the station. I put my bag down near (to) the door.
She was near (to) despair.
Near (to) can be followed by an ing form.
I came very near (to) hitting him.

the dlllermtr twiwrrn nra'rii »n<l ntII ► ■ <
near and by » 115
nearest and next ► 533
nearly, almost and practically ►
532	need
1 ordinary verb: Everybody needs to rest.
Need most often has ordinary verb forms, the third person singular has ร,
and questions and negatives are made with do. Need is usually followed
by an infinitive with to.
Everybody needs to rest sometimes.
Do we need to reserve seats on the train?
2 modal auxiliary forms: he needn't; need I?
Need can also has* the same present tense forms as modal auxiliary verbs:
the third person singular has no ร, and questions and negatives are made
without do. tn this case, need is normally followed by an infinitive without to.
She needn't reserve a seat - there'll be plenty of room.
Ihese forms are used mainly in negative sentences (needn't); but they arc also
possible in questions, after if, and in other ’non affirmative' structures (► 222). -»
vocabulan - 532
You needn Ί fill in a form.	Need I fill Ina form f
I wonder if I need fill เท a form.	This is the only form you need fill in.
Bin NO I You need fdlinn form.
These forms are more common in British English; in American English have to
don’t have to are preferred.
3	needn't, need Ιλ immediate necessity
These modal forms of need normally refer to immediate necessity. They are
often used to ask for or give permission - usually permission not to do
something. They are not used to talk about habitual, general necessity.
Compare:
Its OK - you needn’t / don’t need to pay for that phone call.
You don’t need to pay for emergency calls เท most countries.
(ΝΟΓ Yea needn’t pay... inmost countries)
4	talking about the future
Present tense forms of need are used when making decisions about the future
Need I come in tomorrow f
Tell her she doesn't need to work tonight.
Will need to... can be used to talk about future obligation, and give advice for
the future. It can make orders and instructions sound less direct.
We'll need to repair the roof next year.
You'll need to start work soon if you want to pass your exams.
You’ll need to fill in this form before you see the Inspector.
►or urnilur UM·* of hai* to, » 7l.
5	need.. .ing: The sofa needs cleaning.
After need an ing form can be used with the same meaning as a passive
infinitive, especially เท British English.
That sofa needs cleaning again. (- ... needs to be cleaned ...)
A structure with object · .ไ .ing or past participle is also possible in some cases.
You need your head examining. (BrE) (on___examined. 1
6	need not have...
If we say that somebody need not have done something, we mean that he or she
did it, but that it was unnecessary - a waste of time.
Eon needn’t hate woken me up. I don't have to go to work today.
I needn’t hate cooked so much food. Nobody was hungry.
On the other hand, if we say that somebody did not need to do something, we
are simply saying that it was not necessary (whether or not it was done).
Compare:
I	needn’t hate watered the flowers, lust after I finished it started raining
II	started raining so I didn't need to water the flowers.
Need never have... Is a more emphatic version of need not have...
I need never hair packed all that suncream - it rained every day.
7	need not and must not
Need not or do not need to is used to say that there is no obligation; must not is
used to say that there is an obligation not to do something.
vocabulary · 532 need
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
Compare:
You needn't tell Jennifer - the already knows.
You mustn’t tell Charlotte - I don't want her to know.
Need not is also sometimes used to say that something is not necessarily true.
'She looks quite ill. I’m sure it's flu: 'll needn't be maybe she's just
over-tired.'
533	next and the next, nearest
1 next week, month, etc; the next week, month, etc
Next week, month, etc (without the) is the week, month, etc just after this one.
If I am speaking in July, next month Is August; เท 2016. next year is 2017.
The next week, month, etc Is the period of seven, thirty, etc days starting at the
moment of speaking. On July 15th 2016, the next month is the period from
July 15th to August 15th; the next year is the period from July 2016 to July 2017.
Compare;
- Goodbye - see you next week, (not ... -see you the-ttexfweek.)
I'll be busy for the next week. (- the seven days starting today)
Next year will be difficult. (- the year starting next January)
The next year will bl· difficult, (- the twelve months starting now)
Hie difference between last and the last is similar. ► 505.
the next week
2	the next three..., etc
Note the word order เท expressions with numbers.
I'll be at college for the next three years, (nui ... the three^ext years )
We generally say the next few days, not the next days.
lite next few days will be wet.
3	next Sunday, etc
When next is used with the names of days or months, it is not always clear
exactly what is meant.
'See you next Sunday ' ‘Do you mean this coming Sunday or the one afterr
To avoid misunderstanding, one can say for example (I) on Sunday, this Sunday,
the/ this Sunday coming, the/this coming Sunday or (on) Sunday this week,
and (2) on Sunday week, a week on Sunday or (on) Sunday next week.	·*
vocabulary · 533 next and the next, nearest
4 place: next and nearest
The nearest เร generally preferred for place - Il means ‘most near เท space'.
Excuse me. Where's the nearest bank' (not ... the next hank.)
If you want to find Luke, just look in the nearest pub.
The next can be used for place if we are talking about movement or direction
It means after Ihis/that one'.
We get off al the next station. (ะ the station that we will come to next.)
It's not on this shelf; H's on the next shelf up.
Next can also be used to talk about the nearest position in a row.
My girlfriend lives next door. Who works in the next office'
The people at the next table were having a terrible argument
Next to means 'beside'.
Come and sit next to me.
no and not ► ' u.
534	no doubt
No doubt expresses a personal opinion. It mcans'probably’ or Ί suppose’; it does
not mean 'certainly'.
Vo doubt it'll rain soon.
You’re tired, no doubt. I'll make you a cup of tea.
To say that something is certain, we can use there is no doubt that (formal),
without any doubt (formal), certainly, definitely.
There is no doubt that the world is getting warmer, (not No doubt the world is
Cycling is certainly healthier than driving (not Nodoubnyelmg^s -ketdikier
than driving.)
Doubtless is similar to no doubt (but more formal); undoubtedly is similar to
there is no doubt that.

535	no more, not any more, no longer,
not any longer
We use no more with nouns to talk about quantity or degree - to say how much
There's no more bread.
We do not use no more in standard modern English as an adverb to express the
idea of actions and situations stopping. Instead, we use no longer (usually before
the verb), not... any longer or not___any more.
I no longer support the Conservative party, (not 7 no more support. .)
This can't go on any longer. I'm not helping you any more.
Anymore may be written as one word, especially in American English.
Annie doesn't live here anymore.
vocabulary · 534 no doubt
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
no sooner, hardly and scarcely ► 1W
north and northern, etc ► 112
536	not and no
To make a word, expression or clause negative, we use not.
Kot surprisingly, น.- mined the train, (.NOT No-Mfrpfishtgly...)
The students went on strike, but not the teachers (not ... but no the teachers.)
I can see you tomorrow, but not on Thursday.
I hate not received his answer.
We can use no with a noun or Mg form to mean not any', or ’not a/an’.
Ko teachers went on strike·- (- There weren’t any teachers on strike.)
I've got no Thursdays free this term. (- I haven’t got any Thursdays .. I
I telephoned, but there was no answer. (ะ there wasn't an answer.)
KO SMOKING
Sometimes sentences constructed with verb · not and no · noun have similar
meanings. The structure with no is usually more emphatic.
There wasn’t an answer. / There was no answer
537	nought, zero, nil, etc
The figure ก is usually called nought or zero in British English and zero in
American English. When we say numbers one figure at a time, 0 is often called
oh (like the letter o).
My account number is four one three oh six. OR... four one three zero six.
เท measurements of temperature, 0 is called zero in both British and American
English. Zero is followed by a plural noun.
Zero degrees Celsius Is thirty-two degrees Fahrenheit.
Zero scores เท team games are called nil (American zero or nothing). เท tennis
and similar games, the word love is used (originally from French I’oeuf, meaning
the egg’ - the figure 0 is egg-shaped).
And the score at half time is: Scotland three, England nil.
Forty-love; Andrews to serve.
538	now (that)
Now (that) can be used as a conjunction. เท an informal style, that is often
dropped, especially เท British English (► 265).
Now (that) Andrew is married, he has become much more responsible.
Now the exams are over I can enjoy myself.
•abulaty · 538 now (that)
539	nowadays
Nowadays 1$ an adverb meaning 'these days', ‘at the present time.
People seem Io /v very depressed nowadays.
Nowadays we think nothing of space travel.
Nowadays cannot be used as an adjective.
I don't like modern fashions, (not I don’t like the nowadays fashions.)
540	of course
We use of course (not) to mean ‘as everybody knows* or 'as is obvious'.
It looks as if the รนท goes around the earth, but of course that's not true.
We'll leave at eight o'clock. Granny won't be coming, of course.
Of course can be used as a polite reply to a request.
'Could you help meT Of course.'
But of course is not always a very polite reply to a statement of (act.
It's cold: ‘It certainly is.’ (not Of course it is. - this would suggest that the first
speaker had said something too obvious to be worth mentioning.)
tor the UK ol o/iou'M· co «nKture arBimenci. ► 2H« ?. JOI V
541	often
Often is mostly used for habitual behaviour, to mean a lot of times on different
occasions'. To say a lot of times on one occasion’, we normally use another
expression (e g. a lot of times. several times, keep.. .mg). Compare:
I often fell in love when I lias younger.
I fell several times yesterday when I was skiing, on / kept falling yesterday ..
(not boften fell yesterday...)
Note that often has two common pronunciations, with and without ft Cofon
and .'niton,'.
for till" |»wtUin ๙oftr* and ocher .<«» <>,à <if indefinite frequency. » Ι4β I.
on and about ► .152
on, in and at: place ► 384
on, in and at. time ► 38๖
>cabulary
nowadays
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
542	once, adverb
When once means 'at some time', we use it for the past but not for the future.
To refer to an indefinite future time, we can use sometime or one day. Compare:
-	I met her once in Venezuela.
Once upon a lime there น «ร a beautiful princess.
-	Come up and see me sometime. (NO! Come up and see me once )
We must go walking one day. (Nor We ""พ go walking once. >
When once has the more precise meaning of one time (not twice or three
times)’, it can be used to talk about any time, including the future.
I'm only going to say this once.
Note that at once means 'immediately·.
'Can I have the hillT 'At once, sir.'
543	once: conjunction
Once can be used as a conjunction, meaning 'after', ‘as soon as. It often
suggests that something is finished or completed, and Is most often used
with a perfect tense.
Once you've passed your test I'll let you drive my car.
Once he had found somewhere to live he started looking for work.
Once you know how to ride a bike you never forget it.
Note that we do not use dull after once (not Oner that ycm've passed
lor piw« pertwl mueiKl oi future «Iler <on|uncllom. · 2'1.
544	one of...
After one of we normally use a plural form
one of our cats (xxn one of our cat)
Occasionally one of is used with a singular noun referring to a group.
Why don 7 you ask one of the crew?
A following Serb is normally singular.
One of our cats has disappeared, (not ()He^pmr-cms4Mee disappeared I
After one of, a noun phrase must have a determiner (e.g. the, my, those).
one of the my those horses (bui NO I one of horses)
ofcannot be dropped.
one of my friends (not one my friend OR one my friends)
for irnteiKri like Shri one of thefru·	uJw ftarr/ta dimM AmJ. ► 1 Ml i
vocabulary · 544 one of.
545	only: focusing adverbial
Only can be used as a focusing adverbial (► 199). Il can refer IO differeni parts of
a sentence.
1	referring to the subject
Only normally comes before a subject that it refers to.
Only you could do a thing like that.
Only my mother really understands me.
2	referring to other parts of a sentence
When only refers to another part of a sentence, it often goes in mid position'
with the verb (► 200 (or details).
รhe only reads biographies.	She is only on duty on Tuesdays.
I only like swimming in the sea. I've only been to India owe.
She was only talking like that because she was nervous.
3	ambiguous sentences
Sometimes sentences with only are ambiguous (they can be understood in more
than one way).
I only kissed your sister last night. (The sense can be 'only kissed', 'only your
sister' or 'only last night'.)
เท speech, the meaning is usually clear because the speaker stresses the part of
the sentence that only refers to. Even in writing, the context generally stops
sentences like these from being really ambiguous. However, if necessary only
can be put directly before the object, complement or adverbial expression that it
refers to. Ulis is generally rather formal. Compare:
They only play poker on Saturday nights, (could be ambiguous)
They play only poker on Saturday nights.
They play poker only on Saturday nights.
rhe meaning can also be made more precise with a relative structure.
Poker is the only game (that) they play on Saturday nights.
Saturday nights are the only time (that) they play poker.
4	only today, etc
Only with a time expression can mean ‘as recently as' or not before'.
I saw her only today she looks much better.
Only then did she realise what she had agreed to
My shoes will only be ready on Friday.
Onty (■ท abo lx- ■ determiner เท » noun ptiMM· (e K ><“ nr, my emty 'ta! puntfí
546	open
1 open and opened
We normally use Often, not opened, as an adjective.
/ can read you like an open book, (not ... an opened lwk.)
Are the banks open this afternoon? (xor Arethe^ltanks opened...?)
ocabulary · 545 only, focusing adverbial
Word Problems from A to I
Section 31
Opened is used as the past tense and past participle of the vert) open, to talk
about the action of opening.
She opened het eyes and sat up. Hie safe was opened with dynamite.
2	when open is not used
Note that Often is not the normal word to refer to the fastenings of clothes, or to
switches or taps.
I can 't untie, undo this shoelace, (not I can I open this shodaee.)
How do you unfasten this belt?
Could you tum/switch the radio on? (พr... open the-Htdio?)
Who left the laps turned on? (not Who left the taps ripen?)
547	opportunity and possibility
We often say that somebody has the opportunity to do of doing something.
I have the opportunity to go to Denmark next year, ( I can go ...)
Possibility is not often used in this structure. It is more normal to say that there is
a possibility of something happening.
There's a possibility of my going to Denmark next year. (- I may go ...)
(More natural than I have the possibility Io go to Denmark ...)
548	opposite (adjective): position
We put the adjective opposite before a noun when we are talking about one of a
pair of things that naturally face or contrast with each other.
I think die picture would look better on the opposite wall.
She went off เท the opposite direction.
I've got exactly the opposite opinion to yours.
His brother was fighting on the opposite side.
We put opposite after the noun when it means facing the speaker or listener’ or
■facing a person or place that has already been mentioned*.
I noticed that the man opposite was staring al me.
(Nor.. the opposite man was staring atme.)
I he woman she teas looking for was in the house directly opposite
For oppourrand contrary. · 4SC
549	opposite, facing and in front of
1	‘across a road/room, etc from': oppositelfacing
We do not use in front of to mean 'across a road/riser/room, etc from'. This idea
is usually expressed with opposite or facing (Amt also across from),
there's a garage opposite my house, (not ... m ftontofmy hetts+.)
รhe stood at the other side of the table facing me. (not .. . in front ofmef
The man sitting across from me was smoking a pipe. (And·)
vocabulary · 549 opposite, facing and in front of
2	in front of and opposite
Compare:
There's a bus slop in front of the school. (The bus Slop is on the same side of
I he road as the school.)
There's a bus stop opposite the school (The bus slop is on the other side of
the road from the school.)
เท front of is often the opposite of behind.
The woman in front of me at the ticket window had ต complicated problem.
I always find myself behind people like that.
3	in front of and in the front of
If you are เท front of a place, vehicle, etc you are outside it; if you are เท the
front of il you are inside. Compare:
We stood in front of her car so that she couldn Ί drive off.
Her husband was sitting in the front of the car. He looked frightened.
550	other(s) and another
1	other and others
When other is used with a noun il has no plural form.
Where are the other photos? (mu ... the others photos')
But used alone, without a noun, it can have a plural form.
I’ve got one lot of photos. Where arc the others'
These are loo small. Have you got any others'
Normally, olher(s) is only used alone if It refers to a noun that has been
mentioned before. An exception is the common plural use of (the) others to
mean (the) other people.
He never thinks of others. lake’s arrived - I must tell the others.
Bin NOT On the phone, one cannot seetheother <* He never listens Io another
2	not used like an adjective
Other is a determiner or pronoun; it is not used exactly like an adjective.
So it cannot normally have an advert» before it, or be used after a linking verb.
I d prefer a completely different colour. (.NOT ... fteompMeiy other colour )
You look different with a beard, (not You look other...)
3	'additional, extra'
Another (spell as one word) can mean 'an additional, extra’. It is used with
singular countable nouns.
Could I hate another piece of bread' (.NOT ...an other piece oj bread.)
Another can be used without a noun, or with one. if the meaning is clear from
w hat has come before.
Those cakes are wonderful. Could I hate another (one)?
ocabulaty - 550 other(s) and another
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
With uncountable and plural nouns, we normally use more, not other.
with this meaning.
Would you like some more meat? (NOT —-other thM'V
Would you like some more peas? (not.. other peas?} ___
another before a plural noun เท expressions with jew
However, we
or a number.
I'm staying for another few weeks.
We need another three chain.
For other cases where a(n) is followed by a plural, ► 130.ะ.
'alternative'	___
(Anfother can also mean ‘(an) alternative', ’besides! instead of thls/lhese
I think พ·' should paint it another colour. _____
Have you got any other cakes, or are these the only ones.
Other people often means people besides oneself.
Why don 't you think more about other people?
551	out of
1	movement
The opposite of the preposition into is out of.
She ran out of the room	_______
(not She ran out the room OR She ran OHlfrom the room)
I took Hanyt photo out of my pocket.	_____
Out of is also used to mean‘through', when we mention the opening through
which somebody something goes out.
I น diked out of the front door without looking back
Why did you throw the paper out of the u i^ou'[
เท American English, out is normally used without of in MIS case.
She turned and went out the hack door. (AmE)
2	position
Out of can also be used to talk about position - lhe «pp°s‘le °r
I'm afraid Mr Pa lie ทุ· is out of the office al the moment.
over, across and through ► 357
over and above ► 354
owing to and due to ► 139
vocabulary - 551 out of
552	own
1	after possessivas
We only use own after a possessive word. It cannot directly follow an article.
It's nice if a child can have his or her own room, (not ... an own room )
Car rental เร expensive. H's cheaper to take one's own car.
(not ... the own tar)
I'm my own boss.
2	a/some... of one's own
This structure makes ft possible to include a/an, some or another determiner
in the phrase.
I'd like to have a car of my own.
Il's time you found some friends of your own.
He's got no ideas of his own.
3	own with no following noun
We cannot use mine, yours1 etc with own, but we can drop a noun after my own.
your own, etc if the meaning is clear.
' Would you like to use my pen T ‘No, thanks. I can only write with my own.
4	own and -self
The emphatic and reflexive pronouns myself, yourself, etc (► 178) do not have
possessive forms. My own, etc is used instead.
I'll do it myself, and I'll do it เท my own way. (not . .. tn-myselfs-way.)
She can wash herself and brush her own hair now.
(not . .. brush herself s hair.)
5	on one's own
Note the two meanings of on one's own.
My mother lives on her own. (without company)
Don't help him. Let him do it on his own. (without help)
I I* onrutf^a เท «■ทน·r	» 178
553	part
Λ is usually dropped before part of if there is no adjective.
Part of the roof was missing, (birr A large part of the roof was missing)
Part of the trouble is that I can't sec very well. (.More natural than A /tan of
the trouble...)
less was in Australia part of last year.
perhaps and maybe ►
permit, allow and let - ,K5
552 own
Word Problems from A to 2
Section 31
554	place: a place to live, etc
In an informal style, place can often be followed directly by an infinitive or
relative clause, with no preposition or relative word.
เท! looking for แ place to fit*. (More formal:... a place Io live in OK
... Λ place in which lo live.)
Thereno place to sit down
You remember the place we had lunchI
l- ... the place (that) เพ· had lunch at? I* the place where น·.· had lunch?)
We do not use a place where before an infinitive.
I'm looking for a /dace (where) I can wash my clothes. / a place to wash my
clothes, (not ... tt place where to wash my clothes.)
Go Idaces (informal) means 'become very successful in life'.
That hoy's going lo go places, believe me.

555	play and game
1	nouns
A play is a piece of dramatic literature for the theatre, radio or television.
'lulius Caesar’ is one of Shakespeare's early plays.
A game is an activity like, for example, chess, football or bridge.
Chess is a very slow game, (not ... a eery slow play.)
The uncountable noun play can be used to mean ‘playing in general.
Children learn a great deal through play
2	verbs
People act in plays or films, and play games or musical instruments.
My daughter IS acting เท her school play this year.
Hate you ever played rugby football?
Play can be used with the same meaning as act before the name of a character
in a play or film.
I'll never forget seeing Olivier play Othello.
556	please and thank you_______________________________
1	requests
We use please to make requests more polite.
Could I have some more ria·, please?
Would you like some help? 'Yes, please'
Note that please does not change an order into a request. Compare:
Stand over there, (order)
Please stand over there, (more polite order)
Could you stand over there, please? (polite request)
Please do is a rather formal answer to a request for permission.
'Do you mind if I open the windowr 'Please do.'
vocabulary · 55b please and thank you
2	when please is not used
We do not use please (o ask people what they have said.
'I've got ต bit of a headache: Ί beg your pardon r (not ... พ<«*๙)
We do not use please when we give things to people.
‘Have you got a pen I could use? ’Yes, here you are.’ (noi___Mease.)
Please is not used as an answer to Thank you (see below).
Thanks a lot: 'That’s OK" . (not ... Please.)
3	thank you and thanks
t hanks is more informal than thank you. Common expressions:
Thank you. (not Thanks you.) Thank you very much.
Thanks eery much.	Thanks a lot. (Bin NOT I hank you a lot)
Thank goodness H's Friday, (not Tlumks-goodnesr...)
Indeed (►499) can be used io strengthen very much. This is rather formal.
Ihank you very much indeed (mrr NOT USUAL!» Thank you indeed.)
thank you for / Thanks for can be followed by an ing form. Possessivos are
unnecessary and are not used.
'Thank you for coming.' 'Not at all. Thank you for having me.’
I JI J Ptik fakf y fíwwíwy I
Some British people say Cheers (informal) to mean Thanks.
4	accepting and refusing
We often use Thank you Thanks like Yes. please, to accept offers.
‘Would you like some potatoesr ‘Thank you.’ ‘How many?
To make it clear that one wishes to refuse something, it Is normal to say
No, thank you เ No, thanks.
‘Another caker ‘No. thanks I've eaten too many already·:
Yes, thanks is most often used to confirm that things are all right.
'Have you got enough potatoes? 'Yes. thanks:
5	replies to thanks
เท English, there is not an automatic answer to Thank you; British people,
especially, do not usually answer when they are thanked for small things. If a
reply is necessary, we can say Not at all (rather formal), You're welcome. That's
(quite) all right or That's OK (informal). Some people say No problem (informal).
Compare:
'Could you pass the salt? 'Here you are.' 'Thanks.' (no answer)
'Here's your coat: ‘Thanks: (no answer)
Thanks so much for looking after the children: ‘That’s all right. Any time.’
(answer necessary)
557	point of view
Point of view can mean the same as opinion.
Thank you for giving US your point of view / opinion.
vocabulary · 557 point of view
Section .
Word Problems from A to z
Bui from somebody's point of Iพ่น' is not quite the same as in somebody's
vieน'/opinion. It usually means as seen from somebody's position เท life' (for
example as a student, a woman, a Greek or a Catholic), and is used to say how
somebody is affected by what happens. Compare:
-	In my opinion, liar is always wrong. (- I think war...)
(sot From my pmnt-ofview,	always wrong:)
He wrote about the war from the point of view of the ordinary soldier
-	เท my view, it's a pretty good school.
You have to judge a school from the child's point of view.
-	เท Professor Lucas's opinion, everybody should work a 20-hour week.
From the employers’ point of view, this would cause a lol of problems.
558	politic and political
Politic is a rather formal word for wise', ‘prudent’.
I don’t think il would bl· politic to ask for a loan just now.
Political means 'connected with politics'.
political history a political career
559	politics and policy
Politics (usually singular but always with ร, ► II 7.3) is used to talk about
government and related ideas.
I don't know much about potHics, but I don't think this is a democracy'.
You talk beautifully you should be in politics.
Policy Is used for people's rules of behaviour (not necessarily connected
with politics).
After the war, British foreign policy was rather confused.
(not ... BritishforeigH pohlies . ..)
It's not my policy to believe everything I hear.
It's the company's policy to employ a certain number of disabled people.
possibility and opportunity ► .17
practically, nearly and almost ► 366
560	prefer
When we say that we prefer one activity to another, two ing forms can be used.
The second can be introduced by to or rather than (more formal).
I prefer riding to walking, (not เ-prçfer riding fowdk.)
She prefers making toys for her children rather than buying them.
Prefer can also be followed by an infinitive (this is normal after would prefer). -*
vocabulary · 560
We can use an Infinitive (without to} nr an ing form after rather than
in this case.
She preferí to make toyร for her children rather than buy buying them.
I would prefer to stay at home rather than drive, driving to your mother's.

561	presently
When presently means ‘now, at present*, it usually comes เท mid position
with the verb (► 200).
Professor Holloway is presently working on plant diseases.
rhe Manager is presently in Canada, but he will contact you on his return.
Another meaning of presently is 'not now, later", "in a minute*.
With this meaning, presently usually comes in end-position, or separately as a
short answer.
He's having a rest now. He'll be down presently.
Can I haIV an la' cream? Presently, dear.'
pretty, fairly, quite and rather ► 460
562	price and prize
The price is what you pay if you buy something, A prize is what you are given if
you have done something exceptional, or If you win a competition.
what'i thr price of the green dress? (not .. à pw
She received the Nobel prize for physics. (not ... NoM price ..)
563	principal and principle
These two words have the same pronunciation. The adjective principal means
'main', most important*.
What’s your principal reason for wanting to be a doctor?
(not ... yõur principie reason ...)
The noun principal means head of a school* (especially, in Britain, of a school
for adults).
If you น1ant to leave early you'll have to ask the Principal.
A principle is a scientific law or a moral rule.
Newton discovered the principle of universal gravitation.
(not ... the principal of universal gravitation.)
She's a girl with very strong principles.
quickly, soon and early ► 591
vocabulary · 561 presently
Word Problems from A to
Section 31
564	quite
1	two meanings
In British English, quite has two common meanings. Compare:
It's quite good. but it could bi· better. (= It's OK, not bad.)
It's quite impossible. (- It’s completely impossible.)
Good is a ’gradable’ adjective: things can he more or less good. With gradable
words, quite usually means something similar to fairly or rather (for the
differences, ► 460) in affirmative clauses. Impossible is non gradable: things are
either impossible or not; but they cannot be more or less impossible. With non
gradable words, quite means ‘completely’. Compare:
I'm quite tired, but I can walk a bit further.
I'm quite exhausted - I couldn't walk another step.
It's quite surprising, (similar IO fairly surprising)
H’s quite amazing. (■ absolutely amazing)
He speaks Portuguese quite well, but he's got a strong Fnglish accent.
He speaks Portuguese quite perfectly.
I quite like her. but she’s not one of my closest friends.
Have you quite finished? (- Have you completely finished?)
เท American English quite with gradable adjectives more often means something
like ‘very’, not 'fairly/rather'.
2	word order with nouns
Quite can be used with a/an ♦ noun. It normally comes before a/an If there is a
gradable adjective or no adjective.
It’s quite a nice day.
We watched quite an interesting film last night.
She’s quite a woman! The party was quite a success.
With non gradablc adjectives, quite normally comes after a/an เท British English.
It was a quite perfect day. (AmE It was quite a perfect day.)
Quite is sometimes used before the to mean ’exactly·, ‘completely’.
He's going quite the wrong way. quite the opposite
3	comparisons
Quite Is not used directly before comparatives.
She's rather much / a bit older than me. (but SOI She's quite older ..)
But we use quite belter to mean ’completely recovered' (from an illness).
Quite similar means fairly/rather similar': quite different means ‘completely
different'.
4	quite a bit/few/lot, etc
Quite a bit and quite a few (informal) mean almost the same as quite a lot.
We’re having quite a hit of trouble with the kids lust now.
We thought nobody would be there, but actually quite a few people came.
vocabulary
quite
5	not quite
Not quite means 'noI completely* or ‘not exactly·. It can be used before
adjectives, adverbs, verbs and nouns, including nouns with the.
I'm not quite ready - won’t be a minute.
She didn’t run quite fait enough for a record.
I don’t quite agree. That’s not quite the colour I wanted.
quite, fairly, pretty and rather ► -UM
565 rather, adverb of degree (rather good, etc)
meaning
Rather can be used as an adverb of degree. The meaning is similar to ‘quite’ or
•fairly’, but more emphatic (► 460). This use of rather is less common in
American English.
rhe film Utas rather good.	Some people rather like being miserable.
It's rather later dum I thought. I rather think we’re going to lose.
Rather often suggests ’more than is usual’, 'more than was expected', 'more than
Is wanted' and similar ideas.
Ί low was the filmT Rather good - I was surprised.'
She sings rather well - people often think she’s a professional
It's rather warm in here. Let's open a window.
word order with articles
Rather generally comes before articles, but can also come after a/an if there is
an adjective.
Hull s rather the impression / wanted to give. He's rather a fool.
Megan's had rather a good idea. (o« Megan'ร had a rather good idea.)
plural nouns
Rather is not normally used before a plural noun with no adjective.
566	rather, preference
1 rather than
This expression is normally used in ‘parallel’ structures: for example with two
adjectives, adverbs, nouns, infinitives or -ing forms.
rd call her hair chestnut rather Hum brown.
I'd prefer to go in August rather than in July.
We ought to invest เท่ machinery rather than buildings
I prefer starting early rather than leaving things to the last minute.
When the main clause has a io-infinitive, rather than is usually followed by an
infinitive without to or by an ing form
I decided to write rather than phone/phoning.
Rather than use/using the car, I divided to go by bike.
vocabulary
rather, adverb of degree (rather good, etc)
Word Problems from A to z
Setlion 31
2	would rather
Ibis expression means 'would prefer to', and is followed by the infinitive
without to. We often use the contraction'd rather.
Would you rather slay here or go home?
How about a dr ink?' ‘I'd rather have something to eat.'
The negative is would rather not.
I’d rather not go out tonight, (not hmttMrei rather...)
Would sooner is sometimes used in the same way as would rather.
Note that would rather like (BrE) does not mean 'would prefer'; in this
expression, rather means 'quite', and does not suggest preference. Compare:
'I'd rather like a cup of coffee.' (- I'd quite like .,.) ‘Oh. would you? I'd rather
have a glass of beer. (- I'd prefer...)
3	would rather, past tense with present or future meaning
We can use would rather to say that a person would prefer somebody to do
something. We use a special structure with a past tense.
would rather « subject · past lense
I'd rather you went home now.
Tomorrow's difficult. I'd rather you came next weekend.
My wife would rather we didn't see each other any more.
'Shall I Often a window?' 'I’d rather you didn’t:
A present tense or present subjunctive is possible (e g. I'd rather he goes he go
home now), but unusual. To talk about past actions, a past perfect tense
is possible.
I'd rather you hadn’t done that
However, this kind of idea is usually expressed with I wish (► 632).
I wish you hadn't done that.
เท older English, had rather was used in the same way as would rather.
This structure is still found in grammars, hut it is not normally used.
4	or rather
People often use or rather to correct themselves.
He's a psychologist - or rather, a psychoanalyst.
(sot ... or belter, a psychoanalyst.)
5	would rather and had better
Note that would rather (ะ would prefer) is not the same as had belter
(ร should, ► 77). Compare:
/ suppose I’d better clean the windows, but I'd rather watch TV.
rather, quite, pretty and fairly ► 460
vocabulary - 566 rather, preference
567	reason
The preposition for is used both before and after reason.
I need to talk to you for two reasons
What'ร the real reason for your depression?
( K itt
Reason can be followed by a clause beginning why... or that....
The reason why / came here was to be with my family.
Do you know the reason that they're dosing the factory?
In an informal style, why/that is often left out.
The reason she doesn 7 like me is that / make her nervous.
Some people consider it incorrect to use a because clause as a complement after
reason (as in Sorry I'm late - the reason is because / overslept).
568	remind and remember
1	meaning: remind and remember
These two verbs are not the same. Reminding, somebody means · making
somebody remember'. Compare:
-	Remind me to call Andy, (xoi Remember me to call...)
I'm afraid I won't remember Io call Andy.
-	This sort of weather reminds me of my home, (not This sori of weather
This sort of weather makes me remember my home
But note tire special use of remember in Remember me to your parents
(= 'Give my best wishes to your parents') and similar sentences.
2	structures
After remind, we can use an infinitive structure (for actions) or a that-clause
(for facts).
Please remind me to go to the bank, (not Please remind me of going ■..)
I reminded him that we hadn’t got any bread left.
3	remind... of...
We use remind... of to say that something/somebody makes US remember
I he past, or things that have been forgotten.
The smell of hay always reminds me of our old house in the country'.
(not .. . remmdsme-mir old houses ..)
Remind me of your phone number.
We can also use remind.. . of to talk about similarities.
She reminds me of her mother. (- She is like her mother.)
rent, let and hire ► 186
vocabulary · 567
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
569	(the) rest
I he rest meant ‘what is left*. It is singular in form, and the is always used.
ท'.· only list- three rooms. I he rest of the house is empty.
To talk about what is left after something has been used up, eaten, destroyed,
etc. we often use other words.
There were remains of the meal all over the floor. (ร.ท /here were rests . . )
Supper tonight is leftovers from lunch (ร.» . . rests . I
If you divide 100 by 12, the remainder IS I.
When the rest refers to a plural noun, it has น plural verb.
Then are four chocolates for Penny, four for Joe and the rest are mine.
(not ... the rest is mine.)
rise and arise ►
570	road and street
1	the difference
A street is a road with houses on either side. We use street for roads เท towns or
villages, but not for country roads.
Cars can park on both sides of the street here.
Our village has only got one street.
Road is used for both town and country.
Cars can park on both sides of our road
The road out of our village goes up a steep hill.
('ฬ lhe sfféeKntl of our fúlhigv ...)
2	street names: stress
เท street names we normally strew the word Road, but the word before Street.
Marylebone Road	Oxford Street
571	(the) same _________________________________________________
1	the same (as)
We normally use the before same.
Clive me the same again, please, (not dive me sumeagrttH; please.)
เท a comparison, we use the same (...) as.
You've got the same idea as inc. (ร«ท.. my -ame idea.)
Her hair's the same colour as her mother's. (ร.)!... the Kime colour like . .)
Note the expression th· very same ( exactly the same).
Our birthdays are on the very same day.
2	other structures
before a clause, the same... that or the same... who can lx· used
That's the same man that who asked me for money yesterday.
vocabulary · 571 (the) same
As is also possible before a clause, especially with a noun that is the object
of the following verb.
He's wearing the same shirt that as he had on yesterday.
As/who/that can be left out when they refer to the object of the following verb.
He's wearing the same shirt he had on yesterday.
Note also the expression do the same.
Why do you always try to do the same as your brother f
/oe and Kate went on a camping trip, and we're going to do the same.
572	say and tell __________________
1	meaning and use
Hoth say and tell are used with direct and indirect speech. (Say is more common
than tell with direct speech.)
7urn right.’ I said (o· 'turn right.' / told him.)
She said that it was my last chance, (on Siu told me that it was my
last chance.)
Fell is only used to mean 'instruct' or inform'. So we do not use tell with
greetings, exclamations or questions, for example.
He said. ‘Good morning ' (Bin NOT Hetoldlhem. 'Good morning')
Emily said. What a nice idea. ■ (bih NOT Emily told as. What a à idea 1
‘Mint's your problemr I said, (but sot What's your problem?’ I told her )
2	say: objects
We say something (to somebody). NOT say somebody-something.
He said a few words to me in Arabic, (not Heboid me« jew warden Arabic )
She said that she would be late, (not She said me that. ..)
And I say to all the people of this great country ... (not And I say all
3	tell: objects
After tell, we usually say who is told.
She told me that she would be late, (not She-ield-fhat...)
Fell is used without a personal object เท a few expressions. Common examples:
tell the truth, tell a lie. tell a story/joke.
I don't think she's telling the truth (not ... saying-the-trude.)
Note also the use of tell to mean ‘distinguish’, 'understand', as in tell the
difference, tell the time.
He's seirn years old and he still can't tell the time.
Fell is not used before objects like a word, a name, a sentence, a phrase.
Alice said a naughty word this morning, (not Alite told. ..)
We do not usually use it after tell to refer to a fact.
■ What time's the meetingr ‘I'll tell you tomorrow:
(not i'll tell VON it tomorrow.)
vocabulary · 572 say and tell
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
4	infinitives
TeU can be used before object . infinitive, in the sense of order' or 'instruct
Say cannot be used like this.
/ told the children to go away. (พ1 / saicfthr children to gpaway.)
5	indirect questions
Neither tell nor soy can Introduce indirect questions (► 260).
1	*^๗***“***พ"/«/
Bui My and tell can introduce the answers to questions.
Has she said who's coming? He only told one person where the money was.
scarcely, hardly and no sooner » mi)
573	school ______
l'' Klll^h Enร,1'1'· sc?Uto1 k not used for a university or similar institution
ไ''"ร?"nivereity departments may have the word School เท their name -
โ.^'1'^'^11''?1 Ea"u""*à)· A British institution with High School เท its
l*!?w?.iw^ly!obca sondar) school. In American English, school includes
universit) level institutions. Note also that in Britain, the public schools arc an
r"'I^?f-?!-ÍEenSÍW Nàte schools such as Eton College - very different
from state schools.
574	see
progressive forms not used
ไ?.'Lท.6^''^,"''0 '"lh one's c*■๙· p'"gres.sivc ( continuous ) forms are
not normally used.
1.. ไ?1’-'." ieโ ",e uwna" ไ'.blue mv',hfre? (wi ^reyon-seemg .. ..ๆ
.	ไ?.'.1.'.,ท.''0"'^ S"".'r!hin.R “Tomenl «f speaking, can see is often
used, especially เท British English (► 84).
I can see an aeroplane. (ArnE also I see an airplane.)
(Nor fam seeMfran aeroplane.)
.'ไ'..?ไ.'ไ".ไไ» àrg things If we mean that he/she U
imagining things that are not there.
•Look! Λ camel' You're seeing things
ไ?ไ?,ไไ?1ไใ"' "àrstand or have heard' (> 482), progressive forms arc not
normally used.
• We’ve got a problem.’ 7 see.'
I sec they ’re talking about putting up taxes again.
changes
Progressive forms can be used for changes เท people s ability to see.
I m seeing much better since I got those new glasses.
I'm seeing a lol of things in this book that / missed when I read it before. -»
vocabulary - 574
3	'meet', 'arrange', etc
When see means 'meet', ‘interview, ‘talk to', ‘go out with' or ‘arrange’,
'supervise', progressive forms are possible.
I'm teeing Ihe dentist tomorrow.
Are you still seeing that Henderson woman?
lack's down al the docks. He's seeing that our stuff gets loaded correctly.
4	other meanings: 'consider', etc
See can mean ‘consider’, ‘think’, 'find out', ‘discuss’ or ‘decide'.
‘Can I use the car tontghir I'll see:
‘What lime do you want logo to the gym? ‘Let me see. How about five
o'clockr
I ’ll call the restaurant and see if they've got a table free.
A preposition is necessary before an object in these cases.
We'll see about that tomorrow. (พ MWHftM*Utt-tomorrow,)
You'd better see about that with Um. (not You'd better see that with hm,)
See if... can often means ‘try to'.
See if you can gel him to slop talking

see. hear. etc with that-clause ► 482
575	see, look (at) and watch
1	see
See is the ordinary verb to say that something 'comes to our eyes', whether or
not we are paying attention.
Suddenly I saw something strange, (not Suddenly I looked-ai
AO/Hพhinft	เ^**)
Did you see the article about the strike in today‘ร paper!
2	look (at)
We use look to talk about concentrating, paying attention, trying to see
what is there. You can see something without wanting to, but you can only
look al something deliberately. Compare:
I looked at the photo, but i didn't see anybody I knew.
'Do you see that manr 'Yes.' 'Look again.’ 'Oh no! It's Moriarty'
He looked al her with his eyes full of love.
When look has an object it is followed by at. when there is no object there is no
preposition. Compare:
l ook al me! (not Look me1)	Look! (not Look ad)
Note that at is often dropped before a 1๗1-clause.
Look (at) what you've done! Look who's here!
Look where you 're going.
vocabulary · 575 see, look (at) and watch
Word Problems from A to z
action 31
3	watch
Watch is like look al. but suggests that something is happening or going to
happen. We watch things that change, move or develop.
Watch that man - I want to know everything he does.
I usually watch a football match on Saturday afternoon.
4	complete experiences: see
Watch is typically used to talk about experiences that are going on, in progress.
We often prefer see to talk about the whole of a performance, play, film,
match, etc. Compare:
He got Into a fight yesterday afternoon while he was watching a football
ÍvrtT	nJuLi laulfe	nuif/11 I
Have you ever seen Chaplin's 'The Great Dictator? (not Have-ymr ever
rí»^ I ร > f\i<-Mไ
wuitnvu v.rktau-nri Jme srrcirr rzniwrvr - f
5	watch TV
Watch is normally used with TV; watch and see are both used to talk about TV
programmes and films.
You spend too much time watching TV.
IVe watched saw a great film on TV last night.
6	see if/whether
See can be followed by if!whether, in the sense of 'find out', look and watch arc
not normally used เท this way.
See if that suit still fils you. (mm l ook if that suit ...)
I'm looking to see whether there's any food left, (not I'm looking whether
Phone and see whether she's เท.
ร’ริ’ธ:
infinitive* and Uig tom< aft« tbcw vrti». » I III.
otlw' mraninp of X, (and propruivr นพ·»X » III: I Fix ovhef meaning o! tool. ·
tfand »*rthrr. ► 251. Thor •น· พ-น"»' differ»·-··» !·!-™ hra>and frol » uu
576	seem
1	linking verb: used with adjectives
Seem is a linking verb (► II); it is followed by adjectives, not adverbs.
You seem angry about something, (sot You seem angrily ..)
2	seem and seem to be
Seem is often followed by to be. We prefer seem to be when we are talking about
objective facts - things that seem definitely to be true. Seem is used without
to be when we are talking about subjective impressions. (The difference is not
always clear-cut, and both are often possible.) Compare:
- lhe bus seems to be full.
She seems excited.
The doctors hate done the tests, and he definitely seems to be mentally ill.
It seems crazy, but I think I’m เท love with my bank ma rut ger. (.NOT a seems to
vocabulary · 576 seem
According io the experts, the north side of the castle seems to be about 100
years older than the rest.
He seems older than he is. (not He mw to be-oMer-thon beds - this would
suggest that he might actually be older than he is.)
- She doesn't seem to be ready yet.
She seems (to be) very sleepy today.
3	with nouns
ร·*'ท to be is normal before noun phrases.
I looked through the binoculars: it seemed to be some son of large rat.
( kUS V	I
I spoke to a man who seemed to be the boss, (nor.. . whoseemed àà^)
However, to be can be dropped before noun phrases which express more
subjective feelings, especially เท British English.
She seems (lo be) a nice girl.
I he cup seemed almost doll's size in his hands.
It seems a pity, but I can't see you this weekend. (Mil h-teemst&b&apifr ..)
4	other infinitives
Seem can be followed by the infinitives of other verbs besides be.
Anna seems to need a lot of attention.
Perfect infinitives (► 89) are possible.
The tax people seem to have made a mistake.
To express a negative idea, we most often use a negative form of seem; but in a
more formal style not can go with the following infinitive. Compare:
He doesn’t seem to be at home.
He seems not to be al home, (formal)
Note the structure can't seem to.
I can’t seem to gel anything right. (More formal: I seem not to be able to get
anything right.)
5	seem like
We can use like, but not as, after seem.
North Wales seems (tike) a good place to go climbing, (not .. ■ see*»» as น ...)
6	it seems
It can be a preparatory subject (► 268) for that- and as //clauses after seem.
It seems that lames and Alice have had a quarrel.
It seemed as if the night was never going to end.
7	there seems
There (► 605) can be a preparatory subject for seem to be.
There seems to be some mistake.
เพ ΙΛ, .ท1! ธเ » SIS.	Aptพ เ. น·«เ in similar ways (» 374).
vocabulary · 576 seem
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
577	sensible and sensitive
A sensible person has common sense, and does not make stupid decisions.
7	นพน to buy that dress.' ‘He sensible, dear. It’s much too expensive.'
A sensitive person feels things easily or deeply, and may be easily hurl.
Don't shout at her - she's very sensitive (not ... very sensible.)
Have you not a รนท cream for sensitive skin? (not ... for sensible skm?)
Sensible IS a ‘false friend' - similar words in some languages mean 'sensitive'
578	shade and shadow
Shade is protection from the รนท.
I’m hot. let'ร find some shade to sit in.
The temperature's 30 degrees in the shade.
A shadow is the ‘picture’ made by something that blocks out light
เท the evening your shadow is longer than you are.
There’s an old story about a man without a shadow.
shut and dose ► 122
sick and ill ► 491
579	since: tenses
1	main clause: I've known her since ...
เท sentences with since (referring to time), we normally use present perfect and
past perfect tenses เท the main clause.
I’ve known her since 2005. (not I know her since...)
We haven't seen lainie since Christmas.
I was sorry when tacky moved to America; we had been good friends since
university days.
However, present and past lenses are also occasionally found, especially เท
sentences about changes.
You’re looking much belter since your operation.
She doesn't come round to sec US so much since her marriage.
Since last Sunday I can't slop thinking about you.
Things weren't going so well since Father'ร illness.
2	It's a long time since ...
เท British English, present and past tenses are common เท the structure
It is!was — since...
It's a long lime since the last meeting
It was ages since that wonderfid trip.
vocabulary · 579 since: tenses
American English prefers perfect tenses In this structure.
Il’s been a long time since the tail meeting.
Il had been ages since dial wonderful trip.
3	since-clause: since we were at school
Since can be used as a conjunction of time, introducing its own clause.
The tense in the since clause can be perfect or past, depending on the meaning
Compare:
-	ΓIV known Iter since we were at school together.
I've known her since I've lived in this street.
-	Ton I V drunk about ten cups of tea since you arrived.
You 've drunk about ten cups of lea since you've been sitting here.
-	We visit my parents every week since ICC bought the car.
We visit my parents every week since we’ve had the car.
For prrirci term ► 53 35. For I he difference* beewren Siner, far and from. ► นพ
since, for, in and from: time ►
since, as, because and for ► ร:
580	small and little
Small simply refers to size. It is the opposite of big or large (► KU).
Could I hair a small brandy, please?
You're too small to be a police officer.
The adjective little usually expresses some kind of emotion.
Poor little thing - come here and let me look after you.
'What's he liter ‘Oh. he's a funny little man.'
What's dun nasty little boy doing in our garden?
They've bought a pretty little house in the country.
เท a few fixed expressions little is used in the same way as small or short.
little finger	a little while
the little hand of a clock a little way
III	British English little is unusual เท ‘predicative' position (after a verb),
and comparative and superlative forms arc not normally used.
The Ituppy was so smalt and sweet. (More natural เท British English than
The puppy was so little...)
He's the smallest baby I've ever seen.
(More natural than ... the littlesl baby...)
(๖1 IM, uwd M - .•.1.1™meaning .«X ทน,ร· ('1 I hurl hlHr hope). . IbH.
vocabulary - 580 small and hide
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
581	smell
1	British and American forms
In British English, regular and Irregular past tenses and paniciples are both
common: smelled and smell. American forms are usually regular.
2	linking verb
Smell can be used as a linking verb (► II), followed by an adjective or noun,
to say how something smells. Progressive forms are not used.
Those roses smell beautiful ('-OI.. smell beautifully.)
The soup smells funny. What's in it? (not .. .-ft smelling funny...)
Before a noun, smell of and smell like are used.
The railway carriage smelt of beer and old socks.
His aftershave smelt like an explosion in a flower shop.
Smell is sometimes used to mean ’smell bad’.
That dog smells.
3	transitive verb: ‘perceive’
Smell can be used with an object, to say what we perceive with our noses.
Progressive forms are not used. We often use can smell (► HI).
As we walked into the house, we smell something burning.
I can smell supper
4	transitive verb: ’investigate1
Another transitive use is to say that we are using our noses to find out
something. Progressive forms can be used.
’ What are you doingT ‘I’m smelling the meal to see if it's still ok:
582	so: adverb meaning 'like this/that'
1	after seem, appear, etc
So can lie used in a formal style in a few cases to mean ’like this/that*, 'in (his/
that way’. Til is happens, for example, after นพท. appear, remain, more and lets.
‘Will the business make a loss this year? 'It appears so.'
'The weather is stormy, and will remain so over the weekend.
She was always nervous, and after her accident she became even more so.
I read the front page very carefully, and the rest of the paper less so.
2	not used in other cases
เท other cases, so is not normally used adverbially to mean ‘like this/that*.
in this/that way*.
l ook - hold it up in the air like this, (not ... hold it up in the air so.)
When he laughs like that I want to scream. (ร«แ When he laughs .พ»...)
I don't think we should do it เท that way. (hot ... do if พ».)
He says he เร ill and he looks it. (not ... he hroks พ».)
I« Io Mlh นทฺ «nd Utt. · sail. For 50 am I. clr. » <v For 1> *wv. brio·.». CIC. » -HS.
vocabulary
ะ adverb meaning ‘like this/that'
583	so (conjunction) and then
So and then can both be used in replies, to mean 'since that is so', it follows
from what yon have said'.
'It’s more expensive to travel on Friday' 'Then/So I'll leave on Thursday.'
'I'll he needing the car.' Then/So I suppose i’ll have to take a taxi.'
So (but not then) can also be used when the same speaker connects two ideas,
to mean it follows from what 1 have said'.
It's more expensive to travel on Friday, so I'll lea I* on Thursday.
I VftT J 11,111 1'11 l.unui /ill, I luir^Liu 1
I ivrl · · «	I ■■ ■พ Μ * < νπ I rmr Λ·»· » . I
584	so (degree adverb): so tired, so fast
1	meaning
So means that much' or to that extent. Il is used when we are talking about a
high degree of some quality - in situations where very is also a suitable word.
I'm sorry you’re so tired. (- J know you’re very tired, and I’m sorry.)
It was so cold that UY couldn't go out. (a II was very cold weather, and
because of that we couldn’t go out.)
I wish she didn't drive so fast.
2	so and very
Very (» bib) is used when we are giving new information. So is mainly used to
refer to information which has already been given, which is already blown,
or which is obvious. Compare:
You're very late, (giving new information)
I'm sorry I'm so late, (referring to information which is already known)
- It was very warm in Scotland, (giving new information)
I didn't think it would be so warm, (referring to information which is already
known)
3	emphatic use
เท an informal style, so can also be used like very to give new information, when
the speaker wishes to emphasise what is said. This structure is rather like
an exclamation (» 223).
He's so bad-tempered'. (- How bad-tempered he is!) You're so right!
4	50... that
We use so, not very, before /hi» clauses.
It was so cold that tec slopped playing, (not II พ»* very-mid that
fflaying )
He spoke so fast that nobody could understand, (not He^poke very
fast that. ..)
5	before adjectives and adverbs
We can use so before an adjective alone (without a noun) or an adverb.
The milk was so good dun UY couldn't Slop drinking it.
Why arc you driving so fast ?
vocabulary · 583 so (conjunction) and then
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
So is not used with adjective » noun.
I didn T expect sue.h terrible weather, (not...» terrible weather.)
I enjoyed my stay in your country, which is so beautiful (sor I enjoyed my stay
6	50 much, etc
We can use 10 much and so many (► 587). so few and so little with
or without nouns.
I’ve bought so many new books; I don’t know when I’ll read them.
There were so few Interesting people there that we decided to go home.
I've read so much and learnt so little.
7	SO and so much
We use so, not so much, before adjectives without nouns (► ร84. J above).
Compare:
- She had so much heavy luggage that she couldn’t carry’ it.
Iler luggage was so heavy that she couldn't carry it. (not Iler luggage was so
much heavy...)
I’ve never seen so much beautiful jewellery.
The jewellery is so beautiful'. ( พ์แ .. . sontmh beautlfHV)
But we use so much, not JO, before comparatives
I'm glad you're feeling so much better, (not .. .^»-better)
There is a structure with so followed by adjective t as to + infinitive.
This is formal and not very common.
Would you be so kind as to tell me the timet (= ... kind enough to ...)
fMJ Litt A	(พ ILAtAA WAM Jtt’ ฬเ kt nA t/i \
I 1 rvvniw T’rv nrrns	· · · vm TTvnm T”IW	ท’’·” ·" * * ·/
9	so... a...
There is another rather formal structure with so ♦ adjective i a!an 4 noun
(► 187).
/ had never before met so gentle a person, (a ... such a gentle person.)
585	so and not with hope, believe, etc
1 instead of that-clauses
We often use so after believe, hope, expect, imagine, suppose, guess, reckon, think,
be afraid, instead of repeating words in a r/mk clause.
'Is Alex here? 7 think so. (not ...I think that Alex is here.)'
‘Do you think we'll be in timeτ Ί hope so. (.MIT Thope.y
'Didyou lose? 'I'm afraid so.'
We do not use so before a àt clause.
I hop·· that we'll have good weather, (not I hope so, that well have
ΚννΠ «ΊΠΤΠΙΤΙ I	*
vocabulary · 585 so and not with hope, believe,
Note lhe special use of I thoughI so to mean 'my suspicions were correct'.
Empty your pockets. Ah, I thought so! You’ve been stealing chocolate again
So is not used after know (► 504).
'You're late.' Ί know.' OS / know that, (not I know so.)
2	negative structures
We can make these expressions negative in two ways.
affirmative verb * not
‘Didyou winT ‘I'm afraid not.'
‘We won't be in time for the train.' 'No, I suppose not.'
negative verb · so
' You won't be here tomorrowr Ί don’t suppose so.'
• Will it rainr Ί don’t expect พ:
Hope and be afraid are always used in the first structure.
I hope not. ("OI / don't hope so.)
Think is more common เท the second structure.
I don’t think so. (More common than I think not.)
3	SO at the beginning of a clause
We can use so at the beginning of a clause with say. hear, understand, tell,
believe and a number of other verbs. This structure is used to say how
the speaker learnt something.
It's going to be a cold winter, or so the newspaper says
'Emily's getting married: ‘Yes. so I heard:
"The Professor s ill: 'So I understand:
586	so with say and tell
1	instead of that·clauses
So can be used after say and tell instead of repeating information in
a that- clause.
She's going to be the next president. Everybody says so. l- ... Everybody says
that she s going to lx* the next president.)
You've got to clean the car.’ 'Who says พ '
Taxes are going up. Joseph told me so
Note that so is used in this way mostly when we arc talking about the authority
for statements, about reasons why we should believe them. When we simply
want IO identify the speaker, we prefer that. Compare:
‘Megan's crazy.' ‘Who says so' 'Dr bannister.'
'Megan's crazy.' ‘Who said thatT ‘I did:
2	I told you so.
I told you so usually means Ί warned you, but you wouldn't listen to me'.
‘Mummy, I’ve broken my train." 7 told you so. You shouldn 't have tried
to ride on it:
vocabulary
with say and tell
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
3	other verbs
So cannot be used after all verbs of saying. We cannot say, for example,
Site promised me so.
SO and such ร· 597
587	so much and so many
1	the difference
the difference between so much and so many is the same as between much and
many (► 165). So much is used with singular (uncountable) nouns; so many is
used with plurals.
I had never seen so much food เท my life.
She had so many children thal she didn't know what to do.
(not ...ร" múeh children . .)
We use so. not so much, to modify adjectives and adverbs (► 561.5).
You’re so beautiful (not You're so much beautiful)
But so much is used before comparatives (► 207).
She's so much more beautiful now.
2	so much/many without a noun
We can drop a noun after so much.'many, if the meaning is clear.
I can't eat all that meal - there's so muchi!
I was expecting a few phone calls, but not so many.
3	SO much as an adverb
So much can be used as an adverb.
I wish you didn't smoke so much.
4	special structures with so much
We can use not so much... as or not so much... but to make corrections and
clarifications.
Il wasn't so much his appearance I liked as his personality.
Il's not so much that I don Ί want to go, but I just haven I got time.
เท negative and // clauses, so much as can be used to mean even'.
lie didn't so much as say thank you, after all we'd done for him.
If he so much as looks at another woman. I'll kill him.
588	so that and in order that
1 purpose
These structures arc used to talk about purpose. So that Is more common than
in order that, especially in an informal style. They are often followed by auxiliary
verbs such as can or will·, may is more formal.
She's staying here for six months so thal she can perfect her English.
vocabulary · 588 so thal and เท order
I'm putting it in the oven now so that it'll be ready by seven o'clock.
We send monthly reports in order that they may have full information.
เท an informal Style, that can be dropped after so (► 265),
I've come early so I can talk to you.
2	present tenses for future
Present lenses are sometimes used for the future.
I'll send the contract express so that she gets/she'llget it before Tuesday.
I'm going to make an early start so that I don’t/won't gel stuck in the traffic.
We must write to him. เท order that he docs will not feel that we are
hiding things.
3	past structures
เท sentences about the past, would, could or should are generally used with
verbs after so that เ เท order that. Might is possible เท a very formal style.
Emily talked to the shy girl so that she wouldn't feel left out.
I took my golf clubs so that I could /day on Sunday.
They met on a Saturday เท order that everybody should be free to attend
He built a chain of castles so that he might control the whole country.
ku meaning 'พ (tat... no<’. ►Sil.
589	so-and-so; so-so
1	so-and-so
Ihis informal expression is used when one cannot remember a name.
What's happened to old so-and-so? (ะะ ... what's his name?)
It can also replace a swear word or an Insult.
She’s an old so and-so.
2	so-so
I his informal expression means ‘neither good nor bad.'
Ί low are you feeling?1 So-so. ’ (not ... St-and-so.)
'Was the concert any good? So-so.'
590	some time, sometime and sometimes
Some lime (with two stresses: ,s.sm 'tatm.'l means 'quite a long time’.
I'm afraid it'll take some time to repair your car.
She's lived in Italy for some time, so she speaks Italian quite well.
Sometime (rSAtTHainV) refers to an indefinite time, usually in the future.
It can also be written as two words: some time.
Let's have dinner together sometime next week.
When Willi gel married - Ihis year, next year, sometime, never?
เ <-Tabular, · 589 so-and-
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
Sometimes (fsAmtaunz/) is an adverb of frequency (► 198.1). Il means ‘on some
occasions*, ‘more than once’ (past, present or future).
/ sometimes went skiing when I lived in Germany.
Sometimes. เท the long winter evenings, I just sit and think about life.
591	soon, early and quickly ___________________
1 soon
Soon means 'a short lime after now' or a short time after then*.
Ger น'๙/ soon (not Gel น-๙/ early.)
lhe work was hard al the beginning, but she soon got used to it.
77/ pay you soon ' ‘The sooner the better.’
2	early
The adverb early means 'near the beginning of the time period that we are
thinking about*. It does not usually mean *a short time after now then.
Karly that week. Luke teas called to the police station.
We usually take น long break early เท the year, (not .. soon in the year.)
I usually get up early and go to bed early, (not / usually get HP soon ..)
Sometimes early means 'before the expected time'.
The plane arrived twenty minutes early.
karly can also be used as an adjective.
I caught an early train. You 're very early.
It's the earliest known example of a cave painting.
เท a formal style, the adjective early can sometimes haw the same kind of
meaning as soon.
I should be grateful for an early reply.
Best wishes for an early recovery.
A watch or clock is fast or slow, not early or late.
My watch is five minutes fast.
3	quickly
Quickly refers to the speed with which something is done. Compare:
-	Let's get her to the doctor quickly. (It’s urgent - we need to move fast.)
I ought to see the doctor soon (not an emergency)
-	He did the repair quickly but nor very well.
I hope you can do the repair soon - / need the car.
592	sort of, kind of and type of
1 articles
The article a! an is usually dropped after sort of. kind of and type of,
but structures with articles are possible in an informal style.
That's น funny sort of (a) car. What sort of (a) bird is that?
vocabulary' · 592 sort of kind of and type of
2	singular and plural; these sort of, etc
When we are talking about one sort of thing, we can use sort of. kind of
or type of followed by a singular noun.
This sort of tar is enormously expensive to run.
I'm interested เท any new type of development เท computer science.
Singular sort of kind of and type of can also be followed by plural nouns,
especially เท an informal style.
I'm interested in any new kind of developments,..
Plural demonstratives (these and those) can also be used.
These sort of cars are enormously expensive to run.
Do you smoke those kind of cigarettes 7
Illis structure (these sort of, etc) is often felt to be Incorrect, and is usually
avoided in a formal style. This can be done by using a singular noun (see
above), by using plural sorts/kinds!types, or by using the structure ... of this
that sort! kind! type.
This sort of car is... These kinds of carts) are...
Cars of that type are...
3	softeners
เท an informal style, son of and kind of can be used before almost any word or
expression, or at the end of a sentence, to show that we are not speaking very
exactly, or to make what we say less definite.
We sort of thought you might forget.
Sometimes I sort of wonder whether I shouldn't sort of get a job.
I've had sort of an idea about what we could do.
She's kind of strange	I've changed my mind, kind of.
593	sound
Sound is a linking verb (► II). It is followed by adjectives, not adverbs.
You sound unhappy. What‘ร the matter7
Progressive forms are not very common.
Your idea sounds great, (not Your idea's sounding-great)
However, progressive forms are possible when there is an idea of change.
The car sounds is sounding a bit rough these days.
Sound is often followed by like or as if'though.
That sounds like lames coming up the stairs.
It sounds as if/ though he's had a hard day.
south and southern, etc ► 12
594	Speak and talk
1 little difference
There is little difference between speak and talk. In certain situations one
or the other is preferred, but they are usually both possible.
vocabular)' · 593 sound
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
2	formality
Talk is the more usual word for informal communication.
When à walked Into the room everybody stopped talking
Could I talk to you about my plans for a few minutes?
Speak is often used for communication in more serious or formal situations.
I'll have to speak to that boy he’s getting very lazy.
They had a fight last week, and now they're not speaking to one another.
After she had finished explaining her plans, nobody spoke
3	lectures, etc
Talk is often used for the act of giving an informal lecture (a talk); speak is
preferred for more formal lectures, sermons, etc. Compare:
This is Patrick Allen, who’s going to talk to US about gardening.
This is Professor Rosalind Bowen, who is going to streak to US on recent
developments เท low-temperature physics.
The PopV spoke to the croud for seventy minutes about world peace.
4	languages
Speak is the usual word to refer to knowledge and use of languages,
and to the physical ability to speak.
She speaks three languages fluently.
น'.· spoke Dutch so that the children wouldn’t understand.
Ills throat operation has left him unable to speak.
5	Other cases
One usually asks to speak to somebody on the phone (Amt also speak with).
Hello. Could I speak to Karen, please1
Talk is used before sense, nonsense and other words with similar meanings.
You’re talking complete nonsense, as usual.
(not Yewre speaking complete nonsense...)
Start and begin ►
595	Still, yet and already: time
1	meanings
รtill, yet and already can all be used to talk about things which are going on,
or expected, around the present. Briefly:
still is used IO say that something is continuing and has not stopped
- yet is used to talk al-out something that is expected
already is used to say that something has happened early, or earlier than
it might have happened.
2	Still
Still is used to say that something has, perhaps surprisingly, not finished.
She's still asleep.	Is it still raining?
vocabulary · 595 still, yet and already-, time
I've been thinking/or hours. hut I still can't decide.
You're not still seeing that lackson boy, are you?
Still usually goes with the verb, in 'mid-position' (► 200).
3	yet
Not yet is used to say that something which is expected has not happened
(but we think that it will).
'Is Sophie herer ‘Not yet:	The mail hasn't come yet.
เท questions, we use yer to ask whether something expected has happened.
Is supper ready yet'	Has the mail come yet?
Yet usually goes at the end of a clause, but it can go immediately after not
เท a formal style.
Don't eat the pears - they aren Ί ripe yet.
rhe pears are not yet ripe, (more formal)
4	already
Already is used to say that something has happened earlier than expected.
or earlier than it might have happened.
‘When's Sophie going to comer 'She's already here.'
' You must go to Scotland: 'I've already been there:
Have you already finished? that quick!
Already usually goes with the verb, in mid-position' (► 200). it can also
go at the end of a clause, for emphasis.
Are you here already f You must hate run all the way.
We do not usually put already before time expressions.
When I was fourteen I already knew that I wanted to be a doctor.
(not Already when I WHS fourteen . .)
5	still not or not yet?
Still not looks back towards the past; not yet looks towards the future.
Compare:
-	She still hasn’t got a job. (looking back: she hasn't had a job for a long time,
and this situation is continuing.)
She hasn't got a job yer. (looking forward: she hasn’t got a job now, but we're
hoping that she will get one.)
I still can’t speak Russian, after all these years of study.
I can't speak French yet. but I hope I will be able to soon.
6	yet or already in questions
Questions with already often suggest that something has happened. Compare:
-	Have you met Professor Hawkins yet?
(■ I don't know whether you’ve met him.)
Have you already met Professor Hawkins?
(ะ I think you've probably met him.)
-	Is my coat dry yet?
Is my coat dry already? that was quick!
7	tenses
Various tenses are possible with all three words. เท British English, perfect tenses
are common with already and yet; Americans often use past tenses. Compare:
vocabulary · 5S5 still, yet and already-, time
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
- Have you /raid yet? (Brb)
Have you paid Did you pay yet? (AmE)
She hoi already left. (BrF.)
She (has) already left. (AmE)
8	related to a past moment
All three words can be related to a past moment Instead of to the present.
I went to see if she had woken up yet, but she was still asleep. This was
embarrassing, because her friends had already arrived.
9	yet meaning 'still'
Yet is normally used in questions and negative sentences. But it Is sometimes
used in affirmative sentences in a formal style to mean ’still’.
IVc have yet to hear from the bank. (- We are still waiting to hear...)
10 all ready
AU ready is not the same as already-, it simply means the same as all · ready.
Compare:
‘When's Megan coming'’ ’She's already arrived:
Are you all readyr ’.Vo, Dan isn't:
for Ulff .1· Λ doonm·’ m»iUci เท«mine Imrwi’. · Ml J.
Street and road ► 57N
596	such
1	word order
Such is used with nouns and noun phrases. It comes before a/an.
such people such interesting ideas
such a decision (not พรนch decision)
2	Of this/that kind'
Such can mean ’like this/that*. ‘of this/that kind’. This is most common
in a formal style, with abstract nouns.
The committee wishes to raise fees. I would oppose such a decision.
There are various forms of secret writing. Such systems are called 'codes'.
เท an informal style, and with concrete nouns, we prefer like this/that or this/
that kind of.
... systems like this are called...
He's got an old Rolls-Royce. I'd like a car like that, (not I'd like such a eeft)
3	high degree
Another use of such Is to talk about a high degree of some quality. เท this sense,
such is common before adjective · noun.
I'm sorry you had such a bad journey, l You had a very bad journey.
It was a pleasure to meet such interesting people.
vocabulary · 596 such
Such is also possible with this meaning before a noun alone, when the noun has
an emphatic descriptive meaning.
I'm glad your concert was such a success.
Why did she make such a fuss about the dates?
4	such and very, great, etc
Very, great and similar words are also used to talk about a high degree
of some quality. The difference is that they give new information; such
(ะ= like this/that) normally refers to information that is already known.
Compare:
-	I've had a very bad day. (giving information)
Why did you have such a bad day? (The information is already known.)
-	The weather was very cold.
I wasn 't expecting such cold weather.
-	There was great confusion
Why was there such confusion?
However, in a very informal style such can also be used to mean 'very' or 'great',
especially in exclamations.
She has such a marvellous voice! He's such an idiot!
5	such ... that; such ... as to
Structures with very cannot be followed directly by àt-clauses. Instead, we can
use such . . . that.
It was such a cold afternoon that we stopped playing, (not It was a very cold
afternoon that .)
There is also a structure with such followed by ... + as to + infinitive.
This is formal and not very common.
It was such a loud noise as to wake everybody in the house.
(Less formal: . . . such a loud noise that it woke . . .)
6	such as
Such as is used to introduce examples.
My doctor told me to avoid fatty foods such as bacon or hamburgers.
7	such-and-such
Note this informal expression.
She's always telling you that she's met such-and-such a famous person.
(- . . . one or other famous person.)
597	such and so
1 such before (adjective +) ก๐นก
We use such before a noun (with or without an adjective).
They’re such fools, (not Theyre^ofootef
It was such good milk that we couldn't stop drinking it. (not It was so good
milk that. . .)	,____
Such comes before a/anThcy rc so)
She's such a baby.
I’ve never met such a nice person, (not . . ■ a such/so nice person■)
vocabulary · 597 such and so
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
2 so before adjective, adverb, etc
We use so before an adjective alone (without a noun) or an adverb.
She's so babyish, (not She^ssueh babyish■)
The milk was so good that we couldn't stop drinking it.
Why do you talk so slowly?
We can also use so before much, many, few and little.
We’ve got so much to do, and so little time.
We use so much, not so, before comparatives.
I'm glad you’re feeling so much better, (not ... so better.)
For so beautiful a day, etc, ► 187.
For more about the meaning and use of such, ► 596. For more about so, ► 584.
598	suggest
1	infinitive not used
Suggest is not followed by object + infinitive. TTiflt-clauses and -ing structures
are common.
Her uncle suggested that she (should) get a job in a bank.
Her uncle suggested getting a job in a bank.
(not Her urn /«· '•uggested het to get,/ jftb in a lutns I
2	indirect object not used
Suggest	ร^^รtrdสุ๙i’without a preposition.
Can you suggest a restaurant to us? (not Can you suggest US a restaurant?)
3	verb forms เท that-clauses
In that-clauses after suggest, various verb forms are possible when we suggest
what people should do.
Ordinary present and past tenses can be used.
Her uncle suggests that she gets a job in a bank.
He suggested that she got a job in a bank.
Should + infinitive without to is common.
He suggests that she should get a job in a bank.
He suggested that she should get a job in a bank.
Subjunctives (► 232) are also used, especially in American English.
He suggests that she get a job in a bank.
He suggested that she get a job in a bank.
4	direct suggestions
In direct suggestions (‘I suggest. . .'), should is not generally used.
I suggest (that) you get. . . (not I suggest that you should get,)
suit and fit ► 467
vocabulary · 598 suggest
599	suppose, supposing and what if
Suppose, supposing and what if can all be used with present tenses to make
suggestions about things that might happen.
Ί haven't got a tablecloth.' 'Suppose we use a sheet.'
'Let's go to the beach.' ‘Supposing it rains.'
What if uv invite your mother next weekend and go away the week after?
A past tense makes the suggestion sound less definite.
I faddy, can I watch TV? Suppose you did your homework first.'
'I'm going to climb up there.' ‘No! supposing you slipped'
What if I came tomorrow instead of this afternoon?
เท sentences about the past, past perfect tenses are used to talk about situations
that did not occur.
that was very clever, but supposing you had slipped?
600	surely
Surely is more common in British than American English.
1	not the same as certainly
Surely does not usually mean the same as certainly. We use certainly when we
simply tell people that something is true. We use surely mostly to ask for
people's agreement: to persuade them that something must lie true, or that
there are good reasons for believing it. Compare:
House prices arc certainly rising fast at the moment. (Ί know this is so.')
House prices will surely slop rising soon. (Ί believe this must he so.')
- I certainly transferred the money on Monday. (Ί know.')
She's surety got the money by now. ('ll seems very probable.')
2	belief in spite of...
Surely can be used when we say that we think something is true เท spite of
reasons to believe the opposite, or in spite of suggestions to the contrary.
These sentences arc often like questions.
I'm going to marry Sonta.' Surely she's married alreadyT
Surely dun's Henry over there7 I thought he was in Scotland.
'Is it tonight we're going outr ‘No, tomorrow, surelyT
With not, surely can express difficulty in believing something.
‘Tim failed his exam.' ‘Oh. surely notT
Surely you’re not going out in that hat?
You don't think I'm going to pay for you. surely?
vocabulary
suppose, supposing and what if
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
601	sympathetic
Sympathetic usually means ‘sharing somebody’s feelings' or 'sorry for somebody
who is in trouble'.
I'm sympathetic towards the strikers.
She's always very sympathetic when people feet ill.
Sympathetic is a ‘false friend' for speakers of certain languages. It docs not
usually mean the same as, for example, sympatytzny. sympathiseh, sympatisk
or simpático.
Ihe people เท my class are all very nice pleasant easy to gel along with
(not ...are rill ivry sympathetic.)
602	take: time
We can use take to say how much time we need to do something.
Five structures arc common
1	The person is the subject:
person 4 take · time · infinitive
I took three hours to get home last night.
She lakes all day to get out of the bathroom.
They took two hours to unload the ferry.
2	The activity is the subject:
activity · take (· person) · time
The drive took me three hours. Gardening lakes a lol of time.
Unloading the ferry took them two hours.
3	The object of the activity is the subject:
object of activity . take (« person) . infinitive
Ihe ferry took them two hours to unload.
This house will take all week to clean.
4	Preparatory it is the subject:
It · take (· person) * time · infinitive
It took me three hours to get home last night.
It takes ages to do the shopping.
5	Before/until is used:
It» take (· person) ' time » before/until.
It took us six weeks before until we got the house clean.
It took a long time before until she felt comfortable เท her new school.
vocabulary · 602 lake: ti
take and bring ► 409
talk and speak ► 594
tall and high ► «ท'.
603	taste
1	linking verb
Taste can be used as a linking verb (► II), followed by an adjective or noun,
to say how something tastes, Progressive forms are not used.
This tastes nice. What's in พ?(not ... tastes nicely.)
The wine tastes funny, (not ... is tasfmgftmny-... )
Before a noun, taste of and taste like arc used.
The fish soup tasted mostly of garlic.
Her lips tasted like wild strawberries
2	transitive verb: 'perceive'
Taste can be used with an object, to say what we perceive with our sense of
taste Progressive forms are not used. We often use can taste (► JU).
I can taste onion and mint in the sauce, (not I am tasting...)
3	transitive verb: 'investigate'
Another transitive use is to say that we are using our sense of taste to find out
something. Progressive forms can be used.
Stop eating the cake: 'I'm just lasting it Io see if it's ok:
tell and say - 1. :
thank you ►
604	thankful and grateful
Grateful is the normal word for people's reactions to kindness, favours, etc.
I'm very grateful for all your help, (not I'm very thankful...)
She wasn't a bit grateful to me for repairing her car.
Thankful IS used especially for feelings of relief at having avoided a danger,
or at having come titrough an unpleasant experience.
I'm thankful that we got home before the storm started.
We feel very thankful that she didn't marry him after all.
Well, I'm thankful dun's over.
then and so ► 583
ocabulary · 603 taste
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
605 there
The spelling there is used for two words with completely different
pronunciations and uses.
1	adverb of place
There (pronounced 'dca(r)/) is an adverb meaning in that place'.
What'ร that green thing over there?
There's the book I was looking for.
for Ihr dltfrrrncr h(~rtn tor <nd rtow. · III».
2	introductory subject
There (most often pronounced .'da(r)/) is used as an introductory subject in
sentences beginning there is. there are, there might be, etc. For details, ► 211
There's a hook under the piano.
there and here ► 4«1
606 think
'have an opinion': not progressive
When think is used for opinions, progressive forms are unusual.
I don't think much of his latest book, (sor I'm not thinking much ,.)
Who do you think will win the election? (sol Who are you thinking...?)
Other meanings: progressive possible
When think has other meanings (e g. consider or plan} progressives are possible.
You're looking worried. What are you thinking about? (not ... What do you
think "bout?)
I'm thinking of changing my job.
•ing forms
After think, -ing forms can be used, but infinitives are not usually possible unless
there is an object (► 606.1 below).
She's thinking of going to Brazil next year, (nut She's thinking logo...)
However, think - infinitive can be used when we talk about remembering to do
something, or having the good sense to do something.
Did you think to close the windows when it started raining?
think + object (+ to be) + complement
เท a very formal style, think is sometimes followed by an object and an adjective
or noun complement.
They thought her fascinating	We thought him a fool
It can be used as a preparatory object (► 269) for an infinitive or clause.
I thought it belter to pretend that I knew nothing.
iv'c thought it important that she should go home.
vocabulary · 606 think
To be is occasionally used before lhe complement (suggesting objective
judgement rather than subjective impression), but this is very unusual.
They thought hint Io be a spy.
Ill	more normal styles, r/tar clauses are preferred after think.
They thought that the นพ fascinating.
We thought that he นพ a fool.
I lowever, the passive equivalent of the object ♦ complement structure is
reasonably common, usually with to be.
He นพ thought to he a spy.
5	transferred negation: / don't think ...
When think is used to introduce a negative clause, we most often put nor with
think, rather than with the following clause (► 219).
I don't think it will rain. (More natural than I think it won't rain.)
Emily doesn’t think she can come.
However, we can express surprise with / thought.,. nor.
Hello! I thought you weren't corning!
6	indirect speech
think docs not usually introduce indirect questions.
I was wondering if I could do anything Io help. (More natural than I was
thinking if...)
7	I thought...
Note the use of stressed I thought... to suggest that lhe speaker was right.
Compare:
'It isn't ivry nice.' Oh. dear. I thought you'd UKE it. (But I นพ wrong.y
‘It's beautifulโ ‘Oh. I am glad. I THOUGHT you'd like it. (And I นพ right.)'
8	I had thought..., I should think, etc
Past perfect forms can suggest that the speaker was mistaken, especially when
had is stressed.
I had thought that we u vre going to be invited to dinner.
I should think and I should have thought (also I would / I'd...) are used (mostly
in British English) to introduce guesses.
I should think we'll need at least twelve bottles of wine.
I’d have thought we could expect at least forty people.
This structure can also introduce criticisms.
I should have thought he could have washed his hands, at least.
though and although > 371
607	through, time
เท American English, through can be used to mean up to and including*.
The park is open from May through September.
vocabulary · 607 through: time
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
III	British English, through is not normally used in this way. Instead, British
people say, for example, to... inclusive, or until the end of...
The park is open from May to September Inclusive, (ox ... from May until the
end of September.)
through, across and over ► 35
608	time
1	countability and article use
Time has various uses, some countable and some uncountable (for full details
see a good dictionary)· .Most of these are straightforward, but there are problems
เท two areas:
a measure of duration: how long
When we talk about the number of hours, days, etc that are needed to complete
something, time is generally uncountable (and therefore used without a).
Hour much time do UT need to load the van?
Il took quite some lime to persuade her to talk to US.
Don't worry - there's plenty of time. This is a complete waste of lime.
However, lime is countable in certain expressions like a long!short time and
quite a time (BrE).
I look a long lime to get to sleep. She was away for quite a lime.
The time can be used to mean 'enough time’; the is often dropped.
lust come with me - I haven't got (the) time to explain.
b dock times
When we talk about clock times, time is countable.
Six o'clock would เท' a good time IO meet.
She phoned me at various times yesterday.
The Is dropped เท the expression it's time.
It's time to stop, (not It's thetime to stop )
2	without preposition
Prepositions are often dropped before some common expressions with lime
lie's busy. Why don't you come another time? (More natural than
...al another time.)
What time does the match start? (More natural than At U'hat time...?)
You won't fool me this time.
เท relative structures after time, that is often used instead of when in an informal
style (or dropped).
Do you remember the time (that) Freddy pretended to be a ghost?
You can come up and see me any time (that) you like.
The first time (that) I saw her, my heart Slopped.
vocabulary
time
3	on time and in time
On time means 'al the planned time', 'neither late nor early', rhe opposite is
'early' or 'late'. It is often used to refer to timetabled events.
Only one of the last six trains has been on time, (not ... in lime.)
Daniel wants the discussion to start exactly on time, (not .. .-Mme)
เท time means 'with enough time to spare’, ’before the last moment'.
n>e opposite is too late.
IVf arrived in time to get good seats, (not ... on lime IO gel good seats)
He would have died if they hadn't got him Io the hospital in lime
( WIT น1 si Jinn /n íjni llíiUMiáJ Inn-. 1
\■ · · ·	f
I nearly drove into the ear in front, but I stopped just in time.

to and at/in ►
609	tonight
Tonight refers to the present or coming night, not to the past night (last night).
Compare:
I had a terrible dream last night, (not I hadaferribledream tonight.)
I hope I sleep belter tonight.
610	too
1	too and very
loo is different from very - too means ‘more than enough*, more than
necessary' or more than is wanted'. Compare:
He's a very intelligent child.
He's too intelligent for his class - he's not learning anything
- It was very cold, but we went out.
It was too colli to go out. so we stayed at home.
2	too and too much
Before adjectives without nouns and before advertis we use too. not too much.
You're too kind to me. (not You're too much kind Ό me)
I arrived too early, (not Tar rived too mirth early.)
loo much is used, (or example, before nouns. For details, ►6)1.
I've got too much work.
3	modification: much too, far too, etc
Impressions which modify comparatives (► 207) also modify too.
much too old (not very loo οM)	a little too confident
a lot too big	a bit too soon
far too young	rather too often
vocabulary
tonight
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
4	not used before adjective + noun
Too is not normally used before adjective . noun.
I pul down the bag because ii was too heavy, (not ... à loo heavy bag.)
She doesn't like men who ate too tall, (not She doesn't likeMo MU men.)
let’s forget this problem - it's loo difficult, (not ... this too difficult problem )
เท a lather formal style, too can be used before adjective · a!an > noun
(► 187). Note the word order.
Il's too cold a day for tennis.
5	too ... + infinitive
We can use an infinitive structure after too · adjective'adverb.
He's too old to work. It's far too cold to go out.
We can also use an infinitive structure after loo much.1 many.
I here was too much snow to go walking.
If the infinitive has its own subject, this is introduced by for (► in).
It's too late for the pubs to Ik open.
there was loo much snow for US to go walking.
6	too salty to drink, etc
The subject of a sentence with too can also be the object of a following infinitive.
(For more about this structure, ► 1011). Object pronouns are not normally used
after the infinitive in this case.
The water is too salty to drink, (not the waler Õ Mo stdiy Mdrmk พ.)
However, object pronouns are possible in structures with for.
The water is too salty for แร to drink (it).
Note the two possible meanings of sentences like He's too stupid IO leach:
I .He's loo stupid to be a teacher.
2. He's loo stupid for anyone to leach - he can 't be taught.
7	That’s really too kind of you.
In informal speech too can sometimes be used to mean very'.
Oh, that'ร really too kind of you - thank you so much.
I’m not feeling too well.
8	only too ...
The expression only loo is used to mean very', ‘extremely·. It is common เท
formal offers and invitations.
We will be only too pleased if you can spend a few days with US.

too, also and as well ►
ulai · 610 too
611	too much and too many
1	the difference
I he difference between too much and too many is the same as the difference
lietween much and many (► I (>.*>). loo much is used with singular (uncountable)
nouns too many is used with plurals.
You put too much sail เท lhe soup.
I've had too many talc nights recently, (not ... loo much late Hights ..)
2	a bit too much, rather too many, etc
Expressions which modify comparatives (► 207) and too can also modify
too much and loo many.
She's wearing a bit loo much make up for my taste.
I've been to rather too many parlies recently.
However, much too many is unusual.
You ask far too many questions, (sor.. . Htueh-foo-HHtHy questions-.)
3	too much!many without a noun
Wc can drop a noun after too much, many, if the meaning is clear.
You've eaten too much.
'Did you get any answers to your advertisement7 ‘Too many.'
town and city ► 420
612	travel, journey, trip and voyage ______________
travel means 'travelling in general'. It is normally uncountable.
My interests are music and travel
The plural travels is sometimes used; it suggests a rather grand programme of
travelling or exploration.
He wrote a wonderful book about his travels in the Himalayas.
A tourney (more common in British English) is one 'piece' of travelling.
Did you have a good journey r (not Did you have a good travel/)
t met Megan on my last journey to England. (Nor ... my last travel}
A trip is a return journey together with the activity (business nr pleasure) which
is the reason for the journey.
I'm going on a business trip next week. (- I'm going on a journey and I m
going to do some business.)
Daniel's school is organising a skiing trip to the Alfts.
Compare:
'How was )<our journey7 'The train broke down.'
'How was your trip7 'Successful.'
We do not so often use trip for expeditions which have <1 very serious purpose.
are very hard and or take a very long time.
ilary > 611 too much and too many
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
เท 1861 the President travelled to Dakota to make peace with the Indians.
(χατ .. .-made a trip Io Dakota to make peace...)
Amundsen made his journey to the South Pole in 1911. (wi Amumlseomade
A long sea journey is often called a voyage.
Note the preposition: on a journey/trip/voyage.
type of, kind of and sort of » 192
(the) United Kingdom, England. Britain and
the British Isles ► 111
613	until
1	until and till
These two words can lie used both as prepositions and conjunctions. They mean
exactly the same. Till (AmE also 'til or til) is informal.
OK. then, I won't expect you until till midnight.
I'll wait until till I hear from you.
The new timetable will remain in operation until lune 30
2	untilltill and to
To can sometimes be used as a preposition of time with the same meaning
as until'till. This happens after from ...
I usually work from nine to five. (Oft.. from nine until till five.)
We can also use to when counting the time until a future event.
It's another three weeks to my birthday, (or ... until till my birthday.)
เท other cases, to is not generally used.
I waited for her until six o'clock, but she didn't Clime, (tor I waited for her to
MX o'clock ...)
3	distance and quantity: untilltill not used
Until/till >s used only to talk about time. To talk about distance, we use to.
as far as or up to; up to is also used to talk about quantity.
We walked as far as/ up to the edge of the forest, (tor .. till the edge...)
The minibus can hold up to thirteen people, (mu ... wild thirteen people.)
You can earn up to £1,500 a week in this Job.
4	tenses with until
Present tenses are used to refer to the future alter until (► 2.11).
I'll wait until she gets here, (tot ... until she wdlget here.)
Present perfect and past perfect tenses can emphasise the idea of completion.
You're not going home until you've finished that report.
I waited until the rain had stopped.
613 until
5	structure with Not until...
In a literary style it is possible to begin a sentence with .Vol until.... using
inverted word order in the main clause (► 270).
Not until that evening was she able to recover her self-control.
Not until I left home did I begin Io understand how strange my family was.
6	until and by: states and actions
We use until to talk about a situation or state that will continue up to a certain
moment. We use by (► I! I) to say that an action or event will happen at or
before a future moment. Compare:
-	Can I stay until the weekend'
Yes, but you’ll have to leave by twelve on Monday at the latest.
(ะ at twelve on Monday or before)
-	(/in you repair my watch tf I leave it until Saturday?
No, but ur can do it by next Tuesday, (noi ... until next Tuesday.)
7	until and before
Not until/till can mean the same as not before.
I won’t be seeing ludy until·before Tuesday.
And both until and before can be used to say how far away a future event is.
It’ll be ages until1 before we meet again.
There's only six weeks left until before Christmas.
614	up, down
1	'towards/away from the centre'
Up and down arc not only used to refer to higher and lower |>o$itions. They can
also refer to more or less important or central places. (Trains to London used to
be called up trains', and trains from london 'down trains'.)
The ambassador walked slowly up the room towards the Queen'ร throne
She ran down the passage, out of the front door and down the garden.
We’ll be going down to the country for the weekend.
But in the US downtown refers to the central business, entertainment area.
2	north and south
People often use up and down for movements towards the north and south
(perhaps because north is at the top of a map page).
I work in l/mdon, but I have to travel up to Glasgow every few weeks.
3	'along'
Sometimes both up and down are used to mean ‘along’, 'further on’, with little
or no difference of meaning.
The nearest bank is about half a mile up1 down the road.
vocabulary - 614 up. down
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
615	(be) used to
1	meaning
If a person is used to something, it is familiar; he or she hits experienced it so
much that it เร no longer strange or new.
I've lived เท Central London for six years now, so I'm used to the noise.
At the beginning I couldn’t understand Londoners because I wasn't used Io
the accent.
2	structures
He used to can be followed by -Ing forms, but not infinitives (► 101.2).
I'm used to driving เท London nou·. but it was hard al the biginning
(not rm used todrwe-in-LottdoH-...)
It was a long time before she was used to working with old people.
Used is an adjective in this structure, and can be modified by quite or very.
I'm quite used to her little ways.
3	get used to.. ./ng, etc
(let. become and sometimes grow (► 301) can also be used before
used to (.. .Ing).
You 'll soon gel used to living in the country.
Little by little, he became used IO his new family.
It took them a long time to grow used to getting up in the night.
4	pronunciation
Note that used is pronounced ju:st in this structure.
For น»ท/10 . Inf Inline (eg. I น»ท» to staoirl · "7
616	very and very much
1	adjectives and adverbs: very kind1 very quickly
We use very, not very much, before adjectives and adverbs.
You're very kind (not Yott're very much A#พ/.)
rhe situation is very serious, (not ... verymuch-seriou^)
f came very quickly. (.NOT.. .-very much qukkly)
However, (very) much is used before comparatives.
I'm (very) much happier in my neu'Job. (.NOT ... very happier ...)
Tor Γcry with superlative* (ivry fint. very hcM. cic). ► &J7.4. For the *wy wmc » .
2	not very
N’ol very expresses quite a low degree.
It’s not very warm - you'd better take a coat.
That meal wasn't very expensive. (- quite cheap.)
Note that little cannot be used in this way.
He's not very imaginative, (not He’s little imaginative.)
vocabulars «616 very and eery much
z past participles: very much loved, very worried
Before past participles we normally use very much.
She น่ผ very much loved by her grandchildren, (not à-«v?s very loved )
journey times will be very much reduced by the neu> road. (no. ... very
But we use very with some past participles that are used as adjectives.
For details, ► *»6.8.
I'm very worried about Angela, (not .. . very^nueh^vorrwd . ..)
IVe were very surprised when Han passed his exam. (More common than ...
very much surprised...)
4 very much (adverbial)
Very much can he an adverbial.
เพ· very much enjoyed the party, (mu เพ- very enjoyed...)
We do not normally put very much between a verb and its object.
I very much tike mountains, (not Í like very much mountains,)
Very much can also be a determiner before a noun.
She didn't have very much money
Have you got very much work to dor
Very much is not often used as a determiner in affirmative clauses (► 165.4).
There was a lot of snow on the road, (not there was very much snow ..)
voyage, journey, travel and trip ► 6
617 wait
Wait can be followed by an infinitive.
I'll wait to hear from you before I do anything
Before a direct object, wait forts used.
Please wait for me here, (not Please leaUme-herv.)
//irtt clauses are not used, but an object * infinitive structure is possible.
We'll have to wait for the photos to be ready, (not ... wait that the photos
are ready.)
The time preposition for is often dropped after wail.
I waited (for) a very long time for her answer.
I he transitive verb await is formal, and is used mostly with abstract objects.
We're still awaiting instructions.
Fix the dillcicnrc henwen unujw and eiprvl. » I
wait, hope, expect and look forward ►
wake(n) and awake(n) ► .นfl
617	wait
Word Problems from A to
Section 31
618	want
1	infinitive with to
After want, we normally· use an infinitive with to.
I don't want to come hack here ever again, (no I Tdowt-mmi come back-...)
7/Mf-clauses are not normally used after want, but an object ' infinitive
structure (► M) is possible.
Do you want me Io make you some coffeef (mh />, BW mmI (fhrtiH make
1UU4 à. ·ηι.ι J *1L· -	\
r ”·■ ·’’^»»· พ พ Ullt พ · /
/ don 't want that woman to come here.
เท American English, a structure with for - object ' infinitive is also possible.
Do you want for me to make you some coffee?
2	structure with object complement
Want can lx* followed by an object together with a complement (adjective,
adverbial or past participle) to express ideas such as change or result.
She doesn't want him back.
We want the job finished by Tuesday.
They wanted him dead
I want her out of there now.
To be or as is used before a noun complement.
I want you to be my friend. (on ... as my friend.) (not 7 wan! you my friend )
3	want meaning 'need'
In informal British English, we can say that a thing 'wants' (ะ needs) something,
particularly with reference to actions.
That car wants a clean. Your hair wants a good brush.
เท this case, want can lie followed by an ing form (like need. » -»12).
This coat wants cleaning (= ... needs to be cleaned.)
4	I wanna hold your hand.
เท informal speech, want to often sounds like 'wanna'. It is sometimes spelt
like this เท order to represent conversational pronunciation - for example
in comic strips.
F<H to uwd inMnd ๗ a -hot* -Γιηχή» (c II I dnn'l u«fir to. autol.เ . jno.
want and will ►
619	-ward(s)
Backward(s). forward(s). norlhward(s), outward(s) and similar words can be
used as adjectives or adverbs.
vocabulary · 619 •นพd(ร)
1	adjectives
When they arc used as adjectives, they do not have r
This country is very backward in some ways.
You're not allowed to make fl forward pass in rugby.
He was last seen driving in a northward direction.
2	adverbs
When these words are adverbs, they can generally be used with or without ■ร.
The forms with •ร an· generally a little more common เท British English,
and the forms without ■ร in American English.
Why are you moving hackward(s) and forward(s)?
If we keep going upward(s). we must gel to the top.
Let's start driving homeward(s).
เท some figurative expressions such as look forward to, bring forward.
put forward, the form without •ร is always used.
I look forward to hearing from you.
She put forward a very interesting suggestion.
3	other words
Towards and afterwards are the usual forms in British English;
in American English, toward and afterward are also common.
watch, look (at) and see ►
620 way
1	preposition dropped
เท an informal Style, we usually drop the prepositions in or by before way.
You re doing it (เท) the wrong way. Come this way.
Do it (เท) any way you like.	We went there the เwad way.
2	relative structures
เท an informal Sty le, we often say the way (that) instead of the way in/by which.
I don't like the way (that) you talk to me.
l et s go the way (that) MV went yesterday
3	infinitive or -ing
After way (meaning ‘method*/*manner') we can use an infinitive structure
or of.. .เทg. There 1$ no important difference between the two structures
There's no way to prow of proving that he was stealing.
4	way of and means of
Way of is unusual before a noun (except in the common expression way of life).
We use means of or method of instead.
The 19th century saw a revolution in means of transport.
(Mil ... waysofifansporf)
They tried all possible methods of instruction, but the child learnt nothing.
vocabular · 620 way
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
5	เท the way and on the way
These expressions are quite different. เท lhe/my, etc way is used for obstacles -
things that stop people getting where they want to.
/ can 7 gel the car out because those boxes are เท the way.
Please don't stand เท the doorway - youre in my way.
On the/my, etc way means 'during the journey/movement’ or 'coming*.
We'll have lunch on our way. Spring is on the way.
Forty Army. » /»l I.
621	welcome
Note the common negative meaning of 'welcome to it'.
Aren 7 you unmet! that somebody will steal your car? ' They ‘re welcome to it.
It's more trouble than It's worth:
Compare:
Welcome to London!
London - you're welcome to it! ( I hope you like it more than I do.)
622	well
1	well and good
Well and good can have similar meanings, but in this case well is an adverb,
while good is an adjective. Compare:
-	The car runs well (adverb modifying runs) (‘ห! I he ear run. good)
It's a well-made car. (adverb modifying made)
It's a good car. (adjective modifying car)
-	He teaches very well.
I like that teacher. He's good (sol He's well )
-	She speaks English well, (nor she .peaks English good )
She speaks good English.
Her English is good.
Note that we cannot say She speaks wen English. (Adverbs cannot usually go
between lire verb and the object. ► 196.1.)
2	well = 'in good health'
There is also an adjective well, meaning 'เท good health’.
’How are you? ‘Quite well, thanks.'	I don't feel Iพุ' well.
Note that the adjective well is only used to talk about health. Compare:
When I'm in the mountains I am always well.
117ten I'm with you I'm happy, (not เพแพ I'm wilh yrH' I'm well.)
Well is not common before a rioun. We can say She's we/L but it is less usual to
say, for example. She's a well girl.
vocabulary · 622 well
I'm good is now often used informally to mean 'I'm OK', especially when
refusing an offer.
More coffeer ‘No, I'm good, thanks.'
Want help?" It s OK - I’m good:
west and western, etc ► 111!
what if ► 599
what... like and how ► 1'13
what, which and who: question words ► 625
623	when and if
A person who says when (referring to the future) is sure that something will
happen. A person who says if Is unsure whether it will happen. Compare:
I'll see you al Christmas when we're all at Sophie’s place. (We are certain to be
at Sophie's place.)
I'll see you in August if I come to New York. (Perhaps I'll come to New York,
perhaps not.)
To talk about repeated, predictable situations and events (in the sense of
whenever’), I Kith when and if can be used with little difference of meaning.
Whenlf you heat ice it turns Io water.
When If I'm in li ver pool I usually Slay with my sister.
624	where (to)
Io	is often dropped after where.
Where are you going (to)?	Where does this road lead (to) ?
To is not normally dropped in the short question Where to?
'Couldyou send this offfor me? ‘Where tor
for »'ltm เท retaltw «luiivt. » ilJ
625	which, what and who: question words
1 which and what, the difference
which and what are often both possible, with little difference of meaning.
Which/What is the hottest city in the world?
Which. What train did you come on?
Which,' What people jianc influenced you most in your life?
IIV · 623 when and if
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
We prefer which when พ»· have a limited number of chokes in mind.
IVe'i* got while or brown bread. Which will you hair? (More natural than ...
What will you have?)
Which size do you want - small, medium or large?
When we are not thinking of a limited number of chokes, what is preferred.
What language do they speak in Greenland? (More natural than
Which language...)
What's your phone number? (not winch ts you· phone Humber?)
2	determiners: which and what
Before nouns, which and U'har can be used to ask questions about both things
and people.
Which teacher do you like best?
Which colour do you want - green, red, yellow or brown?
What writers do you like?	What colour are your baby's eyes?
3	which of
Before another determiner (e g. the, my, these) or a pronoun, we use which of.
Who and what are not normally used w ith of like this in modern English.
Which of your teachers do you like best? (not Who/What of your teachers . ..)
Which of us is going to do the cooking? (not Wk&of-HS-. ..?)
Which of these coals is yours? (xor What of these ..?)
4	without nouns: who for people
When these words arc not followed by nouns or pronouns, we generally use
who, not which, for people.
Who won - Smith or Fitzgibbon?(hot Which won ...?)
Who are you going out with - Lesley or Maria?
However, which cjn be used เท questions about people’s identity, and what can
be used to ask about people’s jobs and functions.
' Which is your husband?'' The one in Jeans.'
So lessica's the Managing Director. What's Daniel?
X»' relative น*>11 (eg น*น» I เพง ท...),»2พ.
hot «inguUr and plural \crt* after μΛο and U’har, ► 130 โ»
626	who and whom
Whom is unusual in informal modem English.
1 questions: Who did they arrest?
We normally use who as an object in questions.
Who did they arrest?
Prepositions usually come at the end of who--questions (► 209).
Who did she go with?
เท a very formal style, whom is sometimes used.
Whom did they arrest? (formal)
Prepositions normally come before whom.
With whom did she go? (very formal)
vocabulary
who and whom
2	relative clauses: the man (who) we met
เท identifying relative clause*. (► 234), whom is unusual in an informal style.
Either we leave out the object pronoun, or we use that or who
(► 233 234 tor details).
ใhere’s the man (that)/(who) น*»· mel in the pub last night.
เท a formal style whom is more common.
She married a man whom she met at a conference.
เท non-identifying relative clauses (► 234), we usually use whom as an object
when necessary (but these clauses are uncommon in informal English).
This is lohn Pertins, whom you met at the sales conference.
I have a number of American relatives, most of whom live in Texas.
3	who(m) he thought, etc
เท a sentence like He was trying to find an old school friend, U‘ho(m) he thought
was living เท New Zealand, people are often unsure whether whom is possible
(because it seems to be the object of the first following verb) or whether they
should use who (because it is the subject of the second verb). Who is considered
more correct, but whom is sometimes used. Another example:
there Is a child เท this class who(rn) I believe is a musical genius.
เท cases with a following Infinitive, usage is mixed, but whom is considered
more correct.
There is a child in the doss who(m) I believe to be a musical genius.
627	who ever, what ever, etc
These expressions show surprise or difficulty· เท understanding something.
Who ever is that strange girl with George?
What ever are you doing?
How ever did you manage to start the car? I couldn't.
When ever will I have time Io do some shopping?
Why ever did I marry you?
The expressions can also be written as single words: whoever, whatever, etc.
Note that whose and which are not used with ever in this way.
I·nr the co<xunction* uAwirz.	etc. ►
628	whose: question word
1 with a noun or alone
The question word whose can be used with a noun as a determiner, like
my, your, etc.
Whose car is that outside?
Whose garden do you think looks the nicest?
Whose can also be used alone, like mine, yours, etc.
Whose is that car outside? · Whose is this?' 'Mine.'
vocabulary
who ever, what ever, etc
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
2 prepositions
Prepositions can normally come cither before whose (more formal) or at the end
of the clause (leu formal). ► 209 for details.
For whose benefit were all these changes madeΐ
Whose side are you on?
In short questions with no verb, prepositions can only come before whose.
'I'm going to buy a car.' 'With whose money?' (x<ri Whose money with?}

629	whose and who's
Whose is a possessive word meaning 'of whom/which’, used in questions and
relative clauses. Who's is the contraction of who is or who has. Compare:
Whose is that coat? (not Who', is that eoaf?)
แ was a decision whose importance was not realised at the time.
(NOT	Ieho*ร trnffOftance I
- Do you know anybody who's going to Poland in the next few days?
IV/YT
\·’'*· · · » wTrywwi	I · •/
I’ve got a cousin who's never been to London, (koi .. . นthose neeef free" ..)
There is a similar confusion between its and it's: ► 301.
630	why and why not
1	replies
We generally use Why not?, not Why?, in short replies to negative statements.
Compare:
‘ They V1' decided to mot'e to Devon.' 'Why?
Ί can't manage tomorrow evening.' ‘Why not?' (More natural than Why?)
Why not? can also เพ used to agree to a suggestion,
'Let's eat out this evening' 'Yes, why not?"
2	Why should...?
A Structure with why followed by should can suggest surprise.
I wonder why she should want to go out with me.
I he structure can also suggest anger or refusal to do something.
I don't see why we should hate to pay for your mistake.
'Give me a cigarette.’ 'Why should ir
3	infinitive structures
Why can be followed by an infinitive without to. Illis structure can suggest that
an action is unnecessary or pointless.
Why argue with him? He'll never change his mind, (xor Why mgHtHg...?
DR Why to afgtH* , a?)
Why pay more at other shops? We have the best value.
abulary · 630 why and why not
Why not · Infinitive without Io is used to make suggestions.
'Sandy 'I in a bad mood: ' why not give Iter some/lowers?
Why don Ί...? can be used in the same way.
Why don't you give her some /lowers?
Why don't we go and see ltdie'
wide and broad - 112
631	will and want
Will and want can both be used to talk about wishes, but they are rather
different. Will is used mostly เท 'Interpersonal* ways, to express wishes that affect
other people through orders, requests, offers, promises, etc. Want simply refers
to people’s wishes - nothing more. Will is to do with actions, want is to do with
thoughts. Compare:
-	Will you open the window ? (an order)
Do you want to open the window? (a question about somebody's wishes)
-	She น»n't tell anybody. (- She refuses to ...)
She doesn't want to tell anybody. (ะ: She prefers not to ...)
Note that will cannot be used with a direct object.
Do you want / Would you like an aspirin? (not Will you an aspirin?)
><" í rompwfeDn betwttn u<il MX1 ด้«เท* r». » IS.
win and beat ►
632	wish
1	wish + infinitive
We can use wish ♦ infinitive to mean want. Wish is very formal in this sense.
Note that progressive forms arc not used.
I wish to see the manager, please, (sor I'm wishing to พ...)
if you wish to reserve a table, please telephone after five o'clock.
An object * infinitive structure is also possible.
We do not wish our names to appear in the report.
Wish · direct object is not normal without a following infinitive
I want / would like an appointment with the manager.
I tilt 1 is .น, .น»เนน!!>นูนนน/นู่ 11น| »1ฟ1 tujifci» I
í <WII r mwi r«n cerrirsrirjsr rrvrrr IV · · r · irit ”·! < r mel V . J
2	I wish you ...
Wish is used with two objects in some fixed expressions of good wishes.
I wish you a Merry Christmas. We all wish you a speedy recovery.
Here s wishing you all the best in your new job.
\<>cabularv · 631 will and want
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
wish + that-clause: meaning
We can also use wish with a àk clause {that can Ικ· dropped in an informal
style). เท this case, wish does not mean want - it expresses regret that things
are not different, ami refers to situations that are unreal, impossible or unlikely.
Tenses arc similar to those used with iff sec below),
I wish flhat) I was better looking.
Don't you wish (that) you could fly?
We all wish (that) the snow would stay forever.
Wish ♦ that clause IS not generally used for wishes about things that seem
possible เท the future. We often Utt hope in this sense (► 490).
/ hope you pass your exams, (not I wish you would pass your exams.)
I hope you feel belter tomorrow, (not kwish yottfeh better-tomorrow.)
wish ♦ khak clause' tenses
เท a that clause after wish, we generally use the same tenses as we would use,
for instance, after ‘It would be nice if..(► 239). Past tenses arc used with a
present or future meaning.
I wish I spoke lapanese. (- It would be nice if I spoke lapancse.)
I with I had a yacht. I wish tomorrow was Sunday.
Ml the staff wish you weren’t leaving so soon.
Do you ever wish you lived somewhere else?
Were can be used instead of was in this structure, especially in a formal style.
I wish that I were better looking.
Past perfect tenses are used for wishes about the past.
I wish you hadn’t said that. (■ It would be nice if you hadn't said that.)
Now she wishes she had studied harder.
เท informal speech, sentences like I wish you'd have seen แ sometimes occur.
wish . . . would
Would is very common in that clauses after wish (much more common than it is
in (/-clauses). Sentences with wish... would express regret or annoyance that
something will not happen.
Everybody wishes you would go home. (- Why won’t you go home?)
I wish you would slop smoking. (= Why won’t you stop smoking?)
I wish lack uould call me. (But it looks as if he won’t.)
I wish it uould stop raining. (- It will keep on raining!)
Don Ί you wish that this moment uould last forever?
Sentences with wish___wouldn't refer to things that do or will happen.
I wish you wouldn't keep making that stupid noise.
(= You will keep making___)
Wish... uould(n’l) can be like an order or a critical request. Compare:
I wish you wouldn't drive so fast. (Similar to Please don't drive so fast.)
I wish you didn't drive so fast. (More like I'm sorry you drive so fast.)
- I wish you wouldn't work on Sundays. (= Why don't you stop?)
I wish you didn't work on Sundays. (- It's a pity.)
632 wish
633	with
1	trembling with rage, blue with cold, etc
With is used in a number 0Í expressions which say how people arc showing
their emotions and sensations.
My father was trembling with rage.
Annie was jumping up and down with excitement.
When I found her she was blue with cold.
white with fear/rage	green with envy
red with anger/embarrassment	shivering with cold
2	angry with, etc
With is also used after a number of adjectives which say how people are feeling
towards others.
I'm cross with you.	furious with upset with
angry with	pleased with
After words which say how people act towards others (like kind. nice, polite,
rude, good), we generally use to, not with.
She was very nice to me. (not .. .nice with me.)
3	with meaning 'against'
After fight, struggle, quarrel, argue, play and words with similar meanings.
with can be used with the same meaning as against.
Don’t fight with him - he's bigger than you are.
Will you play chess with me?
4	accompanying circumstances and reasons
With can introduce accompanying circumstances or reasons (rather like
and there is was or because there is!was).
The runners started the race with a light following wind.
With all this work to do, I won Ί have time to go out.
With friends like you. who needs enemies?
Without can be used in similar ways.
Without Emma and lake, we're going to have trouble finishing the repairs.
5	possession
With is very often used, like have, to indicate possession and similar ideas.
There are so many people around with no homes. (-·... who have no homes.)
They’ve bought a house with a big garden
6	clothing, voices, transport, etc
Note that เท is often used instead of with to refer to articles of clothing.
Who's the man in the funny hat?
Could you go and give this trailer to the woman in glasses?
We say in a ... voice, NOI with a ... verier·.
Why are you talking in such a loud voice?
Note also: by car/train, etc (NOI wrduhei-ar, etc), and write in pencil/ink.
Fee thr difference between by and irir*. » iil>.
vocabulary
with
Word Problems from A to z
Section 31
with and by » 416
634	worth
1	worth a lot, etc
Worth ran be followed by an expression describing the value of something.
That piano must be worth a tot.
I don't think their pizzas are worth the money.
'Shall I talk to Rohr ‘It's not worth the trouble.'
In questions about value, either what or how much ran be used.
What How much is that painting worth?
2	a million dollars' worth of...
A possessive can be used before worth in expressions with numbers.
They’ve ordered a million dollars' worth of computer software.
z It's worth talking to Joe; Joe's worth talking to
To talk about the value of an activity, we can use an -Ing form with worth.
The -Ing clause cannot be the subject; we often use preparatory it.
It’s worth talking to Joe. (not Talking to Joe is worth.)
It isn’t worth repairing the car.
Is it worth visiting I eicesler?
We can also use a structure in which the object of the ing form (Joe, the car,
Leicester) is made the subject of the sentence.
Joe's worth talking to.
The car isn’t worth repairing, (not ThenarTsrrt-worlh repairing it.
OR The car isn't worth to berrprured.)
Is Leicester worth visiting?
for mote «boui «ruourn เท whhh I he obj«i ๗ ■ wrti Is thr wbpa of the sentence (e.R ร*·! NX, «Ο
4	It's worth it.
We often use It's (not) worth it to say whether something is worth doing.
If you pay a bit more you gel a room to yourself I think it's worth it.
'Should we go and see the castle?’ 'No, it's not worth u:
5	worthwhile
Worthwhile (or worth while) is sometimes used instead of worth, particularly to
express the idea worth spending time'.
Is it worthwhile visiting Leicester?
Infinitives are also possible after worthwhile.
We thought it might be worthwhile to compare the two years' accounts.
Note also the structure worth somebody's while.
Would you like to do some gardening for me? I'll make it worth your while
(= ... I'll pay you enough.)
634 worth
6	well worth
Worth can be modified by urll.
Leicester's well worth visiting, (not ... eery-worth...)
635	yes and no
1	answers to negatives
เท English, yes is used with affirmative sentences and no with negative
sentences. เท answers to negative questions and statements, yrs and no are
chosen according to the form of the answer, not in order to show agreement or
disagreement with the speaker.
Aren't you going outT ‘No, I'm not.' (sot Yes. I'm not.)
I have no money·.' 'No, I haven't either.' (koi Yes, I haven't too.)
Haven't you got a raincoatr Yes, I have.’ (not No. I have.)
2	contradicting
Some languages have a special word for contradicting negative statements or
suggestions (e.g. French si or German doth). English does not have a word like
this. We often use a short answer structure (► 30B).
The phone isn't working.’ '(Yes,) it is.' (Nor 'the phene isn’t working' -Yes/)
Affirmative sentences are contradicted with negative short answers.
'It's raining." ‘(No,) it isn’t:
lor "Hire about rxgilivT qurMlom. » 21".
yet, still and already: time ► 535
zero » 537
vocaliulan » 635 yes and no
Index
Index
a an 133-135,137 พ.«undoneเท
number* 322.10, a with half 478.4:
ItenratamoiK (e g rt dMidiwdi )
140 2: poMottz with mJiow.w· kx> ♦
ธฺธะ.
andon *37.7; 70mttr*an'«»>,.etc
322 19; weak and «King pronunciation
315 1. with uncountable noun* 120.4;
see aho articles
-> bit 406; softening r.jxe'.'iixi 312 >:
with comparative* 207 1
a couple of . plural vetb 128 2
a few. A» and 60 &ฬเ' 168; with Of 168 1
a great deal 172 4
a group of · plural vvrb 128 2
a largo amount, number 172 4
a little, hrrleand (a) few 168: with of 168.1
with comparative·. 207 1
a long time and tong 517
a long way and fat 461
a lot and Ion 172 2: with comparative·, 207;
a to/of...· plural vvth 1282
a number of . plural wtb 128 2
abbreviated style* 291
abbreviation* 336
ability con and co»w 8.’ 83
about andfrOmimrf 376. and on 352;
ffon>rrfror.l '492 4
about to 353
academic writing 288
accent* 316 3 4
accept and Agree '55
accommodation uncountable 119 3
according to 356
accuse preposition 213
accustomed - rngfonniu infinitive 105 11
acbe (verb) simple or progressive 34 6
acronym* 336 3
across. ΟΙer and dmxtgh 357
act and play 555 2
active verb censes 2
actualfly) 358; discourse market tn writing
ad"and f«. 324.3
addresses ill. in and IM 384 6: XI letters
289; in emails 290 1,290 3
adjetive clauses see relative structures
adjective* SECTOM t$
. infinitive 101
• ing tom 103
adjectin’· and advert* of manner
(e.g, happy aná happily) 193
adjective* or adverbs: confusing cases 194
after linking verba (e g. Iff. win. too*) 11 2
after *ir. 1๘;ฟ, be. fait. ru 11 ร
before personal pronouns (eg. 1๖0r you!)
174.7
comparison 204, 2C6 208
I ornpfementetion: wlut can follow .เท
adjective’ 192
leaving out words after adjectives 188
coder before noun* 184 1 3
position 183; after «>. <iot<·. 50. too 187;
after measurement nouns 186.4. after
noun* and pronoun* 186; after object
183 4. with Mmrthlrw eien tiling, etc
use of commas 2969
with El 185
word order with complements (e g MM
I ท design) 186.5
admired rrntehadnuml 96 8
admit., ing 1001
adopted position and meaning 96 7
advanced active past participle 96 4
adverb particles (eg twc*. 0W7) 195;
เท phrasal Serb* 12
adverbial clauses </$iCnon 22. Other
adverbial clauses SEC1ION23
adverbs and adverbiais petition 196 202.
adverbs of manner and adjectives
<etity*Bd h'ml ' ^'*''
conrietUiigand comment adverbiais 197;
indefinite frequency 198 1; certainty
198 2; completeness 198 3. focusing 193;
manner, püce and time 201: position with
ought IO 76.3; with «serf70 87; comparison
205; ending M 4y. spelling 345.1 i-
often, etc with present perfect 47 5.
yauniay. etc not used with present perfect
48 2; adverbiais and conjunctions: tile
difference 283 I;punctuation 283 t, 296 8;
see abo adverb particles
advertisements weeds left out 291 1
advice uncountable 119 3; - subjunctive
232.2
advise < object, infinitive 98; < utgfocmoc
Infinitlvv 105.4
afford . infinitive 97
afloat position 183 3
Index
afraid position 181 I. afraid soinot 585.1;
lx- afraid 251; beaftaid and fra' 159.1;
with ing form or infinitive 105.11;
I'm afraid meaning Tm sorry' 1592
African American 115.2
after (adverb) shortly after. elc 3601;
Mdafteruardi 3602
after (conjunction) พ; after. ..mg 249 4;
- perfect tense» 249 3; - present with
future meaning 249.2; · pastor paM
perfect 54 1
after all 361;and/inaffy 361 2
afterward)») 619 1; and rafter 360 2
age (noun) preposition 3212 1'unmarked'
ure 190; ห#» ages 1189
age (talking about age) 323; use of be 25 2
age (suffix) 338.2
aged pronunciation 191
agent 7.1;lnpaweMmcturw 58
ago 362. and before 362 4. and.Jfar 362 3;
not used with present perfect 48 2;
lenses 362.?. word order 362 1
agree . infinitive 97; and accept 355;
/ เพพ(รแทpie present) 34 kit was
agreed to... 63.2; non progressive verb
4.2; prepoOdon 213; a. agreed 27511
agreement mat'd singular and plural
128-130; multiple negatives 220
-al	338 4
alight position 183 3
alike 363; position 183 3
alive position 183 3
andaWc^ 147.1:and both 146 1;
and nvry 152; and I. bale 150
•dl. everybody and everyth lag 149
all that .. (relative structure) 233 4
repressions with no preposition 214 2
following article dropped 142 5
all ..but 413.1
all day week etc 147 5; oil day and ei wy
all right showing change of subject 301 1;
and alright 364
all the better, all the more important
instead of coidd 81.5
almost pewition 200 1; with superfatives
207 3; almost. nearly .Iixl practically 366
alone position 183.3; ataw.fonrfy.
lonesome and lone 367
along and through 368
aloud and fotâ 520
already tenses 595 7; with present perfect
47.A. already, slid and yer 595
discourse marker เท wilting 284 2.
in speech 301.2; not Old)·... but abo
alternatefly) and alternatively) 370
although, though, but and however 371;
and hut ทเห used together 229 5;
and เท 'pile "f 498
altogether .indan together 372
always position 198 1;fci imperatives
224.7; and e.vz 454 5. with progressive ร;
with ชเทเ*· past 49.4
am weak and strong pronunciation 315 3
am (ะ in the morning) 325 3
American used for United Slates citizens
American English American British
differences 319, grammar 319 1;
vocabular 3192.spelling 319.3;
pronunciation 319 4; ad jec the forms
รู่รู่รฺ
huictoand mint 75.1; irregular verbs 1 2;
letters 289 Notes; names of meals 330 2;
noun, noun (c g, a doll house) 127 1;
use of subjunctive 232 2
among and beturen -103; meaning 'one of'
4014
amount with uncountable» 172 4; Mkiwing
ankle dropped 142 7
amused very!much amused 968
analysis plural 117.4
and 226*1^ infinitive without to 91 4;
after try. Halt. go. etc 99; both.. . and
228.1; dlipsisfleasingosit words) after
and 276; เท numbets 322 9. weak
and strong pronunciation 315 3; with
adjectives 185
Anglo- (prefl») 338 1
angry preposition 213
anot he" thing'll Ml. 2
ante- (prefix) 3381
anti- (prefix) 338.1
antique(s) shop 1254
anxious preposition 213; amài to 101.1;
anxious fir... น 113.3
any 159
after superlatives 2068
and any of 159 5; and every 162. and nerf
Index
any matt 1595
an, .. burl- except) 413.1
any different, good.1 ase 373
anymore and แ")”1พ 535
any the นvrw. นพ». «< 200 2
expressions with no preposition 214 2
รุ^-». «
notiaffirmativewotd 222
with comparatives (eg. any/.lAv) 373.1
i/orry 24.1 6
anybody Old anyone 180.1; anyone and
anyone 18Ü 7. non affirmative words
222; position with wtycaเห» 186 6:
withrbe 4.17 1
anyhow 301.3
anyone M* anybody
anything 180,ธnyMngelsr 447 1.
rmyfWr«Av ...to 113.6; anything that
233.4; position with adjectives 186.6
anyway 301 3
anywhere 180; position with alcoves
186.6; anyxi Arre else 447 1
apart from discourse marker เท writing
284.2. in speech 3012
apologies 329 7
apologise preposition 213
apostrophe 340. in plurah of abbreviations
3364
apparently discourse marker เท writing
284 3. in speech 301 3
appear linking Serb 374 l.nndwem 374 2;
เท negative sentences 219 4; meaning
582.1; structure with there 20.5
appreciate . in*. 100 1; will! preparatory
น (eg I นพท'd appreciate It if you...)
269 3
approach no followingprvposioon 214 1
Arab Lratnc and Arabian 321 lores
arch- (prcfi·) 338.1
are wrak and strong pronunciation 315.3
areas 322 18
arise and rise 375
arms plural «1th no singular 11/7
around ntwtd ,ind about 376
arrange . mfinmve yi.anan&fof... to
arrive prepositions 384 5
arrived (actrvv past panic.pie) 96 4
art older Inglish form at air 318.10
a (ธ/.ท. and rM 133-142
basic information 134 135
ท and an; the difference 137.7
a and line in numbers 322.10
« with half 478.4
days, months and seasons 142 9
dropped after amount/number of
142 7; after both and all 142 5; after
kind of, etc 142 6; เท noun · noun
compounds 142 4; after possessor
'ร 142.3; In instructions, etc 142.20.
เท advertisements 291 1; In double
expressions 142 2
exclamations (What น...') 142 14
Illnesses 14215
jobs and positions 142.12
man and unman 142 8
measurements le g by the kite) 142 17
musical instruments 142.10
newspapersand magazines 142 19
NO article with plurais and uncouriiaUes
parts of the body 142 16
radio, cinema, theatre and television 142
some/an, or no angle 139
special rules and exceptions 142
talking เท general 140
rhe accused, the Wind, the Hriliih.
the supernatural.™: 188
the instead III possessive (e g hit him on
the arm) 143 5
the older.... the happier, etc 206$
die with Mi 478.3
the with Ing forms (eg. the opening of
huliament) 94 3
rhe with superlatives 208 6
70 miles an hour, etc 322 19
see also a/an, the
as (similarity, function)
and iflr 515
*	infinitive without to 91 4
*	u dl nr present tense with future
meaning 231.2
(น..203
«ร.. .นุ่น;115.6
as and that nol useil together 229 5
at. hie nod hoc.· 492 3
ธร, than and that 206 1
ellipsis (leavingout winds) after ท. 275.7
not used after เท·™ 576 5
replacing subjects. objects and
complements (e g <1, happened
yesterday, (is fatten·*, as แพ agreed.
verb before subject after ai 270.5
«Viik and strong pronunciation 315 3
as (reason) «ร. bemuse. Since and fin 377
Index
as (time) as. uhen and น·พ 251
as a matte· of fact 301}
as a result fiositfon 197; punctuation
283.1; discourse marker 284 2
as*.» as 61} 3 .as far as... u concerned
discourse marker เท writing 284 1,
เท speech 301.1
as follows 256
as I was saying 301 1
as If 378/v(a'(f 463 3;art/...
as long as 379; meaning on condition that
3)92
as much many 203
as regards discourse marker เท writing
284 1, in speech 301.1
as soon as - present with future meaning
as though ,78;Jพุ 1ย though 463 3;
UlooksasdMugh 268 ร
as usual 381
as well position 369 I; nut)·' might as uell
as well as 382;. singular verb 130.4;
asueilasthal 3012
ask and ask/or 383 1; ♦ infinitive 383.2;
. object - infinitive 383 2;
๓*/or. . to 383.2;- subjunctive 232.2;
passive structure (e g / U«H ๓*ฝ to) 64 1;
asleep position 183 3: and drvping 389.2
astonish non progressive Serb 4 2
at after verbs 385; ๓... nge 323 3, and to
385;artogfir 142 1: to-« ntoe > inversion
(amlliary before subject) 2 70 7; ar. on
and to (place) 384; (time) 386;er/ort
น,·ekeทaร 3189; ar Philip s, at the Smiths'.
etc 489.1; Λ school. uMcmtty. etc 1421;
weak and strung pronuiKiatiixi 315.3
at any rate 301 3
at first and/fm 388
at last/iiMfiy. in the md and at the end 465
at which point 237 6
ate AmF: pronunciation 1.3
athletics singuUr.noplural 117.3
-ation (suffix) 3382
attempt . togform Of infinitive 105 11
Attorney General 186.1
attributive position of adjecthrs 183 1
Australian English 320 3
autumn with or widroul the 142 9
auxiliary verbs 15; dropping word’after
auxiliaries 279; รเทพ่dfof emphasis
auxiliary verbs
available portion after noun (e g the tickets
aietilaMe) 186 2
avoid ... .tog 100.1
await 617
awake (adjective) position 183 3; and
awake (verb), uukr and (uh<«r*f>i 389
aware of not followed by that 2101
back .ind again 390
backwardfs) 619
bacterium plural 117 4
bad rules for present perfect 49» 10;
for present perfect progressive 50 9; for
conditio nab SK7ION 22 IntrodiKtfott
for relative pronouns 237 4. for gerund
and infinitive 95
badly comparative and superlative 20$
baggage uncountable 119 3
bank · singular or plural wrb.'pronoun
128.1
barracks singular and plural die same 117 3
baths pronunciation 1184
BBC - singular or phiralv«b.'pronoun
BC and Al) 324.3
be 18 20; and have 25; do be. don't be 19;
Progressive forms (eg fam being) 18
subjunctive (eg I be, turn) 232 3;
90 2; If... ’น™.'urn- to 244 2; contractions
(e g he's, isn't) 337; weak and strong
pronunciation 315 3; with ages 323;
be bom 407; begone 477; left out เท
advertisement^ instructions, etc 291;
auxiliary m older English 47.1
be able to 85
be committed - to...togorinhiutive
105.11
be going to 35
be supposed to 78
be that as it may 232 4
be used to.. Ing 615
bear (verb) 407.2; (can't) bear . tog form or
infinitive 10511
beat and น·บ่, 392
because 393; and toxnuie c/393'.because
and so not used together 229 5; because.
Index
at. since mui fir 377; jrc/become.., Μ
become. p>r. £<1, grou. etc 39S
bed expressions without article 142.1
been meaningcome'or ■พ»พ'· 395; weak
aixl strong pronunciation It'll
Ctrl 454 4. before, firstand before that
396 i. with present perfect 47 4
before (conjunction, preposition) 250 «เย!
|MM perfect 2901· · present «Mh fature
Infmntof 392;indunia 613.7
beg - intinMivc 97.. object * InflnMve 9&
I beg your pardon 329 7
begin - ห*·เท™ or ttdiniove 105 1ft
believe non .ptopnuพ Serb 4 2. > object <
Kibe 103; bebnrน)·not 585;>n negrtvr
sentences 2W.heisbeheiedlobe 64.2;
preposition 2Í3;sol Mine 585 3
belong noil piugfHMsv
prepoiitxm 213
beloved pronunciation 191
below, under, underneath and beneath 399
bend active or passive meaning 9 2
beneath, betotv. unde) aixl underneath 399
betide ,uid besides .น»; beside. (discourse
marker) 301.2
bet 401; « present wMh fature meaning
«012; with two ๗!)ท:ท 8 1
better 204 2; and >.íà 402.2; had better
77;meaning rrcoswed" 402 1;qà
better 564 3 . aH the belter 2082
between and among 403; พน·'ท .. to
3187;Muw>i>vuu'xf/,eU 174 1
h·· (prefa) 338.1
bicycle bybtcycie 142 1
big large end gteat 404
Skะะะ»«...
binoculars (iluGilwsth no singular 117 7
Hack person 3352^ê
blessed pciMiunct.itiori 191
blind lheblind 188 1
blue H ttherM.eu 213
boot by boat 142 1 -.anima boat 384 4
borrow and lend 408
both 155; following article dropped 142.5.
both anti 228 1
bread uncountable 119 3
break acmcorpesavc meaning 9 2
bride and bridegroom 3284
briefly 284 1
bring and lake 409. with two objects a t
bring up and educate 410
Brit 321 Notes
Britain the United Kingdom, the British Ida
British theBritBh 1882. the Hindi Ida 411
British and American English 319
Briton 321 Notes
broad and wide 412
broadly speaking discourse marker เท
writing 284 2. in speech 301 2
buffalo plural 116 3
bunch 1214
burst out crytngi laughing 103 1
bus by bus 142.1. Oil ri Irra 384 4
but (coordinating conjunction) 226 3,
but. although, though and however 371;
but and although not used together
229 ร. dropping words after bid 276.
174Λnrxtพ,'เtoltafn<o.พ 413 1
but (meaning Ony) 41 z 4
b^rr^thod. tce£etç>and tilth 416. เท
passive 58, bylshakespeare. by Matart.
etc 212; or other prepositions afu-r pass
participles 96 9, by the kita etc 142 17
by (place) and near 415
by (time) 414,andu/rü( 613 6
by all any no means 527 2
by car bus. etc 1421
by far with superlatives 207 3
by myself etc 178 7
by the way 301 1
8ye and Bye-bye 329 2
cactus plural 117 4
calculations in speech 322 21-22
caH plural 1171
call 417; passive (e. g .งน· นtu alliedStupids
camped acme I KIM participle 96 4
can and could
willingness 79
instructions und requests 80
pernusuon 81
ability 82-83
typical behaviour 86
ain’t and may) might not 71 4
«เท'! and mustn't 69 2
ain't hate done 69.4
can have done tn questions 69.4
«เท พ, fmir. etc 84; tan speak, play 83 3
«เท· could always 83 .4
con or	be a ble 83.1
Index
could a let definite form of run 825
could making questions, etc less direct
could เท indirect speech 259.3
could meaning'would be able to 82 5
could (chances) 71
could and น <11 able Io 82 4; advanced
point* 83 2
couldand น«รidfouedfo.«1 813-5
could hear done 82.6
weak and strong pronunciation 315.3
Canadian English 320 3
can't bear . Ing form or infinitive 10511
can't help 418
can't seem to 5764
can’t stand ....fog 100 1
capital letters 341; alter urtons 294 4;
national adjectives (eg Italian) 321;
Northern. eK 442
car by at! 142 .1
care . Infinitive 97 .take care (of).
cure (about) and care for 419;
careful - infinitive 101 2
Caribbean English 320 3
carry not followed by Indirect object 8 6
case เท some, etc cam discourse marker ill
writing 284 2. Ml speech 301 2; in any case
discourse marker in writing 284 3.
cattle plural with no singular 117.7
causative structures With ger IM;
with hear 109; with make ไ 07
cent 322 16
cent(i)· (prefix) 338 1
■centric (suffix) 338 4
centuries nurnbenng 322 7
certain · 'fogform or infinitive 105 15
certainly position 198 2; discourse marker
2M2; certainly md curdy 600 1
certainty mud. can't 69; adverbiais 1982
chairman and chairperson 3285
chance uncountable use 120 2
chances may. might, could 71
change (verb) active CM passive meaning 9 1
change (noun) uncountable use 1202
changes become, gel.go. grow, etc 394;
present progress'» 32-4; present
progressive for king-lasting changes 34 2
Changes in English J18
Cheers 329 2.329 12. 329 19
chess uncountable 119 3
chewing gum uncountable 119 3
child plural 117.2
Chinese singular and plural the same 117.3
Chink (offensive word) 335 2
Choose to 97; she lies choien to be 64 1
Christmas prepwntioris 386 4
church expressions without article 142.1
cinema preposition 212; the cinema 142 11
city and won 420
class 4 singular or plural 128 1
classic and classical 421
classical names English wróonv 3272
clause inside clause 2858
clean adjective and adverti 194 2
deft sentences with if 273; with char 274
clever preposition 213
closed) and shut 422
dothes pl^^th^r» singular 117.7
club . singular or plural 128 1
CO· prefix) 338 1
cold becold 25 1
collapsed active past participle 96 4
plural 128 1
college ex,xe»kms without article 142 1
collocations 332 3
colons 294, เท news headlines 292 2
colour (noun) expressions with ท»
preposition 214 8
colour (talking about colour) lice OÍ be 25 2
combat(t)ing?ctc spelling 347 7
come and go 424; come ...tag 476 2; come
and 99 2; come foe a ualk. 'น-'»' etc 479;
come from 424ร: come Io (- arrive at)
424 5. come to Millie, etc 394 5; come
true right 394 5
comic and comical 425
command - object · infinitive 98
■"§===■
commentaries lenses 33 2; words left out
2913
committed ro·.. Ing or infinitive 105.11
common ‘for. ..to 113 4
comparatives and superlatives 204 208;
adjectives (formation) 204; adverbs
(formation) 205; die difference betwxxxi
comparatives and superlatives 206 2;
using comparatives and superlatives 206;
falter and (utter, more and more doafy.
etc 206 4; the older..the happier ...
etc 206 i. any.no older. »c 373 1;«er
after comparatives, superlatives 494 2;
more replacing er 3189; much. jar. etc
with comparators and aipettaivcs 207;
pee positions with superlatives
(e g the happiest man in die น odd) 206 7;
superlative,infinitive 101 3; superlative .
relative clause With that 2334; superlative
Index
after IhU
with or without the 2006:
o the ben. etc 56
comparison SECTION 11.as...tu 203;
comparative and superlative adjectives
and adverbs 204 230; see also
comparatives and superlatives
compel . object . Infinitive 40
complement and compliment 426
complementation What can follow an
adjective? 192; What can follow a noun
122; What can follow a verb? 16; verb,
object · comjàseni 10; of พ"!ebody,
etc 180.5; complements of place 7.3;
infinitive complements 92; นพ form
complements 94
completely position 190 3
compound adjectives with
participles (egcfuM-irou-Wg.
home-made) 96.5
compound nouns plurals 117.6
concentrate not 'concentrate oneself
170.10
concern non progressive verb 4 2
concerned position and meaning 96 7
concerto (dural 116 3
conclusion In coràoo-i 284 1
conditional structures see if
confused and confusing, etc 96 3
congratulate and
congratulations preposition 213;
lonffatulalioni no singular 117 7
conjunctions SECTION 20; conjunctions
and athvrhials- die difference 283.1;
punctuation 203.1,2968; prepositions
before conjunctions (eg the quotum
ofuiuther . .) 210; see also entries for
particular conjunctions
consent structure 104 2
consequently advert, not conjunction.
punctuation 283 1; discourse marker
consider •...นพ 100 1;. object· fob.
10 3; hr U«s considere./ «genruv. etc 65
àc«.sà>/lobe.etc 64.2
consist non- progressive verb 4.2
contain non-progreMfvevcrb 4 2
contemplate ■.โ.!ท* 100 1
contents (dural with no singular 117 7
continually) and continuously) 427;
with progressive form 5
continue ••แพ form or Infinitive 105 11
contractions 337
contrary and opposite 423 2. HI the
contrary discourse marker in willing
284 2. in speech 301 2; on the contrary
and Of! lite other hand 428 1
contrastive emphasis cleft Mncences.
273 274; stressed auxiliaries 3135
control meaning 429
conversation countable or uncountable
119.6
coordinate clauses 226 228
co-ordinating conjunctions 226-228
corpus plural 117.4
correctness 317
correspondence letters 289; emails etc
cos t with two objects 8 .1
costly adjrctiw, not adverb 194.1
could we can and could
countable and uncountable nouns 119;
advanced points 120
counter- (prefix) 338.1
counting so numbers
country countable and uncountable uses
430; the country 141.4
couple (I couple of...· plural verb 1282
court martial 106 1; plural 117.6
covered preposition 96 9
cowardly adjective, not adverb 194 1
crack active or passive meaning 97
craft singular and plural the same 117 3
crash preposition 213
crisis plural 117.4
criterion plural 1174
crooked pronunciation 191
crossroads singular and plural the same
cubic metre, etc 322 18
cursed pronunciation 191
customs plural with no singular 117 7
cyber- (prefix) 338 1
dago (offensive word) 335 2
daily adjective and adverb 194 1
dangling particles see misrelated
dare 431;/dare พ» 431 3; Hou· dare you·
dash (punctuation mark) 297
dates 324, in letters 289 Notes
day by day 142.1; day after day 142 2:
the day uv mel. etc 237.7
days of the week repressions with ท!,
preposition 214 3
de-(prefix) 338.1
dead adjective and adverb 194 2; and
deadly 194 2; dead, died and death 432;
the dead 188 1
deadly adjective, not adverb 194 1
deaf thedcaf 188 1
decide - Infinitive 97; ilt.ru decided to 63 2
decimals 322 1 3
Index

every 151;เนน1ฟ( I52;undnny 162ะ
andmrt 154;.wryone(of) 151 L
every ..but 4 ไ 3 . ไ ietvry day mid aN day,
etc 152.4; expressions wtch ISO preposition
every few days, etc 151.5
every now and then 151 ร
every other 1518
every single 1518
no difference 1801;. singular veto
180 3; and off 149; position with
adjetives 186 6; question tags 306 5;
with Ac 447 1
everyday and every day 1517
everyone 180. · singular verb 180 3,
and ail 149 4แ<1ห»/)*’-'» '80
and titty or»· ISO 7; position with
adjectives 186 fcqtxMwnugt 306 5
*'ไirfSnU	เพ»Λ
position with adjective» 186 6. question
everywhere 180; · singular verb 180 3:
position with adlccttWM 186 6
ex- (prefix) 338 I
example · of 213;/0r example discourse
marker เท writing 2842, in speech 301 2
except structure» 456;. mfiiMttre Without
to 456 5; and eurptfnr 456; and without
456.6; me, him, etc after euept 174 2
excited . by at about 9t
etc 96.3
exclamation mart 293
exclamations 223: amc
(eg. เพ»พa.. .1) 223.2
excuse I'H' 100 :
excuse me 324 6 7
expect (- object) - infinitive 97 98. aptt
hope, unit and loo*fipumi 457;
in negative sentence» 214 4.
apeã so: not 585
1196; and eipertmenl 458
experiment and experience 458
explain Mructurvs 459; passive structures
61. preposition 213
extra- (prefix) 338.1
face . t'« 100 1
facing, oppaute and เท fill'll of 549
fact in fact discmuse marker เท writing
284 3. in speech 301 3; Ο» a motor of fix!
that 264 3	**”
faded acme past poruople 96.4
tog and faggot (offensive word) 335.2
fad . infinitive 97
fair adjective arid adverti 1942
fairly. gaite. zarl.fr and pretty 460
fall ill 394 8
fallen active past participle 464
family - angular or phiral 128 1
fancy. Mg 100.1
far (adjective) 461 4
far (adverb) and a long arty 461.
before loo 610 3; before comparatives
and superlative* 707; how fat' 492 5;
farm on a farm 384.7
farther and further 462
fast adjective and ad Wil» 194 2;(Klierti)
coiiqvxmmv and superlative 205
fear arid br afraid 359
feel 463; progressive and nim-progresMV»
UM* 4 3. . object. infinitive Without
เท 912;-ob»wt.lohc 10 3 lituus#*
that 63.1; there ate fell to be MA· fid IO
if.· though 463.3; tan feel 463 6; feet Ur
meaning want’ 463.4. ffrefdlwmirve
marie: 301.3; without -mV 178.10
female and feminine 464
fetch. loofifar and loot after 5184
few. affwtnd(a)IMr 168, wuhof 1681;
the few., that 233.4; rjurtto few 564 4
fewer and lea 169. with ur without of 169 2
fewest aisdfmsi 170
fight preposition 213
fill In out 318 9
filled I with 96 9
finally 284 1; and chirr att 361 2;/lrulWr
ar last and in:at the end 465
10*4; and/bumf 1 2
find out And bine 504 5
fine «llcctnr arxl adverb 194 2
finish . ing 100 1. and end 448
finished be’have finished 466; meaning
read)· 466; active past participle 964
finished-time words not normally used
with present perfect 48 2; lived wvth
prevent perfect 49 5
fireman 328.5
firm - singular or plural 1281
first (ordinal numb·»)Jim, one. second and
luo, etc 322 6; tenses after this it the
fir it. etc 56; the first, etc to 101 3;
word order with complement 186 5
first (adverb) and at first 388 and before
first (discourse market} fmt(lr). first of nil
in writing 284 Ι.,η νρ,Ά 301 1
first floor, etc 3228
firstly see first
fish su«ular and ptoral live same 117 3
fit (Sd.«t've>. Infinitive 1012
Index
fit (non jxoqrnwf v«b) 4,2; Amt forms
fixed expretsion* 332.4-5; position of
adjcctne* (eg Secretary (ieneral) 186.1;
ord« of notin' (eg bread and baiter)
flat atfxctire and advert) 194 2
floor*fled floor, etc 3228
flow and fly 1.2
flu uncountable 119 7
fly and flow 12
focuiUhng etc '(filing 347.7
follow can follow 84.3iMfoHom 256
foot (body part) onfoof 142.1; Irregular
jSii1 ท·,:^,^
322.14
for (time) for. time, in and from 469:
and «go 362 !; and during 440. dropped
IntimeexpreMtoiM 214.7; vrtth present
perfect progressive 50 5; prerent with
future mcantng with for (eg Hou· long are
you here fori) 469 1
for (purpose, cause, etc) 468. far.. Mgaftcr
nouns (e.g, a machine foe cutting) 468 2:
for. ai. became and itnce 377; tn news
headlines 292 2
for (linking word)/!* to 113; after enough
113& after Mimelhing, anybody, etc 113 6;
ฟพุ»»0 113 8; after verbs 113 7;^iràr
tobe 113 10
for (pronunciation) weak and strong
pronutKutiun 315 3
for a long time and long 517
for one thing* 301.1
forbid · object. infinitive 98:. rig dorm or
infinitive 1054
fore-(prefer) 338.1
forever 454 5; with progress!»· form 5
forget > uqr form or infinitive 105.1;
formal and informal language 281;
เท letters, emails etc 289 290. formal
and informal vixubuUry 333
former the former 188 3
formula plural 117 4
forward(s) 619
found and find 12
fractions 322 1 3
frankly 301.3
free .xfjícme and adverb 194 2.a nd/reefy
194 2
french the trench 188.2
frequently position 198 1
frightened frightened by'Cf9b 9.
very frightened 968
frog (offensive word) 335.2
from. เท. for and sinre (dme) 469: weak and
strong pronunciation 315.3
front mfrom of. facing and opposite 549;
in the front of 549 3
fronting 272
fruit uncountable 119.5
•ful (suffix) 338 2.338 4
full stops 293; in numbers 322 1;
in abbreviations 336 1
fun and funny 471
funds plural with no singular 117.7
fungus plural 117.4
furniture uncountable 119.3
further and farther 462; discourse marker
furthermore 284 2; and in addilion 288.5
future
5ÍCT1ON 4.35 43
present progressive 36
present pcogrcsMve or f^ing to น) 2
simple present 37
present formsoc นฟ/ 39.3
ihati 38.1; in legal documents, etc 39 8
wtu And lhaU, £0f/ig lo and present
protftssiw (advanced points) 39
future perfect 40
future progressive 41
lam to. a. 42
future in the past 43
future formsin polite instructions, etc
(e.g.ttw7Jnrtrfto...) 3113
see also shall will
gallon llntlsh and American 322 17
game andpty 555 1
gather เ พ์เ!her that 482
gay 3352
gender (references to males and females)
general in grn<vai discourse marker in
writing 284 2. in speech 301 2
genitive see possessive;
geo- (prefix) 338 1
geographical names article use 142 18;
Engfksh names of Clues 3271
gerunds SECTIONS 8 10,
see also -ing forms
get structures and meaning 472; ♦ object
♦ infinitive 98; causa the structures 108;
Index
pa»wc· auxiliary (e g Art <™«»«) 60;
pawl VI· unperatnes	inicinafiti)
224 3,passive 0< verbs with IV,» objects
นุ ; hair got 2* turn· got Io 74;and KO
(movement) 473; g« become. go.gn>to.
etc 394; Am) forms »3,/g<*ln«c.ad ๗
I t*got 3’88
get dressed. drouned. blน. monied.
etc <172.4; ger mart tali diivnedot
marry 1’dinortt ร23
get round toi . tng 104.2
get used to 615.3
give with twx> object* 81; in pa «ve 61;
with action nouns (eg, filira cry) 474;
gurttapioh.eK 132.2
give up . ing 100 1
glass (linemilltable) and agtau 119.4
go (nounjag’» 1322
goberb). infinitive « «พfarm 1004;
come 424; and gw (movement) 473;
go. become, grt. grow, etc 394■. ร') fill a
แ witmiเท, etc 47$
goon - utg form «infinitive 105.2
God bless you 2324
God save the Queen 232 4
going to (future auxiliary) 35; or present
progrossfvr !6 2; advanced ponies 39 1 3
gold and golden 126 4
gone acme past participle 96 4. begone
gonna (-Rising to) 35.5
good preposition 213; belter, bat 204 2;
a good tun เท»"ร. etc 130 7; any no good
373; . infmitne 101 4; and น๙/ 622 1.
gxdat. .ng 703 1.^odfoe...lo 113.4;
good-looking comparative and wpcrUtlw
Good morning etc 329 2; Goodbye 329 2
goods plural «uh no singular 117 7
got hair got 24; ha,,· got to 74; I got instead
edrbegot 3188
gotta (-gotto) 74 3
gotten 472 6
grad able adjectives 189; «uh tftoie 564 I
granted 284 2
grape(s) countable 119$
grateful and Ihank/id 604
great b*and large 404
greetings 329.2
groceries plural with no singular 117 7
ground floor, etc 3228
group treated as singular or plural 128 1
group nouns treated as singular OC plural
grown up active pan part* Iplr· 964
guess «cog»™ 84 2; guita so.' nor $85;
/guess discourse marker 301 3
Gypsy 335.2
had weak and strong pronunciation 315 3
had better 77; bud bear·, should and outfit
77.1; in indirect speech 2633
had I meaning 'd I had etc 244 5
had rather obsolete form 566 3
had to do and must have done 73 5
hair (uncountable) and a ftrdr 119 5
half 478; hal/o/478 lifeatfof. plural writ
478.1;halfcri...as 2037.เท,» rav,(-lull*
past two) 32$ 1; halves 117 1
handicapped spelling 347.7;
the handicapped 188 1;
and disabled 335.2
'hanging* (misrelated) participles 1154
happen to 4«-.aftermease 2482;
เท «/clauses 244 1; structure with r/ien-
20 2; in negative sentences 219.4
happy . Blfinttivv 101 1
Happy birthday/New Year, etc 329 4
hard adjective and adverb 194 2;(acherb)
comparative and superlative 205; and
hardly 194 2; hard to pie™.· 101 4
hardly position 198.3: tnvenion (auxiliary
before subject) 270 7; hardly ever/any.**
366.3; luirtffrei»T(pcisitKin) 1981;
and bird 194 2. and scarcely and
no sooner 480; question tags 3054
has weak and strong pronunciation 31$ 3
hat bl a hat 212
hate non progressive verb 4 2. - tog form
have 21 25; auuüary verb 22; actions
(eg havcabarh.tmAfiul) 23. hair <n
tobe(cgabarh.shourr) 23 1; haw (got)
possession. relnuonxhifM, el, 24, with or
without do 24. hat V arid fee 25; have ·
object . verb form 109. hair (got) to 74.
have (got) to Λΐιιΐ must 75.1; feat* (gor)
to. ท-,» hair IO and must 75 2; don’t hair
to. needn't ai»t miDt'i l (chances) 69 3;
mvrffl landmusrníícWigaòon) 73 4,
causative Structures 109; question tags
306 6; contractions ((’ห·. hasn't, etc) 337;
/tfXmstead๗/irgor 318 8; weak and
suing pronunciation 315 3
Have a good holiday time trip etc
have on (ะ be wearing) 437 3
he (personal pronoun) 173 174. meaning
he or site 328 2; fee or she 328 2;he/da
and strong pronunciation 315 3
Itià
I
f
m
Hi IHf I i
^๕ไ^*'l,lwre)DU·
I suppose 301.3
I think 301. J
I think I'M softeningevpcrssuin 3»? 2
I would meaning ย I were >ou. I would'
<i)an (พุff1.) 338 3
Idea ,»rpn«Uoi> 213; <> good Wn·,
far .to 113 5: พน· iilra of Ing 103 1;
uiKCHinublc UM> 120?
identify structure เหth a> 10.2
identifying .Mid non identifying relative
clauses 234; advanced points 23?
'ΓΐίοιΟΗ iionfaup· structures 238:
ร"·cul structure. เหth past tenses and
น··นพ 239; jf/uerepM, 240; if. happen
to 244 1;/...un>. ucreto 2442;unreal
pan sttuanoru 241; if only 242; If you will
etc 243; structures เทspoken English 245.
if... should 244 1; ifit น·,,. arre nolfor
244 3; nvn if 452 4; if meaning 'พา if
244 10. cKtfi negatno เท sentences with
If 244 8: (falter preparatory น(e g ir น·!»
be aptly if) 268 %<7เท Indirect question*
260.3; if and whether 261; condilkinah in
indirrci speech 263.5. if and tn cate 248.
<and <๗«ห 623; if'toraisd wttea 247;
other «ords with iimikir uses 246; leusing
out if 244 4; anwrdon structures instead
of (f-clauses (e* Hl*//known .) 244 5;
if allot etc 115.6; any in if-tUusn 1591;
mviny.ctuiw* 454.1; tf wnot 244 7;
if any. if me. นพ»น'y. If m doubt etc
244 ft if. past participle 115 6. if... then
244 9. ΰώ if 59». If as discourse marker
slxiwing concession 284 2; see also as H
if necessary 244 6
if not and เนัเน่*» 24?
if only 242
if so not 244 7
If you like 514 7
■fy (พ’’เ» 338 6
ill position 183.3; and Mr! 494. proposition
ill-(prefix) 338.1
illnessestnuav,uncountable 119.7: wlthor
withixit the 142 15
rm. rve. don't, etc contractions 337
I’m afraid 359.2: discourse marker 301.3
rm- (prefl» 338.1
imagine non-progressive vertt 4 2.
I (object.) eng form tool, imagine
(that) 246; - SO. not 585; เท negator
sentences 219.1
immediately (conjunction) 495
imperatives 224; question tap 306 2,
structures เหth lei 225
important - subjiMictisr 232.2; - for.. to
1132; structure with should 232.5
impossible to understand, etc 1014
impressed preposition 213
in (place) 384; Mid Into 496. and to 38% เท.
at union 384. In bed, hoipitut etc 142 1
in (time) 386c M น month’;tune.etc 386 6.
and during 441; and inter 506; in. ur and
on 386. tn. from, far .mil EC 469
in addition 284 2. andfurthermore 288 5.
in addition to ■ mg 104 2
in any case discourse marker เท writing
248 2: m care of 248-T*
In conclusion 284.1
in fact discourse marker in "Siting 284 >
in sjieech 301.3
in front of,/being and opposite 549:
and before 397
in general discourse marker เท writing
in most cases discourse marker เท writing
เท my opinion comment adverbial 197.
discourse marker เท writing 284 3.
in speech 301 3; and from my point of
I*u· 557
เท my view discourse· marker in writing
เท order that and to พน» 588
เท other words discourse marker เท writing
เท particular discourse marker In «thing
284.2, In speech 3012
in short 284 1
เท some cases discourse marker เท writing
284 Λ, In speech 3012
in spite of .198.«พุ’น·of. ing 115 6;
m spite of thtjaa that 264 ilniplieof
thill that discourse marker เท willing
i ท the end. ir/drr end. น t lau and finally 465
in the first etc place discourse marker ill
wntlng 284 l.m speech 301 1
in the way and on dr,· uny 620.5
เท which case 237 6
in- (prefix) 338 1
incidentally 301 1
Index
inclined structures 1<Μ 2
include non progressive Serb 4 2
increased acini· paM participle 96 4
Indeed 499
Indefinite pronouns เพ somebody,
anybody you, ere
independence and
independent prepositions 21J
Indian English <20 3
indirect arid direct objects 8
Indirect and direct speech 258 263.
introduction 2$4renM-s 299: questions
and angers 260; น*»๙!1'» and if 261:
infinitive, 262; advanced points 263;
reporting past tenses with past« past
IMMh^Mymiarr ucrr.ctc 263 2;
modal verbs 263 3; negative tjuestirxis
263.6; |MM useoi must 69 6; reporting
SJta/J l...f 263 4; sentences with if 263$;
indirect speech พ»!boot reporting vntn
263.9; word order with น*»ar. น*นch and
น*น» 2637; indirect speech with relative
structures tomebody I tom,· youa Me, a
Mr that / didn't torn, howfiut น could RO
237.17
infinitives SIC I lOfvS O' 10. introduction
88, progress:»,-, perfect, passive ansi
negative infinitives 89; spill infinitive
897; perfect infinitive* (eg. io tour
90; without พ 91; Winstead t/whole
infinitive 283.1; as subject, obfecr or
complement 92; Mlflnlthvor Mg form
95; infinitive or Mg fonn with different
uses 105; after Serbs 92; alter Serb·
obfect 98; after hear. พ. etc . object 110;
after adjectives 101; aUa cay, difficult,
anpcnsdde.eu 1014; after superlatives
(eg the youngyit petton to} 101 3;
after nouns and pronouns 102. after
Rtadvn(e« agn/dm เท น*ท๗! to play]
237 14. far ...พ.. 113; active and
passive infinitive with similar meaning
106; purpose (e g. / พเ à N พ ท''.') 112.
«tucnire with,rrep«aiot> it 268-269.
with gel 108; with Mir 109;ú«f iiLteiul
of พ (e g. try anti) 99; future meaning
(eg the Ufa IO come} 102.6: เท indireta
speed! 262; In news headlines 292 2;
after น·ly 620 3. after but 413 3; after
after male107; after rather than 5661.
after น·mid lather 566.2; after น*ท· 630 3;
น*»พ..,น*ทเพ..., etc 111
informal and formal language 281;
เท knees, emails etc 289 290. informal
and formal vucabdaทุ· 333
information uncountable 119 3
information structure 267; reasons fix
using passives 67
•ing (Suffix) 338 2
-ing forms SECTIONS 8-10. introducUon
93; terminology·: participles' and ‘gerunds
93 1,93 3, period, passive and negative
Mg forms 93.2; as suited, object or
romplemcnr 94; with demminer (e g the
opeitingOfParluuneni. myunoUng] 94 3.
with object (e.g รุท»ting พ!'นท) 94 2;
àhhre or Ing form 95; infinitive or i'tg
form with different uses tO5; psmeipjes
(Mg forms used like adjective,) 96; »tg
forms after verbs 100, after nouns and
adjetives 103:after prepositions lot.
Wlthgri 108; with hme 109; after hivir.
see. etc . object 110; pentdpte clauses
115. nu, related participles (e g looking
out of the Windomthe mountains ..)
115 4; in progressive structure, 3;
|MSU\·· meaning (e g ft nerds riinnlrw)
too 3; after mind 528 3. & came ing
476; after way 620 3. structure With
preparatory พ็ 94 5
initials name, of organisation, 336
insist - subjunctive 232 2. preposfmxi 213
instance fat Mstancídisciiiirse marker in
writing 284.2. เท speech 301.2
instant the instant (that) 495
..Mg IIS MinvlMdr/amlน่พ่*พนเ 500.-
Instructions use nf tenses 33 J. wonk left
out 29i.l.utec4น*น.น·*!idand am
tnstniitlons(eg, ibu’a need to...) 311 3;
imperatives 224
intend . object. Infinitive 98;. tog form
or infinitive 10$ 11; in negative sentences
inter-(prefix) 338.1
Interestfed) preposition 213; · rqgfortn
or infininw- 105.16; MMKM* and
interrutiona'l English 320 4
interrogative structures 216
intonation ท*นnqumonugs 3055;
เท rHwive (เผพ 2342
introductions 329 1
Inuit 3352
inversion vvrbbefore subject 270 271.
in older Enrftoh 318 10
inverted commaร <rcquotation marks
invitations 329 IS
invite · object. inhnimr 98
involve non piogmsAv verb 4.2.
พ่เ tng 100 1
involved positxm and meaning 96 7
Irish ihftrUh 188 2
irreguter verbs Ikt ๙cixmiwnexamples โ
Index
is weak and strong pronunciation 3153
-ise ire (suffix) 338 6; fa· or -ire 343
-ish buffo) 3384
•ism (suffix) 338 2
•'St (tuffa) 338 3
it (pc-tonal pronoun) 173; advanced point»
174; and this.'that (things that Irave JUM
been mentioned) 145, referring to nothing
173,7; rrtmng tn the situation 173,7;
referring to time weather, temperature
and distances 173.8; used Io identth
(e.R ft'» 7๗ท) 173 » It uas that IIนพ
Iuho.etc 174 3. ft นพrnr .secretary uho.
foe... 10. etc 113 4. preparatory subject
it Λ>ΜΠ·|'matter no malte, 253 3
it it the first last etc tense» 56
it is true (that) discourse marker 2842
item of information, etc 1211
its 143; and ft j $01
it's time 502
itself 178
ity (suffix) 3382
•lie's 3386;-freer fte 343
Jamaican creole 3203
Jap (offensive word) 335.2
Japanese singular and phiral the same
117 3; rfa/nponoe 188.2
jeans plural with no singular 117 7
journey (countable) and travel
(uncountable) 119.3; haze'did you hate
a good journey 329.9. journey, tract!, trip
and voyage 612
jury treated as singular or plural 1281
just adjective and adverb 194 2; and/lâ
194.2; (adsorb) meanings and tenses 503;
position 199; used far emphasis 503.1;
juaas.'when 251 3;/usr<N<fesc»ursc
marker 284 2
just because ,.. It doesn’t mean 393.3
just now meanings and น·ท«•ร 503.3
keep meaning’May’ 394 10; bvp (cm).. i'lg
kibbutz plural 117 4
kick with two objects 8 1
kidnapped etc spelling 347 7
kilo plural 116 3
kilo- (prefix) 338 1
kind sort of 592; billowing article dropped
592.1; rfa-w Hod qf 592 2. discourse
marker 301.3; softening expression 312 1
kind to 213; น) kind as to 584 8
kinds of English SECTION 28; standard
English and dialects 316; accents 3164;
changes in Engfesh 318, American and
British trig! nil 319; other varieties of
English 32». English IS a lingua tranca
320.4c formal Witten English 5ICTION 26;
spoken English SECTION 21
King. Queen, etc without article 142 12
knife plural 117.1
-MlnMve without Io 504 2;. object.
tobe 10.3;and/indotft 504 ร; Jbioreand
I blow ft 504 6, know and know abow/of
5044; know about nix followed b) that
(dir เ» blown to be...) 64 2; you know
discourse marker 301 1. 301 3.1 don 't
inou'discourse marker 301 3; Haw da
you know? 492 4; How should I know?
3032
knowledge uncountable 119.3
known known to 96.» urft known 968
Kraut (offensive word) 335 2
lack (noun) preposition 213
lack (verb) non progressis·· 4 2; no following
large and aide 404 4; large, b«andgmw
404
last word order with complement 186 5;
at last 465 2; expressions with no
preposition 214 2; Jmr bur one. etc 413 1:
last, the lad and the latest 505; tenses after
this o the last, etc ·&; the last... to 101.3;
last three, etc $05.2
lastly 284 1
late adjective and adverb 194; and lately
194.2; (adverb) talc and latest 205;
•See you later 329 2
lately with present perfect 47 4; with
present perfect progressist 50.5
later and to 506
latest. Iasi and the last 505
latter the latter 188 3
laugh preposition 213
lay and lie 507
lead andlruden 126.4
leaf plural 117.1
learn forms 508 1; • ท่ร form or infinitive
1058; learn to and lean how to 5082
learned (adjectree) pronunciation 191
least and feurst 170. al least discourse
marker In writing 284 3. เท speech 301.3
leave preposition 213;. object. infinitive
98; Λΐιιίforget 47ft with preparatory ft
(e g. I’ll leave It to you to decide) 269 4;
with tun objects 81
leave off Ing 100 1
leaving out words str ellipsis
Index
madr&Kt\tn\
manage . infinitive 97
mankind 328.6
manners plural with no singular 117 7
many and "tort 165; see also much
marked' and 'unmarked' adjectives and
marriage preposlbon 21J
marry andgrl marrwf 523; no following
preposition $23-2; not used wMh «0๙1
other 7 one another 179 5
masculine and male 464
mathematics MngiiLu.no phirnl 117 3
253. the matter (with) 524; structure with
may and might chances 71 i/n/y might
Willies and hopes 72.1; may might atari/
72.3;maymighlhairdone 71 ร.จ. might
เท instructions requests. siiMitions
and cntknms 80; permission 81; Epical
behaviour 86; may... (but) discourse
marker showing concession 284 2; might
in indirect speech 263 3; might meaning
would perhaps’ 239.6 mighr making
questions etc less dares t 3114;
the difference between may and might
712: dac differences between may/might
andrancouM 71.80 81
maybe position 198 2. and perhaps 525;
softening expression 312.1
mayor andmnjvrra 328.4
me 17 3; after be 1733; advanced points
174; in double subjects (eg Min and me
went) 174.1; ทน' or I. etc after at, than,
bat and etcejrl 174 2; me loo 369 3; me
meals 330. thanks for meals, etc 329 ท
mean (verb) 526; non progressive verb 4 2;
• i'« form or infinitive 526 3;· object.
infinitive 526 3; and dir/it S26 2:1 meant
to hair done a 90 2; structure of questions
526 1; What doyw meant 526 5;lmean
discourse marker 526.4
meaning and opinion 526.2
means 527. by atliany.no mean) 527 2;
meam of and uoy of 620.4; singular and
plural the same 117.3
measles singular; no plural 117 3;
uncountable 119.7
measure non progressive verb 4 2
measurement marked and unmarked
forms 190. a fur-Utre can. etc 125.3;
expressions without preposition 214 8;
high and tan 485; adjectives after
measurement nouns 186A; foot. Inch, tic
322.17
media singular (uncountalite) or [dural
meet (with) 318 9. not used with each
other / one another 179.5
mega· (prefer) 3381
melt active or passive meaning 9 2
mention •...Ing 100 v.don't mention It
metre, etc 322.17
micro-(prefid 338 1
mid- (prefix) 338 1
Middle Ages plural with no singular 117 7
might see may and might
mile 322.17
milli-(prefix) 338 1
322 14°	m
mimicked spelling 347 8
mind (verb) ineamnft UM· and structures
528; ท0.· พ'«เ Id you mind. 7 528
mind you 3012
mine. jour», etc 176; <1 friend of mine, etc
ministry . singular or plural verb 128 1
mis- (prefix) 338.1
misrelated participles (e g looting out of
the window, the mountaim..,) 1154
Miss 326 1c. 326 2 b. 326 3
miss (verb) meaning» and structures 529
missing (adjective) 529.5
mistake . for... to 113.5
mistaken (very) much mbtakrn 968
modal auxiliary verbs ipammaraisd
meanings SECTION 7; in indirect speech
263.3; used to make questions, etc less
moment the moment (that) 495
Monday, etc with no preposition 214 3
money notes.coinsand amounts(Britfeh)
322 15; (American) 322.16; singular «-rbs
and pronouns 129.1
money uncountable noun 119 3
monthly adjectnv and adverb 194 1
more (determiner and adverb) 166; more of
166	1; and other 550 3; in comparators
and not any more 535; what« "ion· 284 2
more or less discourse marker in writing
284 3. เท speech 301.3
more than one · singular verb 129 3
mXqX'pXl 116 3
most (determiner and adverb) 167; mon of
167	1; เท superlatives 204 205; and moáty
Index
194.2; meanins‘wry· 2045; (the) most M
adverb 167 4
mostly 194.2
mother-in-law plural 117.6
mouths pronunciation 1184
move active or passive meaning 9 1
mph (ะ miles per hour) 322 19
Mr Mrs and Ms 326.1 l. 326.3
much and many 16$; III much/many...
Ill 203 ">■. much! many of 169.2; how
much.!many 492 5; much and wry with
past participles 968; much as an adverb
165.7; muchebe 447.1; mudvmany
more 201.2. much loo 610.3; much with
comparatives and superlatives 207
musical instruments article use 142 10
must certainty 69. "IUU hair been · done.
etc 69 4; must nor and can't (British and
American English) 69 8; obligation 73;
and have (rot) to 75; mustn't and can't
73 3; mustn't, needn't and don't hair to
73.4; and should (certainty) 69 7;
and should (obligation) 738; past indirect
speech (certainty) 696 past indirect
speech (obligation) 73 7; weak and strong
naked pronunciation 191
njmei English wrüons of place nanie\
names and ฝties (r^ Pw. Mr LfU'u) 326
nationalities nmim and Adjccthes
(c g Inland, //Uh. an Iftihmaniนพทaท,
the Irak) 321
nature without/he 1401
near Utfcerto comparatisv and wpef lathe
205
near (preposition) and by 415; near to 531
nearest next and (he next 533
nearly position 198 3; nearly, alrnostMd
practicatty 366; not used with never, etc
necessary structure with should 264 6;
♦ /dr to 1134;^niY«w/y 244.6
need (verb) fcfflMami tX 532;
didn't need to 532.6; เท èndlrwr speech
263 3; needn't, mustn't and don't hai* to
73.4; need never · mfinitlvr 532 6;
non-progressive verb 4 2
negative structures 217-221
basic rules 217
negative infinitives and -Mg forms 217.3
negative questions 218. negative
questions as exclamations 2234;
negative questions in indirect speech
263.6
negative imperatives 217.2
219
multiple negatives 220; inulUple
negativesin dialects 220.4
ambiguous sentences 221
extra negative 220 5; in expressions o(
doubt 220.6
question tags 217.6
yes and no in answers 218 4
contractions (๙1) 337
neglect to 97
neither (determiner) 157; neither of 157 Í
163.5; pronunciation 157 4
neither (adverb) ntithado I. etc 309 2;
neither... nor 228.3;neither.norand
never witli present perfect 47 4; with Simple
with do 217.5; position 198.1; positron m
imperatives 224.7;. inversion (auxiliary
before subject) 270.7; question up 305.4
hZwZ^Und English 3203
news uncountable 1193
news headlines 292
next expressions with no preposition 214 2;
next but one. etc 413.1; next, th· next and
the nearest 533; next Sunday two possible
meanings 533 3; neil three, etc 5332;
word order with complement 1865
nice preposition 213; ท®· and 1854
nickel 322 16
nigger (orfenstve word) 335 2
night al night 142.1
nil 537
no (determiner) no. none and ท·»! any 163;
and neither 163.5; and no! alt 147.6;
and nor $36; no... hutf· except) 413.1;
question Up. 3054
nogpodluse 373
no (answer) and)» 63$; เท answers to
negative questions 635.1; contradicting
no doubt 534; discourse marker in writing
no good 373 3
and uhoeiw. whatever, etc 253 2.
Ito matter aixl It (toil matter 253.3;
no matter utoat with no following verb
253 4
Index
no need for...to IBS
no one 164. aixl now ' 64 2. .«xl 'to,
ariyMie 163 2. position with adjectives
JOSÃ ^Xainn ,□81 MthX,
No problem reply Co think* 556.$
no sooner, hordtyand ftanrfy 460
no use 373 J
nobody and no one 180: no difference
180 1; and no! anybody 220.2; nobody
elv 447 1, position with adjective» 1866.
question i«7> 305 4; question ,□8ร »lth
nommalrsation 285 3,288.)
non affirmative (oon-assertive)
wtMds (eg ท»พุ«พ,yet) 222
non defining relative clauses
nontradableร"นร IS» with «tore
non identifying relative clauses
sec relative structures
noncTrtoánd not any 163; ธพุเ neither
163.5; * relative clau»nMh thru 233 4;
413.1; none of น facfc etc 237 9; none the
none, none die loiter, etc 208 2
nonetheless 284 2
no r. neither and not... either 227 2,228 3
normal smicnuc «1th dioubl 264 6.
normal fix., to 1134
normally position 198 1
north and northern, etc 442 capital letters
northward(s). etc 619
21»^n<x 244 7,notalHalb.notany.no
.แพ! none 163 'to, either, neither*nd
nor 227 2; «rak and strong pronunciation
not a grain breath'scrap, etc 121 2
not any more, 'to more and no low 535
not at all 387 3; reply co thanks 556 5
not only ... but also 228 4
not quite 564 5
not until . Inversion (auxiliary before
subject) 270.7
not very 6162
nothing 180. and not anything 220 2;
nothing!»! to 1116 nothing that
233.4; nothing to do and noChing to be
done 106.3; position with adjectives
186 6 question tan* 305 4. question tugs
with if 306.5
notice, hear, etc lomednn* happen!Ing) 1Ό
notices «ords left I tot 29'4
•	inftniinr. pref^utlonCe.g.nptonrfto
piaywhh) 102 5; น«rito do/lobe done.
etc 106.1;.for...to 113.5;· mgfonn
noun - noun le g fliittcftoai&ur) 12$; first
ηυυη singular (e.g a dure drop) 1252.
measurement(eg S/NV àcorn) 125.3;
first noun plural (e g a tlothet drop)
noun - ■ร (possessive) form. 121 น» ot
possessive 124; possessive or preposition
structure 124.2 3; time (e g. <1 dr. >
journey) 124$, classifying cipreuinns
(e g children «tlothei. tour's mitt) 127
noun clauses MC7ION 24
noun complementation rthat can iiXtow
nouns left out after adjectives 188
nouns used for actions (eg u troth,
cough) 132
now (lhawing change of subject) 301.1
nowadays 539
nowhere 180. and (ior.m,i.*VT(· 1636
position with adjectives 186.6
nucleus plural 117.4
number Í1 forge number 172 4 <1 number of
•	plural veil 128.2; article dropped after
a number o/142 7
number (grammatiiJ term) so· singular
and plural
numbers 322; fraction. I,nd decitmds
322 1 3; telephone number* 322.4;
Human numbers 322 $; cardinal and
ordinal numbets(or*./irsf. etc) 322 6
centunes 322.7; Noor. 322.8; and
punctuation 322 » a and one 322 10;
with determinei» 322 11; rfcvn hundr.d,
«น; 322.12; billion 322.13; filr hundred.
CSC without 322 14. British and
American money 322 15 16. merito
and volume 322 18; <7 and per 322 1»
numbers mx used as complements alter
be 322 20. silken calculations 322.21 22
oasis plural 117 4
objects direct and indirect 8
ob ect to .. Ing 104.2
obligation incur, wit! Ilme (got) to. duntki.
ought to. had better 73 77
oblige . object · infinitive 98
Index
occasionally ικηύκχι 198 1; with present
of after determiners SECTION 13: after
tractions and decimals 322.2; after half
478.1; after uhofe 150 5; noun . noun
Withe/ ai 124 2; weakondstnxtg
pronunciation 315.3
of course $40, discourse marker 284 2
of which 2352
offer · infinitive 97; with two objects 81:
passive structures 61
offers 329.16
often 541; position 198.1; with present
perfect 47.5‘.htMofim 492 5
OK showing change of subject 301 1
old position and meaning 183 2: aftr,
measurement nouns 186 4; Ire»» 188.1;
marked' and 'unmarked' use 190;
older English verb forms 31810
■oiogy (suffix) 338 2
omission of words see ellipsis
omni-(pref<0 338 1
on and about 352
on (place) 384 2. and ๙11» 496: on. «randIn
urrtrndf 3189
on . .ing 115.6
on condition that 246: · ,«resent with
on foot 1421
on holiday 488
on one's own 552 5
on the contrary discourse marker 301 2;
and on lheotherhand 428 1
on the Other hand 283 1; discourse
and however 288 5
on the way and เท th. uuy 620 5
on the whole discourse narktr in writing
on ^rfíítan.r*3
once (conjunction) 543
once (adverb) and one day 542; ๙๙น!- $42;
with simple post or past perfect 54.1
one (ทนmberjandu 322Ã0. one and a half
478 5; one and first. two and second. etc
322.6: one ftrrsrfny. etc (no preposition)
2142;one lfucnóre.etc 166 3; one o/544
one. >v>น and Wiry (indefinite personal
pronouns) 181; one, 1432
one(s) substitute word 182
one another and each ๙)น·» 179;
oneself* 178
only use and position 545; * inversion
clause with that 2334: if only 242; not
only... butabo 228.4; only today, etc
54$ A; only too 610 8; the only . . ever
454 2; the only... to 101.3
open without -self 178.10, active or passive
meaning 9.1; when open แ not used
546 2·, open (ad jet th v) and opened 546
operate preposition 213
opinion andpoint of tint· 557;
and meaning 5262: in my opinion 197;
in my opinion and according to me 356
opportunity and postbdHy $47
opposite (achedive) position $48;
4'เแ(เ < t/fiCfUJ}' 428 2
opposite (noun) tfulic thcoppmilediscourse
marker เท writing 284 2. เท speech 3012
opposite (prepoution) opposite, facingΛηιΐ
in front of $49
or and nor 227.1; either ...Of 228.2;
dropping words after ๙ 276; singular or
plural sèrb after repression with ๙ 130.4;
I.herbw... or 254;. infinitive without
-or (suffix) 338 2
or rather 566 4; and better 402 2; discourse
marker 301 3
order (verb) ^obytcl - inlinMlw 98; in order
orders imperatives 224: with redf 73.6;
predictions as orders 39 5; You «reto...,
others) and another 550; and different
$$02; and more $50.3
ought forms 76 3; probability 70; obligition
76	and ihotdd 70.76 and had better
77	Λ .ought* hear... 70.76; in indirect
our 143: weak and strong pronunciation
315.3
ourselves 178
-OUS (suffix) 338 4
รฺ&^.พ.............................
outward(ร) 619
through 357
over, (prefix) 338 1
owe non peiwessnx· verb 42; with
preparatory ft (eg น»· owe II to society to)
269 4; with two objects 8.1
Index
owing to *nd lit*· to 439
own (determiner) „iy own, etc 55?
own non progrcsshe verb 41
pogo	21?
Paki (offensive word) 115 2
pan- (prefix) 338 >
panicking etc spelling 3478
pants plural witit no singular 117 7
paper (uncountable) and a paper 119 4
paragraphs 2k-b
Pardon? 529 a Pardon me' พร. I beg
)»w pardon 329.7
parking uncountable 119 3
participles I-หด้and «/form.) SfCIONS
8-10. terminology: 'present' and past'
93 1; used Ute•งุ่เพุเพ·" 95; acme
and passive participle* 362-4 after
conjunctions and pteposetiuns (e.R after
tailingพ)ทน) 115 6; after noons (e.R rhe
people iptatiotted) 96.6: past participles
with try or other prepositions 96.9; past
participles with IO)and much 96 8;
• object > panldple 107 109; tear, พ.
clauses 11 ร; misrelaicd participles
(c« laohng out of the น»น/ทน·
lhe »n-uniaUn ,.) 1154
particular พ particular discourse market ill
party (íamlocJUnlpreposiuôn 212
party (political, etc) with singular or plural
verb and pronoun 128 1
pass With two objects 8 1
passer-by plural 11/ 6
passives SfCTiON 6: structures and verb
form* ร?; by ■ agent ร& modal structures
59;ger as pássnèauubary (eg ger caught)
60; verbs with Iwno^ccis 61; V«bs
with prrpoMtXHB 62. /r urn thaugfrl I hut
..etc 6R/h-Bteteivd rote....eft
64; lie uni "modeleda genius, etc 65:
Sty mutuei'peeked, etc 66; When do
wr use passive structures' 6/, infinitives
(e X- to be taken three times a day) 42 ร;
infinitives (eg. nothing to do nothing
to he done106 h -Ing forms (e g. betng
done) 93 2; passiveswithixit be in news
headlines 292 2, position ๗ prepositions
209.4; rate not used เท passes V 57 3
past continuous M e past progressive
past participtas MS-participles
past perfect 53 ร·»; oe simple pan with
simple and pro^evjif- tile difletences
55 4. with befote 250 3. with if (unreal
past ) 241; with suppose, suppoàng. uteri
r/l'tinn-al put') 599, wlthas^funrea)
past’) 378
past progressive forms and nsr 45;
difference between I «1st progressive and
simple pasi 453 6
past simple see simple past
past tense instead ui น··old after
conjunction* 46 1
past verb form with present or future
meaning 46; after Id rather 566 Rafter
d 239. after tfonty 242 after If* time
502.2, after unh 6324 in polite requests,
quest ions. etc 462
paths pronunciation 118 4
pay preposition 21,3;mjxisMvc 61;pm
for. to 113 7; one and two oncers 8 7
penny, pennies and pence 322 15
people, rvrvurr/s)aitd people' 117 2
per (e g. 70 mln per hour) 322 19
perfect infinitive (e.g, tohaivdonti 091.
use 90: after morte rate (e g. You should
hat V tiemen) 50 3
perfect ing forms (eg lull ing drpl) 93 2
perfect tenses 6, with แ/พr 249 3. with
before 250 3: with era 454.3; wither and
mice 469 2; future perfect 4ft see also
present perfect past perfect
perhaps positXin 1 2. and maybe 525
period (full stop) 293
permission (noun) uncountable 1193
permission (giving and asking) 81
permit - object < infinitive 98;· Mgfottn
or infinitive 105 4; permit allow and let
person persons, people md peoph'i 1172
personal pronouns 173 175, basic
iitfi.1t mat*■ท 173; advanced point" 174,
ร๊ริธริรรุรุ๊ะ.
(advanced puiiib) 174; me. He •ท double
subjects (e.&AiJuva/id me	1741;
I. Hr เท <l«>ubl<· object* (e g Muwji )VMI
«พ/ ฦ 174.1; พบr เ. Hi after nt, than.
uus I leho.... Ht 1743. ue Indiwv
and etduMt? 174 9; น* น wm >r>น
men, etc 173.10: co meaning'me* 174 6;
ywfi&Uguyi 1743: older Mckiufcct
Mugular arid plural form*al พน 174 &
he' fhcutoo 174.9; mt myfmototg. etc
พ>«9 174,7; pronouns ๓ indirect speech
258 2, personal pronouns out left out
173 4; IH-Isinial anil relative pronouns nix
Index
persuade . object . infinitive 98
phenomenon plural 1174
-phile buff··) J38 2
pho be -phobia (suffix) 3382
phono preposition 212
photo plural 116 3; lake a photo 435 6
photo-(prefix) 338.1
phrasal verbs 12
physics lingulae no plural 117 3
piano plural 116 3
picnickers. etc spelling 347 8
picture inaptaurt 212
piece apieceof 121.1
piece and group words 121
pint British and American 322.17
pity countable or uncountable 119.6
place expressions with no preposition
can stay, etc 237 7; เท thefintliocond. etc
place discourse marker เท writing 284 1.
In speech 301 1
versions 327
plan (noun)for... to 113 5
plane by plane 142 1;on/inaplanc 384.4
play (noun) and game 555.1
play (verb) with one and two objects 8.7;
Mid OCT 5552
please Mid thank you 556
please non progressive verb 4.2
pleased preposition 213;.infinitive 101.1
plenty 172.3
plural see singular and plural
pm (ะ เท the afternoon evening) 325 3
Poet laureate 186 I
poetry uncountaUe 119.3
point uncountable use 120 2; there's no
point, etc 20 2. at which point 237 6
point of view preposition 212;
and opinion 557
pointless for .10 113.4
polico plural with nosingubr 117.7
policeman woman 3284
polish active or pa wave meaning 9.2
polite preposition 213
pohteness 310-312: questions as reguests
31 O’. diManong verb forms 311; softening
expressions 312;pfawand "uintyou
politics singular and (Mural the same 117 3;
md policy 559
poly-(prefix) 3381
possess non-progressive verb 4 2
possessive's 123-124.127; forms 123; use
124; classifying expressions 127, articles
dropped 142 3; not used with rhe poor, etc
188 1; or preposition structure 124.2
possessive* poeesrre determiners
(c.g.my. inur)	preu^sive pronouns
(eg. -nine, your,) 176-177; a friend of
mine, etc 177; mymobng etc 94.3;
possessive fonns of nouns 123 124; see
also possessive ร
possibility and opportunity 547
post with two objects 81
post- (prefix) 3381
postcards words left out 291 2
postman 335.1
postpone Ing 100.1
potato plural 116.3
pound (English money) 322 15
pound (weight) 322.17
almost and nearly 366
pre (prefix) 338.1
predicative position of adjectives '83 1
predictions with wilt 38 2 3
prefer structures 560 · -mg form or
Infinlthv 105.9,. object · inflnitisc 98;
prefer...ingto., ing 1042;
non·progressive verb 4.2
prefixes 338
premises plural with no singular 117.7
preparatory it 268-269, with -('«forms
268 3; in pa«ives(e.g. ir นพ thought that,
it ua< decided to} 63; with for ...to. etc
prepare to 97
prepositions 209-214, after particular
words and expressions 213; before
particular words and expressions 212; at
die ends of clauses 209; after superlamrs
(e g the happiest man in the uvrfrf) 206 7;
place 384; ihrecnon 385; time 386;
expressions without prepositions 214.
before conjunctions 210; before Mg
forms 104, rtf, tn and on left out 3867;
left out before question words 2104;
left out before that 210 1 3; left out ill
abbreviated styles 291; prepositional
verbs (e g. took ar) 13 prepositional verbs
in passive structures 62; prej>ositi,xis and
.ulverb ptiniclrs 195.1; sec also the entries
for particular prepositions
prescriptive and descriptive rules 3174
present posioon and meaning 186 3
present anil present perfect
the difference, 52
present continuous see present
progressive
present participles see participles
Index
present perfect 47 S&bMicmfofirMtfcMi
47; present perfect pa%snr (has been done}
57 1-2; present perfect ทโ past 48; present
perfect or past (advanced pom») 49:
prewiu perfect with/or and since 469.2;
Wither 2493; with before 250.2-3; with
ever 454 Z; present perfect or past with
already and yet 595 7; present perfect
progrÁsivr 50, present perfect simple or
progressive 51; present perfect or present
52; present perfect or simple past with jus!
aiฟ่>นพ/น)น* 503.2-3; present perfect inr
future after conjunctions 231.3
prerent perfect continuous see present
perfect progressive
present perfect progressive so,
or simple st; wither and since 469.2;
see aho present perfect
present progressive 32; or simple
present 32; in storiex commentaries
and instructions 33; or simple present
(advanced points) 34 1 2.34 6; or present
perfect pfOgmatye 52.1; pasanv (d being
done) 57.1 2; talking abriu changes 32 4;
long lasting clkJJiges 34 2;
íxm progrrssnvwrbs 4; ftiture use 36;
future use (advanced points) 39
present simple see simple present
present tenses
SECTION 3; simple present 30-31;
present progressive 32; in MOTH'S,
commentaries ami instructions 33;
advanced points 34
future use 37
aft"(น...as 2039
after before 250 2
after//238 2
after suppose, supposing and uhat
Aft" unless 247 3
after until 613.4
after most conductions 231.2
Ailh/or 469 1
after bet 401.2
President, etc without article 142 12
Presidentelect 186.1
presume there are presumed to be 64 4
pretend to 97
pretty adjcctisv and advvrb 194 2;
prettdy 1 พุ.2; pretty, fairty. quite
«nd lather 4«)
prevent preposition 213; · object -from .
Mgfonn 100 2
price and pi น.· 562
prince and princess 328.4
principle and principal 563
prison expressions without
prire «nd pray 562
pro· (pref แง 3.38.1
probable structures 113.4
probably poution 198 2
problem No pioblein (reply to (hanks) 556 5
professor 326 3
progress uncountable 119 3
progressive forms 3-5; construction 3;
non-progrvsávewrtn 4. with<rfu«», ell
5; เท polite requests, questions etc 3112;
and simple iorms with at, when and while
251; progressive infinitive (e g. to be doing}
promise * Inflmtiw 262 1;/promise 34 3;
non progressive verb 4 2. with two objects
pronouns SKTIOW 14; รพ่ also entries for
particular pronouns
pronunciation stress and rhythm 313;
on noun- ท«เท compounds 125 7;
stress tn abbreviations 336 2; stressed
and unstressed contractions 337;
reertsed promincianon' 316 3; Hnnsh
and American differences 3194;
pronunciation and spelling 351;
silent letters 351.3; weak and strong
pronunciation 315; pronunciation of: eit
442; third person -(e)t 30 3. plurals 118;
น^ไรÍÍSSm -d
In Ami 1.3; tan 315; <ธท3 337 Notes;
other 1566;got^ro(gonna) 35.5; ««to
( gotta ) 743; Mr. Mis. Ms 326.3; neither
157.4;ofien 541;rmd I I;Μ»» I 3, น»ทe
proof preposition 213
proof (suffix) 3384
proper position and meaning 186.3
propose . infinitive or Mg form 1004
provided providing (that) 246
pseudo (prefix) 338 1
psycho- (prefix) 338 1
public (noun) · sii«ular or plural 128 1
publicity uncountable 119 3
punctuation 293-298 full stop question
mark and exclamation mark 293; full
stops in abbreviations 336.1; question
marks no< used เท Indirect questions
headlines 2922; semi-colon 295;
comma 298 comma* after Mibordmatc
nix used ๓ indirect questions or before
Index
that 296 6c punctuation with conjunrtinrw
and adverbiais 283 1.296 8; dash 297;
quotation marks ( tmerted comma») 298;
apostrophe 340; apostrophes tn plural
abbreviations 336A
purpose infinitive <x purpose 112
push not followed เท' indirect object 8 6
put off Ing 1001
put up with 13 4
pyjamas plural with no singular 117 7
quarter (American money) 322.16
Queen, Kilin etc without lirdde 142 12
queer (offenúve word) 335 2
question uncountable use 1202
question mark 293; tn news lieadlinev
292 2; not user) In indirect questions
2802
question tags 105; advanced points 306
questions 216. declarative questions
(eg. Vutti the bent!) 302; rhetorical
questions (e g Who caret!) 303; echo
questions (e g Sht l traded how manfl)
«Μ; reply questions (e g IViisirO 507;
indirect questions 260; negative questions
218. position of prcpoWWns 209 2.
209 6 7; question word clauses 266;
questions about that clauses (e.g Who
do you with (that) you'd married!) 2648.
questions as polite requests 310 1; see
quick adjective and adverb 194.2; (adverb)
didckerot 205; cpdcHy. toon and <>๙)
591
quite meanings, structures and word
order 564; quite, fairly. mlherand prelty
460; witfl supetfornvs 207 3; softening
expression 312-1; not quite 564 5
quite a bit./hl'. foe, etc 564 4
quite the opposite discourse· marker in
writing 284 2 in speech jot 2
quotation marks 298; in news headlines
radio preposition 2\2;(lhelnulto 142 11
radius plural 117.4
ragged pronunciation 191
raise and rise 1 2
rarely Ι·ηιΐ1οη 198 1; - inversion(iimihan
before subject) 270 7
rather (adverb of degree) meanings,
suurmres and word order 565;
Id rather Ml· and Id rather -lol.· 566 2;
rather/truly, quite and pr.itr 460; willi
comparative* 207.1; softening eqireswin
rather (preference) $66. or-other 301 3;
and belter 402 2; rather than . Infinitive
without to 91 4; would rather 566 3; had
rulfier (obsolete cipression) 566 3
re- (prefix) 338.1
read with two objects 81
reading complicated structures 285
ready to 1014
real mh«tiw- and adverb 194 2;
compuralhetind superlative 204 5
realise non progressive verb 4 2
really แร่»! fix emphasis 196 3; discourse
reason rmum/or uln th.d 567.
/Or... rearon 2t2; uncountable use 120 2
'received pronunciation' 316 3
recently .nth present perfect 47 4
พหh present perfect progressive 50 5
reckon rakon mined 585; 7 reckon 301 3
recognise nonptiwessiveverb 42
recommend · object - infinitive 98.
• subjunctive 232 2
recovered acme past participle 96 4
reduced relative clauses (eg the girl
dancing uuhyour brother) 237.11
reflexive pronouns 178;and «พft other
one another 1788. emphatic use (eg o-
Uyounel/) 1785
refuse . Infinitive 97; w.ih two objects 8 1;
regarding discourse· marker in writing
regards phiral with no singular 117 7;
regret - log form or infinitive 105 3
relative clauses see relative structures
relative pronouns (uh", which, etc after
ทนน»ร) see relative structures
relative structures . 33 237;basl<
information 233; Identifying and
non Identifying clauses 234; whole 235;
what 236. when. ubereund why 233 9,
which referring to whole clause 2338;
position of prepositions 237 & dropping
object pronouns 234 4; advanced points
237;cotnp«vhcn*iixipnfolem* 285 5 7;
intonation and punctuation 234 2.
relative . Infinitive: a garden เท whrch
Io play, etc 237 14. relative Miucturcs
after Iiuy 6202; with indirect speech:
mrrwtmdy I know wilt like, a car thal I
didn't know how fadd could gp 237 17-18
reluctant (for ...to 113 3
remain 394 10
remains plural with no singular 117.7
remember . ingform or infinitive 1051;
Ort remember 84 3; non progressive verb
4.2; and remind 568 1; remember me to V
32913
Index
remind Mructurr-) and preposition 568 2;
repetition use and «««dance -S'
reply questions (e g WtUiPI 307
report thm are reportfd to hr	64 4
reported speech M-<-indirect speech
reporting direct speech reporting vert*
and word order -57; punctuation (use of
comma! and colon») -44 6
request (noun)/,» to 11} 5
request (verb). object . infinitive 98
requests will1 uvuid.ean. could. might.
thall 80; using questions -IO. negative
questions 18 >' If. ..ivttW
require . mg form (passive meaning) 100 i
research uncountable 119 3
resemble no following ριηιούιίοη -14 1.
responsible and ทว/MiruiÍK/íryptcpusitxin
result at a 'ทน!เ position 197, punctuation
-S3; dtscoorse mià -84 -
retired.active pint paniciple 964
rhetorical questions (c.R U'ftocarn') 30)
rhythm 3136
rich the tieh 188 1
right adjective and adverb 194 2;. Infinitive
1012. comparative and superlative 204 5.
showing changer*Mibjcci 101 land
'«พุ 194 2; ทุ่^เ^... Io 1134.
sc.'-iso all right
risk, fag 1001
Roman numbers (7. II. III. esc) 322 5
roofs pronunciation 118 4
rotten 96 10
round wound and about !?(,
rubbish uncountable 119 3
rude preposition -13
rugged pronunciation 191
rules prescriptiveand descriptive rules
317 4 รท* also bad rules
run into -13
runner-up plural 117.6
sacred pnmuncatkin 191
Safe lOurney home 3-9 9
Saint weak and strong pronunciation 315
same 571; word «de with compkmem
satisfy noil· progressive verb 4 -
savings pineal with no singular 117 7
etc 6) 1;2ieftie(r/wbe.eic 64 2: A-r
um sued ID be. eu 64 4; and uil 572;
simple present ill quotations (e g. Hamlet
ห»ร. ) 34 4Jiesòysio 586 i:»heutp
says pronunciation 1.3
scales plural with no singular 117 7
scarcely position 196.3: question tags
30S.4, uanety. hanOy aixl no VW 480
school expressions withc-N article 142 1.
« singular or plural 1281
süssors plural with no singular 117 7
Scot 32 1; Scottish and Scotch 321 ’lutes
scratch active or passive meaning 92
sea optvsUons without article 142 1.
search preposition 2’3
secondly, àf.v.erc 284 1
Secretary General 188 1
see meanings and structures ' 74; . ofi|e> r
-iàittvenc ingfocm 116.1;can«V
84 1; 7 see r7«ir 482. the นร» เท·ท to
64.3; progressive and non-prognerive
users 4 3; ire if I whether 575 6; «V. foot
Handtecuch 575;พ..rd 182.
see above over 354 6
See you (four, etc) 3292
seem structures and u«· 576, and appro'
374 2. cunt Item to 576.4; In negative
rl terms that entf 576 6; NON-progressive
seldom position 198 1; · inversion
(aucillan before subject) 270 7
self plural 117.1
■self {myttif. etc) 178
sell active or passive meaning 9 I; with two
objects 81
semi- (prefl.) 338 1
semi-colon 295
sense Arrr 'c no tent in. etc 20 2
sensible) and sensitive 577
sentence structure basic clause type»
MCTiO’l 19; Ixsw word order 215;
normal order and variations 267;
ptcpMAtotyir 268-269; Inversion
220 271; fronting 222; c left sentence,
273 -274; ellipsis (leavingmil weeds)
225-280; conjunctions, àrnccnce» and
clauses «<108 20; embedding น·นบพ-
น ιόde clause) 285; reading complicated
structures 285; spoken sente nce structure
299; see also questions, negative
Index
structures. exclamations. imperatives,
relative clauses. I» noun clauses, direct
ฟ้ะระะX1*.-. 1.»
set ol cutlery, etc 121A
sexist language 328
shade ..nd shadow ร78
shall future auxiliai» 38 1; <1 tiers.
suggestions, asking for instructions and
decisions 802; legal document» etc 398;
indirect speech 2634: weak and strong
pronunciation 315.3; «ฬ replacing I>M«
3188
shame for... to 113.5
shape expressions with no preposition
214 8; use of be 252
share between among 403 3
sharp adfrctivr and adsérb 194.2;
and iharply 194.2
shave without เ๘/ 17810
she 173 174. used for animats, countries.
ship» etc 328 1; weak and strong
pronunciation 315.3
sheet of paper. grain of land. etc 121 1
shelf plural 117 1
■ship (suffix) 338 2
shocked to 101 War 96.9: with rhoulrf
232 5: very shocked 968
Shone Am» pronunciation 1.3
short adjective and adverb 1942;
and shortly 194 7, in short 284 1
should**pn4xiblllty 70;obh^Oon 76;
and mu>r (certainty /probability) 69.7;
and mud (obligation) 738; and ought to
70: and had better 77 1; should or would
after I and uein ^clauses. etc 244 1;
I should meaning' If I were sou. I should*
240: after เท owe 248 2; after I ห«เท·๘. It's
important. Its surprising, eV 232 5; after
rluifiL·/ h/iitf rfntu* 7A ?* fluvtM / ΠΙΓ,ΙΙΐίΠΡ
if I should: etc 244 5; uho should I see
but. et< 413.1; why should diet. etc 303.2;
uotdd replacing should 3189: weak and
strong pronunciation 3153
structures 61
shrunken 96.10
shut andetow 422
sick and til 494; he 's sick / het being sick 18
side either tide 156 5
Silk and Silken 1264
silly adjective, not adverb 194 1
similar word order with complement 186 5
similarly 284 2
simple past forms, spelling pronunciation
and use 44; or past progressive 45.3-6Í
or present prefect 48 49; or present
perfect with already and yet 595 7;orpas
Instead of past progrrsúre or perfect
after conjunctions 231.7; with present
or future meaning 46; with present or
future meaning after at time 502.2; with
present or future meaning after uotdd
simple present form» spelling,
Denunciation 30; use 31.33 34; or
present progressive 31 34; or present
perfect 31.6; or present 52; instead of
prevent progressive after conjunctions
since tenses 579; with present perfect
(XOgrnsive 50 5; ante. for. เท anti from
(time) 669-.unce...ing 1156;store.«ร.
became and for 37
sing structures with one and two objects 8 7
Singapore inglish 320.3
singular and plural spelling of plurals
116; irregular and special plurals 117;
plural with apostrophe (e.g, 1460s) 336.4;
pronunciation of plurals 118; group
nouns (eg the team isare) 1281; «her
singular rapressúHH With plural vert»
128 2; plural espresstons with singular
verbs 129: mixed singular and plural 130;
til rue after what-clause 274 1; this/that
torr of etc 5922J-vei rhen-i and
where's· plural verb 130 6;another'a
good three hour», etc 130 7; distributive
plural (e g they opened their books)
131; singular modifiers: a shoe shop.
etc 1252, a three-mile walk, ere 125.3;
fractions and decimals 322.1; nouns and
half 478 5. hundred and hundreds, etc
322.14; singular they 175-, either of 156 2.
neither of 157.2; the rest 569; bread and
fam. etc 1 พุ.4; sec also countable and
uncountable nouns
sir 326 2; weak and strong pronunciation
315.3
site expressions with no preposition 2148
size use of he 25 2
sky in the sky 384 7
slang (kind of language) 334
slang (noon) uncountable 119.3
Sleep well 329 20
slow adjcctire and adverb 194 2; (adverb)
comparative and superlative 205
small and little 580
Index
2 2 2 2 ร 2
smell ssitcrtnow» 841; progressive and
smile preposition 213
พ (adJwbTnw-anlng lifa-ito/üiM' 582;
doso 29;«wtso 452 ร;
/à/ àt/bàv. MT so 585 2; /frJJ
so I tav/MMt. etc 585 * พ ír a, พ่
so (degree Mtn) so IM so/iur. etc 584;
and 50 much 5847; and ttjr/j 597;
and ivry 5$4.2ίΜΤ» 455; exchmailorw
andemptaMM 2233;«๗พ...as 2032;
พ uwrrzi« day, «C ใ 87. verb bHocv
iutycct after พ 270.5
SO (meaning because of thisAhdt) 583;
tolhei 229 5
be it 232.4
few 584 6
little 584.6
long as meaning on condition dun 246
much as 587 4; «’ร เพ* to much ..as
50 that and inorder that 588
so to speak discourse mark.’ in wilting
284 3. เท speech 301.3
so-and-so 589
social language 329
society without the 140 1
socio* (prefix) 338 1
some meanings, pronunciation and
jndothers 158 7; expressions with no
preposition 2142. «Mil,· or no ankle 139;
Mmeqf whom, etc 237.9: weak and suong
pronunciation 315.3
somebody and MWW 180; no difference
183.1; position with adjectives 186 6;
question tags 306.5; with eta· 447 1
someplace 1806
something 180; position with adjectives
sometimes position 2C0 2; with present
somewhere 180; position with adjectives
186.6: somratareefce 447 1; <omtuhtrr I
soon comparative and superlative 205;
toon, early anti quickly พ1: no sooner,
hardly and mutely 483; sec also as soon
soprano plural 116.3
sorry preposition 213;. wgformor
infinitive 105 14; sorry about not followed
b> that 2102; Sorry and firuse rm 329 7;
Sorry'lastorig for repetition) 329.8;
with should 232 5
sort of 592; discourse marker 592 3; ankle
dropped after sorto/ 142 6; these sort of
sound adjective and adverb 194 2;
and soundly 194.2
sound (verb) 593; non pagedwwtb 4 2
5outh African English 320 3
south and southern, etc 442; capital kite·'
442 3
spacecraft singular and plural the same
spaghetti uncountable 119.5
speak sprat to with 318 9; and talk 594;
so to speak discourse marker in writing
284 3. เท speech 301.3
speaking speaking offabota 301
specially) and เพั«ฬพ 451
species singular and plural the same 117 3
spectacles ( Jural with no singular 117 7
speech see spoken tnglish
spelling 337.340 351; contraction*
person singular present 30; simple past
44; possessive· , 123 1; comparative and
superlative adjectives 204.1; apostrophes
340; capital letters 341; hyphens 342.
numbers (eg. forty-one) 3229; tar and
■er 343; «พ!·and like 544; adverbs
ending in ty 345; -irfrand -rcrafiV 339 4;
final r 346; doubling final consonants
347; y and / 348; ch and uh. k and ck 349.
teand ธ· 350: spelling and pronunciation
(strange and difficult spellings) 351;
British-American difference* 319 3;
national adjectives (e g Italian) 321;
Xorthfrrn). Southern). etc 442. Mr. Mrs.
(e g bathroom, furniture shop) 1258
spend . object - -ingform ICO 2
spk (offensive word) 335 2
spit Ami: forms 1.3
spite in spite of 498
split infinitive 89 7
spoken and written English sec spoken
English, written texts
ndex
spoken English SECTION 27; spoken
scntencevtiucture 29ftmolding
repetition 30); discourse markers in
speech 301; declarative qiieMiixis
(eg lhat 'i the bast) 302; rhetorical
questions (ee เฬพ 0พฟ) 303; echo
questions (ex She's intdked how many/)
304; question tags (basic information)
305; question tags (advanced pomes) 306;
reply questions (e.x Was น/)307; short
answers (e g M* hram) 30& warn I.
neither do the)-, etc 309; politeness: using
questions 310. politeness: distancing
verb (onns 311; politeness: softening
expressions 312;informal relative
io*ín'^StiSi'3»2Ír'
22; stress and rhythm 313; intonation
314; weak and strong pronunciation 315;
contractions 337
spokesman woman person 328 5
spring with or without rhe 142 9
square foot. mile, etc 322.18
staff plural with no singular 117.7
stand (can't) Wind ...(ng 100 1; see also
standard English and dialects 316;
start'- 4r« form or infinitive 105.10; active
or passive meaning 9 1; and begin 398;
to Hart With 301.1
state verbs 4.1
statistics singular and plural the same
stay 394 10; stay and 99 2
steward and stewardess 328.4
still, jet and already 595; emphasising
stimulus plural 1174
stomach ache countable or uncountable
stone and stony 1264
stone (British measure ol weight) 322 17
Stop1*> 'rigformonnhniihe 105.12:
- object (· from) · «น;form 100.2
stopped acme past jxinicipte 96 4
stories use of jsresent tense- 33 1
straight adyective and adverb 194 2
strange to·... to 113 4
street and road 570
street names stress 5702
stress sec pronunciation
strike and stroke 1.2
strong and weak forms 315
stupid to 1012
sub'(prefix) 338.1
subject separated from sentence 299
subjunctives 232; เท cider English 3201;
พ'th lor 511
ร!นพ»
ACTION 21: Rebuses SKTION ท.
ocher adverbial clauses SECTION 23; noun
llMises and Indirect speech SECTION 24
subordinating conjunctions SECTION 20
such 596, and so 597; and iwy 596 4; ever
such 455;exclamations 223.3;such...
that. Oito 596 5; such a! an 596; inch
such-and-such 596 7
suffer preposition 213
suffixes 338
sugar uncountable 119.5
suggest structures 598; เท passu·· 61
แท่467
summer withor wMlsoul the 142 9
Sunday etc expressions with no preposition
214 3
super- (prefix) 338.1
superlatives see comparatives and
superlatives
supper and dinner 330
in negative sentences 21ft suppose XI. not
585; / suppose discourse marker 301.3
suppose and supposing (conjunctions)
599
supposed be supposed to 78
sure adjective and adverb 194 2;· frig form
or Infinitive 105 15; be sureurui 99 1;
surely 603; and (urr 194 2; and certainly
600.1
surnames use 326 1 d
surprise non progressive verb 4 2;
• infinitive 101.1
surprised by at 96 9; tvry surprised 968
surprising structure with àld 232.5
surroundings phiral with no singular 117 7
swear - Infinitive 97; (swear 34 3
Swiss singular and plural the same 117 3
swollen active post participle 96 4
sympathetic ώΐ
dropping words before tags 277 4
take Slid bring 409.. anion noun (ex tai,
a bath) 132 2; or huiv(e.g a bath, shower)
23.1; takeaphoto 435 6; tatr(time) 602;
I nek·*
à (time)foe... to 113.7; tale with twi
take care take can (of). out (about) mA
tarefo- 419. Takecart 3292
take part preposition 213
talk (noun) a talk 132 1
talk (verb)and น»nk 394, taUtngaltout
tall unmarked· นพ I9ftandli«ft 483
taste 603; «ท taste 84 1; progressive and
tea (afternoon meal) 330
teach ••เทร form or infinitive 1038;
team
128 1
pasuve meaning 9.2
tele-(prefix) 338.1
telephone numbers 322.4
telephoning 331
television without article 142 11
tell w«h one and two objects 8 1; · object ·
infinitive 262; can tell &Λ 2: he told ทน to,
etc 386; pa«nv unictures 61,64 1; น) he
raid w, etc 385 3; to tell the truth 301.3;
re» and «>572
telling the time 325
tempt . object - infinitive 98
tend structure w«h there 20 2
forms 57.1; present tenses SECTION 3;
talking about the (inure SECTION 4; past
and pçrfcct tenses SECTION 5; M indirect
subordinate clauses 231;pasi verb item
with present or future meaning 46: tense
and lime 2.2; tenses in older English
318.10. For tens»·* with particular words
just now. since, still, yet already, than,
wish See also entnes tor individual
àn'âí^àe without to 91.4;
than, its สเฬ that 206.1; dropjM’ng words
After than 22ร 7; invenion: verb before
Mibjca after than 2705; replacing
•objects object* dixi cot npicinvM*
(e.s than is mmuuy) 236; than ทน·.
fttflท /z/m Atf 17 A ไ. Iiual· itS(4 Efftmti
pronunciation 315 3; udlor present tense
with future meaning after than 231 2
thank you. thank, 556 3. thank, plural with
thankful and graved 604
thanking people «29.19
that (conjunction) dropped 265;
comprehension problems 285 6; not used
after pre portions 2101; that and as not
used icgerlter 229.5; that clauses 264;
preparatory 4 264.4; that, than and as
206.1; the fact that 264 3. weak and strong
pronunciation 315 3
that (demonstrative) and those 144;
expressions with no preposition (e g. that
afternoon) 214 2; that พํน· 182 5;à/«
toherr 274 3. that!throe of 182 7; à à'
and It lot things that base JtM Iteen
mentioned 145
that (relative pronoun) see relative
structures
that-clauses 264 265
that is to say in writing 284 i. in speech
That's all right OK reply to flunks, etc
the (definite ankle) 133 136.140 142,
gencraltsaoons with and without the 14».
with superlatives 2Εβ; measurements
(eg by the kilo) 142 17; เทน»al
muniment' 142 1», ports of the body
142 16; radio, cinema, theatre and
รรุรร,‘•รท»ร·รุ»ฬ».
Dutch, etc 188 2; the meaning 'enough
206 5; with half 478.3; dropped after all
and both 142 5; after amount number
of 142.7; in niMin · noun compounds
142.4; after possessive i 142 3; เท
advertisements, inunictkins. etc 142.20;
Mbed.nc 142 1; weak and strong
pronunciation 315 3; see also articles
the British Isles. Britain, th. United
Kingdom, and Kngland 411
the fact that 264 3
the former, the latter 1883
the majority 172.5; · pluralverb 1282
the matter (with) 524
the Middle Ages plural with no singular
the moment (that) 495
the United Kingdom. Britain, the British
Mm and Engfiนฺนเ 411
the way (= how) 492 6
theatre preposition 212; (the) theatre
142 11
thee 318.10
their 143; meaning his or her ITS
them 173 174; meaning (urn or her' 17S;
weak and strong pronunciation 315.3
themselves 178
Index
then discourse marker เท writing 284.2. ill
speech 3042; ๙.. à 244.9; Ihm and
there .Iixl here 4Λ4;. invertion (will before
wbM) 221
there two pronunciation*and meaning»
there is Gntroducing indefinite subjects)
20, เท question logs 306 4; pronunciation
20 1; there appear»/happen· seem* eti
to be 20 5; there น errtarn/ >urr. etc lobe
20 $; there hm. there remain*, etc 20.6:
there might be. there could be. etc 20 $;
therefore adverb, not cunfunction 283 1;
punctuation 283.1 discourse marker
thermo- (prefa) 338 1
these พ่ thaehndof.elc $92.2
they 173 174; meaning lie octi*·' 17$;
they, orนaodyoufindefuiiie pronouns)
thicken 394 9
thief pforul >17 ,
thing far one thing 301.1. another thing a
think meaninp and structures 606;
think mi not $8$; don't think พ / think
not 219 3;/ rhlri* discourse marker
301 3; propositions 213; progressive
"nil 6 3; there rue thought lõbe 64 4
thirsty be thinly 2$ 1
this and that 144 14$;on thelriepboni·
3314; I hi* Sunday, <4C (no proportion)
214 2;thUone 182.% thou thefine/ tail.
etc lenses $6; à Uuhere 274 5c
"ill1 that and it (things that haw juM
been mentioned) 14$; thh I.««fc or with
present perfect« past 49 .3; thIS น»»*. etc
with present perfect progressive 50.5
those 144; rlune Unit of. Os 592 2; fhoie
tfiat
thou 318 10
though a?fhcsMslr.liu/an<13i«rei»r 371;
Ί«พ์ though 452 4; "tough intríligenl, or
275 11; though meaning 'however 371 4;
tired though the นนร. etc 25$; see also as
though
thought < ทนแนแ<e or uncountable 1196;
preposition 213; the thought of. I ng
103 1
thousand and a thousand 322.10;
rhnronn/ffs) 322 14
thfAnnh illil/iGwitt 7AQ■ eftf,IIZ zir r<ns 4II|(
•ระะ?รพิ น£ร.
throw at/to 38$ 3. เทpastier 62 2ะ
"th two objects 81
thunder uncountable 119.3
thy 31810
tight ad|ecnw and adverb 194 2
till 613
time (countable or uncountable) meanings
and structures 60ft any time you 'ท· in
umn.ftt 237.7; try the time that 414.1;
เท a rnonthi lime, etc 386.6; time 10 502 1;
593; filing <1^0^325 *omrt"""
title* โทแ names (e.g..Wr leu tt Peter} 326;
to (infinitive market) 89 6: used imteadof
พbole irJinihw 280.1, weak Lnd fcttong
to for’epo^bonl'atul at in 385. and until Ml
613.2; dropised after where 624; to.. .big
1042; tobedfiOtoolihorpUtd.w 142.1;
weak and strong ptonuiMUlion 315 3
to blame 106.2
to hear her talk, you'd think, to Me them.
you'd think, etc 1142
to some a great extent 284 2
to start with 301.1
to sum up 284 1
to tell the truth 3013
today with present perfect or past 49 3
tomato phir.ll 116.3
tonight 609
เท negaetvr clauses 227.2; position 369 1;
too (meaning more than wanted', etc)
structures and meaning 610, and ten·
610 1; and too much 610 2; much too. far
too. etc 610 3; special word order with
adjective» 187
too much many 611:100 much and MO
610.2
tooth pfonl 1172
toothache countable or uncountable 1197
tornado plural 116 3
toward(s) 619 3
town expressions without arocir 142 1;
and city 420; the town 1414
traffic uncountable 119 3
train by train 142 1; on a train 384 4
trans- (pref»> 338 1
translate preposition 213
Index
travai (uncountable)mui journey 1193;
countable use 1ห์,3; เท่น*!. journey, trip
travelling Tic spelling 347.6
tri-(prefix) 3381
trip preposition 213; Hat* you had: Did
yõu haw a good Inp! 329 9; mp. trawl.
/ouinry and «ทุ·พ»· 612
troops plural with no singular 117 7
trouble . (object .(infinitive 282 283
trousers plural with no singula/ 117.7
truth lotediheiruih 301 3
truths pronunciation 1184
try (verb) · -Me form or Inllnidw 10S 6;
try «nd 99 1
try (noun) onemore try เพ1
tube by tube 142 I
turn. Cum Ulto (changes) 394 7
TV preposition 212; without article 142.11
two-part verbs phrasal wrln
(eg. break up) 12; pre positional vertx.
(eg พุ^พุ) 13
type of 592; (allowing article dropped
592.t;thewtype of 592 2
typical preposition 213
typical behaviour am.totdd. may. r,เพ่»ท.
นฬ. «ouM 86; «เ๗ to 87
ultra-(prefix) 3381
บท-(prefix) 338 1
uncountable nouns 119; advanced points
120
under- (prefix) 338 I
under no circumstances - inveraion
(auobary before subject) 270.7
understand non progressive verts 42;
.object •lobe 10.3; ·object. log(ocm
100.1; can understand 84 3; I undmland
unemployed the unemployed 188 1
uni- (prefix) 338.1
unimportant for... ro 113.4
union with sintRilur or plural verb and
United z UmteclKb^m Britain.
the British tees and England 411
United States · rinpitasvrtVpronoun
university preposxiixi 212; expressions
without article 142 1
unless 247;. present with future meaning
247.3; and if not 247.1
unlikely 516; adjective. not adrtrb 194 1
until and til! 613;'» pest participle (eg until
cooked) 115 6; 1 present lense with future
613 6; and ro 6t 3 2; not used for distance
613 3; not until. inversion (auxiliary
before subject) 270.7
up and down (e g up· down the load) 614
up to (distance, quantity) 613.3
upbringing and education 410
□pwardfs) 619
us meaning me' 1746;rowomen.etc
1741; weak and strong pronunciation
3153
use any:no we 373.3; ช Itanyuw
eipeaing...7.etc 945;suucture
with there 20 2
used be’getuwdtol. .นพ) 615
used to · infinitive (past habit* etc) 87; and
นould 878
usually position 198.1
vacation 488
vanished active past participle 96.4
verb - infinitive(X Inform 1004. special
cases 105
verb - -ingfixm 100
verb - object. compienxnt (eg I hey
elected her Prendent) 10; pasMse (eg She
uat elected Preúdera) 65
verb . object. infinitive 98. passive (e g He
if bettered to be...) 64
verb - object > i'lg focni 100 2
verb complementation What can follow
verb forms in older fnglish 318 10
verbs of movement the came in running,
die entered running ot the ran in 14
verbs with active and passive
meanings (e g I opened the door
^รฺร
(®< break up) 12
verbs with prepositions (e.g, listen fa) 13;
passive fttnictun* 62
verbs with two objects Z. เท 61
vertebra plural 117.4
very 616; and เพฺy mu ch 616.4; and»
รพ 2; and such 596 4; and too 610 1;
I *ry.. uwitvd 499 1; and much Midi pau
pinidpiw 96S.Lwy^r.«ic 207.4
ndex
very much 616.4; and !»ry 616position
616.4: with comparatives and superlatives
207
vice- (prcfu) 338 I
view เท ททุ!พน'discourse marker เท anting
284 3. in speech 30X 3. point of (■พน' 212.
vital/or...» 1134;· subjunctive 232 2
vocabulary uncountable 119.3
voice preposition 212
ะรร
voyage. travel, journey and trip 612
พ'
waiter and waitress 1284
wake active or PMW meaning 9.1; uà.
auvit arxl (a)uYikrfi 389
waking (ddjeciive) and aunkt 389 2
wanna (ร want to) 618 4
want structure* and morning* 618; เท
negative sentences 2194;
wllhp*Xvwaning 618 3; eidเฟน
631 ะ meaning 'need* 618 3;uunlionoi
• wardb) (luffix) 619
warm beuwm 2$ 1
warn . object ♦ infinitive 98
was replacinguw(f^///iwu) 3189;
/... UYU to 244 2; weak and strong
pronunciation 315 3
wash without »(p78 10
watch . JHg iocm or infinitive 10ss.ueüch.
tart íWandsrr 575
way 620; expression* with no preposition
620 1;ins/ft-sameuxty 284 2; jri/o/iffte
นtry 620.5; lhe uwy (film) r-ic sprtr ft? me.
ÍKโพ้5
301.1: 1*พ uay and à' 492 6
we inclusive and cxdume meanings 174 9
ย’·น*" 237 13; ue น'»พ»,>ou "พ'!. etc
173.10. weak and strong pronunciation
319.3
weak and strong forms 319
wear htumrtng 437 3
weather uncountable 119 1; countable use
weekends ail ox urrtends 3189
weekly adjective and adverb 194 1
weigh prowesrtve and non พส™r
weight (talking about weight) use of be
252
weight (noun) expressions with no
preposition 2148
welcome uricometo 101 2; แพ! O'»,·
รํ'
comparative and superlative 205; position
183.3; discount marker 301 3;and M>od
622.1; นรพ๗/, alioandfoo 369; as น eV as
382; as urtlatlhat 301.2
well-known comparative and superlative
204 4
well-read active past participle 964
well worth 634.6
Welsh 1?พแพ*/! 188.2
were insteadof น«นafter If 239.4; tflwen
you 240; after as tf/though 378.2. after
uub 632.4; UVIS replacing นพ (e.g. tf I
น·!*) 318 9; นere 1>พ meaning if she were;
weak and strong pronunciation 319.3
wert older English form of u<rc 318.10
wtsat (Question word) 625; exclamations
223 2. questions with what as subject
2166; แพ7 (asking for repetition) 329 8;
uhallo 262.2;uhat, whichandย'?น» 629;
น ?นพ. น4ทุ and hou' 492.4; word order เท
indirect questions 263 7
what (relative pronoun) 236 no matin
what 293; แพ/neef 6 etc 274
west and western, etc 442; capital letters
what... like and how 493
What about.. .7 492.4
what else 447 1
what ever 627
what if 599
what is more 284.2
What time...? 386 7
meaning'at ail' 252 8; short answer
252.7; whatever else 447.1
when with sample part or post perfect 54.1;
. present tense with future meaning
231 2; and tf 623; เท relative structures:
the clay when, etc 274 2; dropped after
""พ. day.)«!'. etc 237 7; no mailer น-พ/,
253: น-พ» . !'« 115.6 when.as and
น-แพ 251; when else 447.1; when ever
627; น'?น·» turning, when ready, etc 291 5
whenever 252, and no matter พ/พ" 253.2;
whore . InUnim* 262 2. dropped after
somewhere. art)uhtre.eK 237 7;
in relative structures: lhe plate where, etc
2339; no mailer น-พ',' 253 2; Io dropped
where's^plural noun phrase 130.6
wherever 252: and no matter where 2532
Index
whether . present เทพ with future
which (Question word) 625; น*น* </625 3;
which one 182.5; พุ™«er น*น* 253;
น*ท่*. irful and น*ท 625; word order เท
indirect quesocins 2637
which (relative pronoun) (e g the car
น*น*...) 213 234. referring to a «hole
clause (e g.... uhich surprised arrfbod) I
233Λ advanced point. 237; in น*น*
caw. etc 237 6; none of I<*fcfcett 237»
or น*o with group noun, like from 128. >
whichever 2S2; and no matter which 2S! 2
while, as and น·)พ» 251; while asleep, etc
275.11; uhr* in Germany, etc 251$.
showingcontrast 284 2; while.. Ing
1156
who (question word) 625; and whom
216 6; weak and strong pronunciation
315.3;withe*. 447 1
who (relative prenoun) (eg "น- man
น*<>..1) 233 234; advanced point. 237;
“*o or which with group noun, like ream
128.1; he/rte who 174 9.1 who. )VU who.
etc 237 13; no matleruho 253. น *o and
whoen 626.2; who meaning the person
who. น*»h anti น hat 625
whoever 252; and no mailer who 253 2;
whole and all 150; the whole of >50 5;
on the uftalediscourM· marker m writing
284.2. in speech 301.2
whom (question word) 626 1
whom (relative pronoun) (eg the person
นhorn .) 233 2 34; advanced point.
237; write of'.horn, etc 237» ilho and
whom 6262, who(m) >w thought.... etc
whose (powwve question word) 628;
position of prepositions 628 2; questions
with whose. . as subject 216.6; and who's
whose (relate pronoun) (e g the person
whose keys I found! 235: no matter uhos.
253; whose, of whom uhichind that... of
235.2; atul who's 629
why - infinitive without fo 630 3; and น*y
riot 63» in rrlatnv stnicnites
(e g rhe reason น*,·) 233 9; why. uhat
and how 492 4; with else 447 1
Why should she?, ell 303 2
wicked pronunciation 191
wide adjective and adverb 194.2; and brood
412. and large 404 4; anti widely 194 2
widen 394 9
widow and icUtonw 328 4
wife plural 117.1
will future anilhar? 38; and 1/พ// 38.1;
advanced point. 3» modal use for
□bliginon 73; willingness 79. Pensions
79 1; refusal. 79 2. promises and threats
79.3; instructions and request. 83; ts-ptcal
behaviour 86, criticisms 86 3; เท if clauses
243; weak and stnmg pronunciation 315.3
willing fee...io 113 3
win anti beat 392
wind and น«and 12
winter with or wMlwHit th·· 142 9
wish (noun) structure with .dicriพ 232.2
wish (verb) meaningsand structures 632;
• object. infinitive 98. non progressive
verb 4 2; tenses alter wish 632 4; wish...
นordrf 632 5; with two objects 8 1
wishes sending good wishes 32913
with meaning, and use 633;.I nd/ทฺ(tools.
method, etc) 416
with reference to 284.1
without ing 115 6. anti except 456 6;
and ImUadaf 503 2
wog (offensive word) 335 2
woif plural 117 1
142 8. uximan or It omen เท noun . noun
compounds 1254
wonder I น.»นเcred was pondering เท
polite requests 311
won’t refusals 79 2
wop (offensive word) 335 2
word order basic word order 215;
information structure 267; fronting
272; inversion 270 271; complement
brtore heavy cbject 10.1; questions 216;
negative question. 218. declarative
question, (c.g You're waiting taut)
302; indirect questions 260 1; indirect
speech (advanced punts) 263 7 8;
exclamation. 223; direct and indirect
objects 8 2; Directs with phrasal vertis
posinon ๗18» ie&^tiws
hke Ihgtish weeding 96 ร; pnrrxiph-s
after nouns (eg rhe people tprestioned)
96.6; pavilion of adverbial. 196 201;
น'นท?' and never with Imperatives 224 7;
prepositions «tile end of clauses 209;
refiottiiig verbs (e.g said lohn) 257;
position of subordinate clause* 229 1;
word order in older Frçlish 318 10 bor
word order with particular words and
expressions, see ago. all. also, as wed
back, both each else enough, just
Index
now. last, next only, opposite quite,
rather, such used to. whole
work uncountable 119 3; expressions
Without nrtKle 142.1
works (^ factory)singular IUM> plural tile
worth structure* MbMotthtol a worth
comphunln^ etc 5
worthwhile «45
would «พ» i/239. wnM aI ΛαιΜafter I
and ut 239.3; replacing thtiuld 318 9;
I would meaning 'If I >.<-re you. I would’
240. would JMiv. . for unreal paM
situations 241; เท spoken r/efauses 24$;
past 43; alter น·น)! 632 5; in Indirect
speech 2S9 3; past น™· instead OÍ uouhi
after conjunctions 46.1; used to make
questions etc less di red 311 4; leak and
strong pronunciation 315.3
would like 514 6;softeningexptession
3123; would have ฬพ/ to hn.rian. etc
yet noiiidtVmativewotd 222; after
superlatives 206 8; tenses 595 7; พ'. stiff
aodoirmfy 595; punenution 283.3;
discourse marker emphasising contrast
In writing 284 2, in speech 301 2
yid (offensive word) 335.2
you 173; advanced points 174; you "พ-.
etc 171 IL พฺ>à go» I 74 8; dialect
plurals (yv. )i2. พร'. ydü) 174 8; พ. one
and r)ie>(mdeluu'.e persona) pronouns)
181;พ์น่^0 237 13;พir»iu·
discourse marker 3013, weak and strong
You^MfaMM 19: >๖๔'r น*ko"<r
«ย 621
young thtyouAg 188 1
your 143; weak and szn>ng pronunnaiiun
Your health 329.12
your* 176
Yours faithfully, etc 289 Point 8
yourself ΛίχΙ jYAundiO 178
youse (dolect form of plural you) 174 8
youths pronunciation 118 4
would rather
Would you mind .. .7 5282
wound and wind 1 2
wreaths jKonuiKiaiion 118 4
wretched pronunciation 191
write with one and two objects 8 1
written and spoken English see spoken
English written texts
written texts SECTIO'J 26; formality
281; pruniMiitsand other ptuforms 282;
linking with conpintllonãand a (herbs
28 3. discourse markers 284; reading
complicated sentences 285: paragraphs
286; repetition 287. academic writing
288; letter' 289. emails, text messages,
etc 240. abbreviated styles 291; headlines
292. MM-Ills·! punctuation
wrong adjective and adverb 144 2;
> "imperative .md su portative 204.5;
preposition 213; Iherr'f umtrihlng wrong
20 2;นท»นุ;to 101 2.urongfot ..to
-y fluffs 3384
y'all (Amf dialect iorm of plural พ) 174 8
yard (measurements) 322 17
ye (dialect form of plural ."น) 174 8; (older
English) 320 1
yearly adjective and mherh 194 I
years ๗d 323
yes and no 635; in answers to negamv
questions 635.1
Index
Your indispensable guide to problems in English
Practical English Usage answers the questions that teachers
and learners ask about English grammar and vocabulary, using clear
corpus-informed explanations and examples.
More than 600 entries range across issues such as:
article problems - using tenses · singular they
get as a passive auxiliary - the truth about conditionals
bring or take? · can, could, may or might? · classic or classical?
emails - politeness · avoiding offensive language
I New edition
Now organised into two main parts for quicker, easier reference
•	Complete practical learner's grammar
28 sections cover all the grammar and usage that learners need to know,
including:
-	the grammar of speech and formal writing
-	British-American differences
-	changes เท Engksh
-	questions of style and idiom
-	lets of learners' most common mistakes
•	Guide to vocabulary problems
-	rules for word formation and spelling
-	a survey of high-priority vocabulary areas
-	an A-Z guide to over 250 common word problems
SHAPING learning TOGETHER
OXFORD
UNIVERSITY PRESS
www.oup.com/elt