GRAMMAR
BOOK
Form, Meaning, and Use
for English Language Teachers
THIRD EDITION
Qjane LQfgQfJ-ppQQIYIQfl
Marianne Celce-Murcia
(with Jan Frodesen, Benjamin White, and Howard Williams)
□ NATONAL ,1 UP|N| Γ
GEOGRAPHIC * > J? t IN Lt
LEARNING ** CENGAGE Learning·
Australia · Brazil · Japan · Korea · Mexico " Singapore · Spain · United Kingdom · United States
"Ί NATIONAL
I GEOGRAPHIC
J LEARNING
HEINLE
í» CENGAGE Learning·
lie Grammar Book: Form, Meaning,
nd Use for English Language Teachers,
bird Edition
iane Larsen-Freeman
larianne Celce-Murcia
vith Jan Frodesen, Benjamin White, and
oward Williams)
ublisher: Sherrise Roehr
Kecutive Editor: Laura Le Dréan
evelopment Editor: Kasia McNabb
ssistant Editor: Vanessa Richards
irector of Global Marketing: Ian Martin
snior Director, Production:
Michael Burggren
roduction Manager: Daisy Sosa
ontent Project Manager: Mark Rzeszutek
Manufacturing Planner:
Mary Beth Hennebury
Iterior Designer and Page Production:
MPS Limited
over Designer: Michael Rosenquest
over Photo: Getty Images
© 2016 National Geographic Leaning, a part ofCengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright herein may
be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by any means graphic,
electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to photocopying, recording,
scanning, digitizing, taping, Web distribution, information networks, or information
storage and retrieval systems, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the
1976 United States Copyright Act, or applicable copyright law of another jurisdiction,
without the prior written permission of the publisher.
For product information and technology assistance, contact US at
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product,
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions.
Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2015932825
Hardcover ISBN: 978-1-111-35186-1
National Geographic Learning
20 Channel Center
Boston, MA 02110
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions with office
locations around the globe, including Singapore, the United Kingdom, Australia,
Mexico, Brazil, and Japan.
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson Education, Ltd.
Visit National Geographic Learning online at ngl.cengage.com
Visit our corporate website at www.cengage.com
Printed in the United States of America
Print Number: 01 Print Year: 2015
To our grandchildren
Thea, Noah, âüi Lz/m
and
Kyle, Scoii, Danielle, and Joel
Contents
Dedication iii
Acknowledgments VII
To the Instructor viii
Preface ix
About the Authors xi
Chapters
1	Introduction 1
2	Grammatical Terminology 17
3	Lexicogrammar 33
4	Copular Verbs and Subject-Verb Agreement	57
5	Word Order and the Phrase Structure Rules for the Subject of a Sentence	77
6	More Phrase Structure Rules: The Predicate of a Sentence 89
7	The Tense-Aspect System 105
8	Modal Auxiliaries and Related Phrasal Forms 137
9	The Tense-Aspect-Modality System in Discourse	161
10	Negation 183
11	Yes/No Questions 209
12	Imperatives 231
13	IF^-Questions 245
14	Tag, Alternative, Exclamatory, and Rhetorical Questions	267
15	Articles 281
16	Reference and Possession 305
17	Partitives, Collectives, and Quantifiers 331
18	The Passive Voice 351
19	Sentences with Indirect Objects 373
20	Adjectives 393
21	Prepositions 415
2 2 Phrasal Verbs	441
2	3 Nonreferential Subjects: Ambient It and Existential There 463
24	Conjunction 481
25	Adverbiais 509
26	Logical Connectors	541
27	Conditionals 575
28	Introduction to Relative	Clauses 605
29	More on Relative Clauses: Nonrestrictive and Relative Adverb Clauses 631
30	Focus and Emphasis	655
31	Complementation 679
3	2	Other Aspects of Complementation 707
3 3 Reported Speech and Writing 731
34	Degree—Comparatives and Equatives 767
35	Degree—Complements and Superlatives	793
3 6 Conclusion 815
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises 819
Indexes
Index of Names	883
Index of Languages and Language Groups	891
Index of Words, Phrases, and Affixes 893
Index of Topics	903
Contents
Acknowledgments
Over the years, we have received helpful comments that have contributed to the revision of
this third edition. To the students and colleagues who have taken the time to ask questions,
make suggestions, and challenge US, we are indebted. We have learned much from you, and
we trust that you will be satisfied with our response to your feedback in this new edition.
More particularly, we would like to thank Rodney Huddleston for generously giving
of his time and thoughts in commenting on the previous edition of this book. We are also
very grateful to our former students for helping US to draft updated chapters for this edition:
Jan Frodesen (Chapters 25, 26, 28-30, and 33), Ben White (Chapters 8, 15-17, 21, and 22),
and Howard Williams for chapters in the previous edition, which we have further built
on for this edition (Chapters 24, 26, and 31-33). Loretta Grey also contributed to drafts
of Chapters 14 and 19, as did Claire Chik to Chapter 4 and Irena Kim to Chapter 12. In
addition, Brett Reynolds, Stefanie Wulff, Elka Todeva, and Mai-Han Nguyen assisted US in
updating this edition. Revising a book as complex as this was an enormous undertaking, and
we are grateful that these colleagues stepped up to facilitate the process, although we alone
remain responsible for its content.
We also appreciate the efforts of the Heinle, National Geographic Learning, Cengage
team, most especially Laura Le Dréan, Vanessa Richards, Mark Rzeszutek, Kasia McNabb,
and Ian Martin. Their patience, careful attention to detail, commitment to the project, and
professionalism are unsurpassed.
Finally, without the support of our colleagues at the University of Michigan and the
University of Pennsylvania (Diane) and UCLA (Marianne), and our families and friends, this
edition would have been even longer in coming to fruition. For their love and encouragement,
we express heartfelt thanks.
vii
To the Instructor
We have included more material in this text than you can teach in a one-term course that
deals with English grammar for teachers. To include less would have been unconscionable
since we believe that teachers need to be familiar with all the topics in this book. A one-
term course, then, should aim not only to teach a portion of the chapters in the text, but
also lay a foundation that will enable students to continue to use the book after the course is
completed. Hopefully, we have helped you to accomplish this by giving readers a framework
and providing practice in investigating grammar, rather than simply supplying readers with a
compendium of facts about English.
One of the greatest challenges in teaching this course is helping students overcome the
anxiety about the study of grammar that they sometimes bring with them. One of the greatest
rewards is watching students move from anxiety to curiosity. This does happen. We have been
privileged to see it.
Happy teaching!
Diane Larsen-Freeman
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
Marianne Celce-Murcia
University of California, Los Angeles
Preface
It is hard to believe that the first edition of this book appeared in 1983—more than 30 years
ago! A number of significant changes have taken place since then: generative grammar is no
longer ascendant, English is seen as an international lingua franca, and technological aids to
research, teaching, and learning are ubiquitous, to name only a few. What has not changed
is the value of teachers having a. thorough grounding in their subject matter, and grammar
is certainly an important component of this subject matter knowledge base for language
teachers.
Nevertheless, grammar teaching has often been singled out for harsh criticism. Such
aversion stems from the fact that some language teaching methods rely exclusively or
predominantly on the teaching of grammar, or that language students are frustrated by all
the exceptions to the rules or by their inability to communicate and to their being penalized
for inaccuracy. Our grammar is broader than a compilation of rules governing accurate form.
We try to help teachers, and consequently their students, understand how English grammar
“works” communicatively. We do not see grammar as sterile, but rather as a rich resource
for making meaning in contextually appropriate usage—hence our subtitle: Form, Meaning,
and Use.
Another word about our subtitle is in order. The subtitle in previous editions was An
ESL/EFL Teacher’s Course. In preparing this edition, we have become aware that “English as
a second language” and “English as a foreign language” are not always used as designations
for teachers of English these days. Some call themselves “teachers of English as an additional
language” or “teachers of English language learners.” This is partly because it is not always
so easy to distinguish English as a second language from English as a foreign language in
actual situations of use. There is also a need to consider the multiple languages that students
are exposed to and that they use to different extents throughout their lives. For many of
these students, English is not a “second” language. Further compounding the dilemma is
that in this interconnected world of ours, some learners of English are more interested in
using English for international communication among themselves, rather than learning it in
accordance with Standard English norms as a second or foreign language. Thus, although we
continue to use the term ESL/EFL in the text itself due to its prominence (for example, in the
names of our professional associations [e.g., IATEFL] and degree programs), in an attempt
to serve the inclusive audience that this book is intended for, our subheading now reads for
English Language Teachers.
The Grammar Book: Form, Meaning, and Use for English Language Teachers is designed to
help prospective and practicing teachers of English to enhance their understanding of English
grammar, expand their skills in linguistic analysis, and develop a pedagogical approach to
teaching English grammar.
Each chapter in the third edition of The Grammar Book is designed to lead readers
systematically from an understanding of the grammar topic to an ability to use this
understanding in the English language classroom. After the first two introductory chapters,
each chapter includes:
•	A core presentation of a particular grammatical topic. Descriptions and examples
draw upon the latest linguistics and applied linguistic research and include discussions
of problems that learners regularly encounter
•	Suggestions for teaching the form, meaning, and use of constructions to English
language students
•	Comprehension and application exercises that enable readers to assess their
understanding of the material and to apply what has been presented
•	A list of references cited
•	Suggestions for further reading, consisting of grammar texts, grammar reference
guides, and published linguistic research that provide further information regarding
the analysis and teaching of the points covered
At the end of the text, we have also included detailed suggested answers to the chapter exercises.
New to the Third Edition
•	Updated explanations of the form, meaning, and use of grammatical constructions,
which draw on new research findings, especially from cognitive linguistics (for
meaning) and corpus linguistics (for use)
•	Contrastive information that alerts teachers to possible cross-linguistic influence and
helps teachers to identify the learning challenges of their students
•	Increased accessibility of the grammatical descriptions to guide teachers to address
their students’ learning challenges
•	New applications in the form of teaching suggestions, exercises, and further readings
Preface
About the Authors
Diane Larsen-Freeman and Marianne Celce-Murcia have long been leaders in the field
of second language pedagogy.
Diane Larsen-Freeman is professor emerita of education, professor emerita of linguistics,
research scientist emerita, and the former director of the English Language Institute at the
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. She is currently a visiting senior fellow at the University
of Pennsylvania. She is also a distinguished senior faculty fellow at the SIT Graduate Institute
in Brattleboro, Vermont. In addition to her co-authorship of The Grammar Book, Diane is the
editor of Discourse Analysis in Second Language Research, co-author (with Marti Anderson) of
the third edition of Techniques and Principles in Language Teaching, co-author (with Michael
Long) of An Introduction to Second Language Acquisition Research, author of Teaching Language:
From Grammar to Grammaring of the TeacherSource series, co-author (with Lynne Cameron)
of Complex Systems and Applied Linguistics, co-editor (with Nick Ellis) of Language as a Complex
Adaptive System, and series director of Grammar Dimensions: Form, Meaning, and Use.
Marianne Celce-Murcia is professor emerita of applied linguistics and TESL at the University
of California, Los Angeles. In addition to co-authorship of The Grammar Book, Marianne
is co-editor (with Donna Brinton and Marguerite Ann Snow) of the fourth edition of
Teaching English as a Second or Foreign Language. She is also co-series editor (with Maggie
Sokolik) of the five-volume, content-based Grammar Connection series. She is also co-author
of Techniques and Resources in Teaching Grammar (with Sharon Hilles), Teaching Pronunciation
(with Donna Brinton and Janet Goodwin), and Discourse and Context in Language Teaching
(with Elite Olshtain).
xi
Introduction
What Is Grammar?
Probably the most common definition of grammar is that it is a set of rules that describes the
structure of sentences or parts of them. For instance, one word-order rule states that English
adjectives precede nouns, so in English we say “white rice,” not “rice white.” While this definition
is not incorrect, in this book, we adopt a broader view of grammar. We do so out of conviction
that there is theoretical and empirical support for such a view. We also do so because we think that
broadening our view of grammar makes teachers better prepared to work with ESL/EFL students.
Quite honestly, some new teachers are afraid of grammar. They fear that they do not know enough
to teach it, or that they will get the rules wrong. It is our hope that such teachers will come to see
that the study of grammar is not about the study of mechanical rules. The study of grammar is
truly fascinating! Indeed, we might go so far as to say that grammar is a meaning-making resource
and that our ability to speak grammatically is one of the things that makes US human!
______________________________________________________
LEXICOGRAMMAR______________________________________________
One way that our conception of grammar is broader than the common definition is that, for
us, grammar is not only about structure. In fact, we think that grammar is interconnected with
the lexicon (or vocabulary) of a language. For this reason, we prefer the term lexicogrammar.
For instance, English speakers who use a camera to capture an image say that they are “taking a
photograph.” German, Polish, and Spanish speakers say that they are “making a photograph.”
While English speakers would understand the other speakers, the lexicogrammatical resources
that English speakers use extends to their choosing a different verb for this pattern. Both
phrases work fine in their respective contexts. Notice also that both “taking a photograph”
and “making a photograph” have the same structure; therefore, a rule of English word order
would not distinguish them. And herein lies a second difference. Not only is it the case that
vocabulary and grammar are intertwined; it is also true that language is less governed by rules
and more made up of patterns. These days, the patterns of language are often referred to as
“constructions” (Tomasello, 2003).
____________________________________________________________
CONSTRUCTIONS 
A construction is a form that has meaning. Constructions can be found at many different
levels of language. For example, the -ed grammatical morpheme is a construction when added
to a verb to contribute the meaning of “past,” e.g., walk + -ed = walked. Similarly, a sequence
of two words can be a construction. For example, the phrase the + noun is a construction.
If you hear the phrase “the child,” you know that a particular child is being referred to. This
combination of two words has a different meaning from a + noun, as in a child, which could
mean one of many children. At the level of the sentence, there are also form-meaning patterns.
For instance, if we alter the syntax or word order and invert the subject and the verb in a
sentence, we create a question, which has a different meaning from the statement: It is cold. —>
Is it cold? And there are even patterns above the level of sentence—the suprasentential level—
that connect a series of sentences into a text to make the text coherent. For example, in
the following pair of sentences, the sentence with the pronouns she and them follows, not
precedes, the first sentence: Gretchen likes grammar questions. She thinks of them as puzzles to be
solved. While many grammars do not handle text-level grammar, we will.
Another point of departure is that, contrary to some construction grammarians, we
don’t stop at the dimensions of form and meaning. This is because in our experience, students
need to know not only how to form constructions and what they mean, but when to use
particular constructions in appropriate contexts as well. Knowledge of use encompasses how
to make texts coherent, as we saw in our example with the two sentences about Gretchen.
Use also entails knowing what is socially appropriate in a context. Sticking with pronouns,
for example, some speakers consider it inappropriate to use the singular masculine subject
pronoun he to refer generically to speakers of both sexes, as in A teacher is hardworking. He even
works on weekends. These speakers might say, “They even work on weekends.”
A DEFINITION OF GRAMMAR __________	'
This leads US to our broader definition of grammar: Grammar is a meaning-making resource.
It is made up of lexicogrammatical form, meaning, and use constructions that are appropriate to the
context and that operate at the word, phrase, sentence, and textual levels.
Do not be put off if this definition is unfamiliar to you or even unclear. We will have
ample time to consider it in the pages that follow. The point here is to call your attention to
the contrast between our definition and traditional thinking about grammar, which positions
grammar as separate from the lexicon and which associates it exclusively with rules that
describe the way that words and sentences are formed.
RULES/ CONVENTIONALIZED PATTERNS, AND REASONS
That said, in this book, we also use the term rule, along with the word pattern. But there are
three qualifications we would like to make to our use of the term rule in connection with
grammar. The first is that rules are not, as we shall see, airtight formulations; they always have
“exceptions.” While rules may serve a useful purpose, particularly in meeting the security needs
of beginning language learners as “rules of diumb,” it is important to understand that almost
every linguistic category or generalization has fuzzy boundaries. Language is mutable—organic,
even; therefore, its categories and rules are often nondiscrete (Rutherford, 1987).
Second, where traditional grammar rules may sometimes be descriptively useful, they do
not tell us much about which construction to use in a particular context. To understand why
this is so, an additional important feature of language use should be noted—its conventional
nature. While all of the following can be accounted for by traditional rules, only the first is
conventionally used to propose marriage (Pawley & Syder, 1983, p. 196):
I want to marry you.
I wish to be wedded to you.
The Grammar Book
I desire you to become married to me.
Your marrying me is desired by me.
My becoming your spouse is what I want.
With the increased access to large corpora of language data that computers afford, it has
become clear that constructions occur in a number of recurring patterns. These sequences
are sometimes rather fixed, as in “I’ll believe it when I see it.” At other times, the sequences
are more open, allowing some substitutions. For example, an English speaker can say, “Tell
me what’s happening/going on/up,” etc. We include findings from corpus linguistics in
this text.
The third qualification that we make concerning grammar rules is that they often appear
to be arbitrary formulations. For example, learners of English are told that it is possible to
place a direct object after a certain kind of two-word, or phrasal, verb when the direct object
is a noun, but not when the direct object is a pronoun. The asterisk before the second example
is a linguistic convention used to indicate ungrammaticality:
I looked up a word in the dictionary. (Direct object word is a noun.)
*1 looked up it in the dictionary. (Direct object it is a pronoun.)
Such formulations do appear to be arbitrary; and yet, if one views this very same rule from
a discourse or text-level perspective, we see that this rule is one manifestation of an important
cognitive principle of information structuring, which we introduce first in Chapter 2 and then
revisit throughout the remainder of the book. Therefore, at least some of the arbitrariness of
rules disappears when we view language above the sentential level.
Indeed, what we seek to do in this book is to give reasons, not rules, for why English
grammar functions as it does. Subsentential and sentential rules can sometimes appear
arbitrary and make learning more difficult. Giving students reasons for why things are the way
they are can aid students in learning English grammar. To do so respects their intelligence,
helps them understand why English speakers use the language as they do, and promotes their
autonomy as learners. It also helps students see how grammar and communication interface,
thus addressing, although not entirely solving, the common problem of students’ not being
able to activate their knowledge of grammar when they communicate.
THE threFdimensionF ~	~
We made the point earlier that constructions have form and meaning. Because we are
attempting to treat grammar with a communicative end in mind, we also wrote that in our
book, we will discuss the use of grammar constructions in appropriate contexts. We refer to
these as the dimensions ofform, meaning, and use. Because the three are interrelated—that is,
a change in one will involve a change in another—it is helpful to view the three dimensions as
a pie chart, with arrows depicting the interactions among the three (see the next page).
The question in each wedge of the pie provides further guidance in terms of defining
what that wedge represents. In dealing with form, for instance, we are interested in hotv a
particular grammar construction is formed—its word form (or morphology) and its word order
(or syntax). When dealing with meaning, we want to know what a particular English grammar
construction means, what semantic contribution it makes whenever it is used. Its essential
meaning might be grammatical: for example, the -ed on looked signals a past action. Or its
meaning might be lexical (a dictionary definition); for example, the meaning of the phrasal
verb look up used in our example means “to discover by consulting a reference work.”
Pragmatics, the domain of the use wedge of our pie, deals with issues concerning the choices
that users of a particular language make when using the forms of language in texts or social
Chapter 1: Introduction
3
communication. As such, it is a broad category. We use it in this book to mean the “relations
between language and context that are grammaticalized, or encoded in the structure of a language”
(Levinson, 1983, p. 9). We can account successfully for the use of a particular grammar construction
if we can explain when it is used or why it has been used instead of another construction with the
same meaning. For instance, we could point to a register or difference in the formality of the
context to help explain why to look up was used instead of to discover by consulting a reference work. A
different use explanation, one having to do with a principle of information structuring, would be
invoked to account for the difference between I looked up a word in the dictionary and I looked a word
up in the dictionary. ESL/EFL students need to know not simply how a construction is formed and
what it means; they need to know why speakers of English choose to use one form rather than
another when both forms have more or less the same grammatical or lexical meaning.
It is, admittedly, sometimes difficult to establish firm boundaries between the wedges in the
pie, especially between the meaning and use wedges; as we have already pointed out, linguistic
categories often have fuzzy boundaries. Nevertheless, we have found the three dimensions of
the pie chart useful as a conceptual framework for teaching grammar. Since grammar does not
deal simply with form, language teachers cannot be content with having students achieve a
certain degree of formal accuracy. Language teachers must also help their students to use the
constructions meaningfully and to know when they are appropriate to use.
A PEDAGOGICAL GRAMMAR, NOT A LINGUISTIC GRAMMAR
In discussing the accuracy, meaningfulness,,and appropriateness of the grammar constructions
contained in this book, we have drawn from a number of different linguistic schools of
thought. Whereas linguistic grammars strive for internal consistency, pedagogical grammars,
such as this one for teachers, are eclectic. We feel that insights into the structure of English
can be gleaned from different types of analysis. For instance, certain linguistic theories tend
to be formal—most concerned with accounting for well-formed word sequences or sentences.
They can be invoked for explaining^sentence-level phenomena, such as why the reflexive
pronoun himself in the following sentence must refer to Paul and not to Steve. (See Chapter 16
for the explanation.)
Steve said that Paul hurt himself in the lacrosse game.
The Grammar Book
Other theories are more functional, seeking to explain the occurrence of certain linguistic
constructions by exploring the communicative function they play in the organization of
discourse. We had an example of this earlier when we saw how the use of pronouns provided
coherence between two sentences. Since we are interested here in accounting for both
sentential and textual or discourse-level phenomena, we look to both formal and functional
linguistic theories for helpful insights into English.
Then, too, linguistic grammars are often inaccessible except to those specially trained
to work within a particular theory. We have tried to make available linguistic insights without
requiring that our readers bring a great deal of linguistic background knowledge with them. We
have adopted some formalism, however. For instance, in elucidating the form dimension, we
have employed grammar trees. We have found such trees to be a very effective parsing device
in analyzing sentence-level syntax, and some linguists even claim that they describe sentences
better than any other description of English to date (e.g., Lasnik & Uriagereka, 1988, p. 6). We
also have turned to structural linguistics and corpus linguistics for observations relevant to the
form dimension. For an understanding of the meaning dimension, we have drawn on insights in
traditional, functional, lexical, cognitive, usage-based, and case grammars. For the use dimension,
our treatment comes from work in discourse and contextual analysis, conversation analysis, and
in systemic functional grammar, and again from usage-based and corpus linguistics.1 In addition,
many of the facts about English that we synthesize for each of the three dimensions originate with
our own research and that of our students.
Finally, while many linguistic grammars go into great depth about a restricted set
of constructions, pedagogic grammars must be as comprehensive as possible in the number of
constructions they treat. We have tried, therefore, to cover the most frequently occurring
constructions with which ESL/EFL teachers have to deal in their classes. At the same time,
we have been more selective about the amount of detail we include than a linguistic grammar
might be. What we have compiled here is information that ESL/EFL teachers have found
useful in order to address the learning challenges of their students.
The Learning Process
LEARNING IS COMPLEX___	________
No less important to language teachers than understanding the content of what they are
teaching is an understanding of the process by which the content is learned. While it is
beyond the scope of this book to treat the language acquisition literature in depth here,
suffice it to say that with anything as complicated as language, it is not likely that the learning
process will be a simple, invariant one. That is to say, we sincerely doubt that language
development could ever be accounted for by attributing it to a single process such as habit
formation or rule formation. On the contrary, it is intuitively appealing—to US, at any rate—
to attribute language development to a variety of processes, each of which is responsible
for some particular aspect of language. For instance, we might hypothesize that associative
memory plays a role in the acquisition offormulaic language (conventional units such as “How
are you?” and “I see what you mean”). On the other hand, pattern detection is a plausible way
to describe, although not necessarily explain, the acquisition of generalizations or principles
that operate in the language, such as where to place not in an English sentence in order
to express a negative message. While such attributions are speculative on our part, and we
eagerly await the results of the concerted effort that is now being undertaken to research the
Chapter 1: Introduction
5
efficacy of focusing on form,2 we find the exercise useful for thinking about how one might
go about teaching the three dimensions of language.
GRAMMARING ~
Before going on, though, it is important to underscore the point that grammar can be
implicitly taught and learned. Therefore, the grammatical descriptions featured in this book
are for teachers, whom we hope will use them as aids in their teaching, not as the object of the
teaching itself. ESL/EFL teachers should be helping students to use English constructions.
Thus, ESL/EFL teachers might better think of what they do as teaching grammaring—a
skill—rather than teaching grammar as an area of knowledge (Larsen-Freeman, 2003).
In the interest of balance, having said that grammar can be taught implicitly, let us also
offer our view that how teachers help students use English structures accurately, meaningfully,
and appropriately is contingent upon a number of factors, not the least of which are the learners’
own particular cognitive styles and the contexts in which they are learning. Teachers may help
some students by giving them explicit grammatical descriptions and rules, but doing so may
not help others. In a context where exposure to Engish is limited, explicit teaching of grammar
may be desirable. However, importantly, our point here is simply that any explicit grammatical
information should be a means to an end, not an end in itself. If a student can recite a rule but
can’t apply it, we will have failed in our “grammaring” efforts.
What Is GrammarTeaching?
While we hope that it is self-evident that language teachers need to know about the
grammar of the language they are teaching, it would be worthwhile to point out that a lot
of misunderstanding about grammar teaching comes about because the term can be used
to refer to many different practices. Again, if we think in terms of traditional approaches,
grammar teaching often entails giving students a grammar rule and asking them to apply it
in a written exercise. While this is one way of teaching grammar, our approach to teaching is
broader. For one thing, as we have just indicated, grammar teaching can be less direct, more
implicit, in the sense that it can include asking students to engage in particular activities in
which they are likely to encounter many instances of a particular construction. This has been
termed “input flooding.” It is also possible for teachers to “enhance the input” by, for example,
giving students a written document in which certain constructions are highlighted, such as
making all the -ed endings on verbs a different color from the rest of the text. Both of these
techniques might become “consciousness-raising” activities—if students’ attention is directed
explicitly to the targeted constructions.
Of course, for many learners, consciousness-raising of this sort is not sufficient in and of
itself for mastery of grammar. Students need practice—an opportunity to use a construction
in a meaningful and appropriate way. For example, having students read and discuss a weather
map to make forecasts for different parts of the country is likely to involve the use of what is
called the “nonreferential it” and the “be going to” future, or in its contracted form with It, It’s
going to (“It’s going to snow in Vermont, but it’s going to be warm in California.”). The point
is that practice need not be explicit about which grammar structures are being taught, or even
that grammar is being taught at all.
This is not to say that explicit grammar teaching in the way of using grammatical
terminology and giving generalizations about patterns (and, yes, even rules) is ineffective.
The Grammar Book
Often adolescent and adult learners need this kind of instruction. Indeed, in a review of
research on grammar teaching, Norris and Ortega (2000) conclude that explicit grammar
instruction is an effective means for promoting language learning; it is certainly true that
students all over the world have been taught grammar in this way.
There are some researchers, however, who are concerned that a focus on grammatical
accuracy will discourage students from using language for communicative or meaningful purposes.
Such researchers believe that grammar should only be taught reactively as the need arises, as in
correcting students when they make an error (Long, 2007). Even in this regard, the suggestion is
to correct as unobtrusively as possible, so as to minimize disruption and avoid student discomfort.
Of course, most of the knowledge of constructions that English speakers have and use
is unconscious. They may be aware of some of the rules that they were taught in school,
but most of the time, they use grammar without awareness. It is this unconscious ability to
comprehend and deploy constructions that most ESL/EFL students want to master. Therefore,
using grammatical terminology with students can sometimes be helpful, but the point is that
teaching grammar and using grammatical terminology are not equivalent. Nevertheless,
grammatical terminology is part of a language teacher’s professional knowledge base, and
even when teachers are not enthusiastic about using grammatical terminology (see Borg,
1999), it is often the students who insist that it be used. Indeed, you will not be teaching for
long before a student poses a question about some lexicogrammatical aspect of the language.
To understand and to answer such questions, knowing grammar terms may prove useful.
A MULTIDIMENSIONAL TEACHING APPROACH
We advocate a multidimensional approach—using different teaching techniques for teaching
different aspects of the three dimensions. The choice will be informed by the learning challenge.
For instance, what we are trying to achieve when we are teaching learners how to form a
construction is their being able to accurately produce that construction on their own with the
meaning they intend. We submit that what would assist learners to be able to do so is purposeful
iteration, not rote, repetition of a particular syntactic pattern (Larsen-Freeman, 2012; 2013).
An iterative activity gives students multiple opportunities to practice a construction with the
meaning that they intend. An example is having students play “twenty questions” to practice
yes/no question formation.
When working on some part of the meaning wedge of the pie, however, we recommend
an activity in which students are given opportunities to associate a particular form with its
meaning. An example that springs readily to mind is the Total Physical Response technique
that teachers employ to have students learn to associate the meanings of certain phrasal
verbs with their forms.The students first watch the teacher, and then later, perform actions
themselves signaled by the teacher’s use of certain phrasal verbs: Stand up, turn around, sit
down. Such a simple introduction allows the students to forge a meaningful bond between the
form of each verb and its meaning.
To practice the use dimension, the activity should require students to make some
choice within a context and to receive feedback on the appropriateness of their choice. For
instance, after being introduced to the pragmatic difference between look a word up and look
up a word, students might be asked to fill the blanks in a passage, choosing between the two
forms with look up as well as the two forms with other phrasal verbs. Further examples of
the application of these pedagogical principles will be offered in the teaching suggestions
at the end of each chapter of this book.
Chapter 1: Introduction
า
The three previous examples and most of the others we present in this book are
practice activities, appropriate to the middle “p” in the “three p” teaching sequence of
present, practice, produce, which has long guided teachers of grammar as well as teachers
of other aspects of language. It should be acknowledged, however, that with the evolution of
more communicative approaches, such as task- or content-based approaches, not all teachers
adhere rigidly to this sequence. For instance, it might be that the need to teach grammar
arises only when teachers notice that students are struggling to produce (the third “p”) a
particular grammatical construction during some communicative activity, or when a particular
text presents a grammatical challenge to English language learners. At this point, a teacher
might choose to conduct a practice activity, with or without initially presenting (the first “p”)
the construction. Alternatively, many teachers today subscribe to the practice of discovery
or inductive learning, letting students figure out for themselves the generalizations about
a particular grammatical construction. Thus, one teacher might have students engage in
some meaningful consciousness-raising task or practice activity first in order for the students
themselves to induce the rule that another teacher, following a more traditional approach,
might have presented initially.
SEQUENCING GRAM^
We do not deal explicitly with issues of syllabus design in this text. The issue of learnability,
or student readiness to learn a particular construction, has important implications for the
selecting and sequencing of content for ESL/EFL students. Unfortunately, not enough is
known about learnability at this point to move US to endorse one sequence of grammatical
constructions over another, although we do know that students do not master all aspects of one
construction before moving on to tackle another. The process of language acquisition is not
a matter of simply aggregating one construction after another in linear fashion. The process
is a gradual one; and even when learners appear to have mastered a particular construction,
regression from a target-language perspective may occur as their attention is diverted to a new
learning challenge. Thus, it makes sense to recycle various aspects of the target constructions
over a period of time: revisit old constructions, elaborate on them, and use them for points
of contrast as new grammatical distinctions are introduced. It also makes sense to think of a
grammar syllabus as a checklist rather than an ordered sequence. In this case, it would be a
teacher’s responsibility to see that students learn the checklist of grammatical items by the
end of a given course or period of time, but the sequence would be left up to the teacher and
would depend on his or her own approach and the students’ needs.
Which English?
Another issue for which we should make our assumptions explicit has to do with “which
English” we are analyzing here. English is not a single, uniform language. Instead, many
dialects of English are spoken around the world. As native speakers of North American
English, we have chosen to focus our analysis on this dialect, although we acknowledge that
there are many “Englishes.” Though , there may be some grammatical differences among
dialects of English, they share a significant central core of grammatical constructions and
relationships that enables US to speak of the grammar of English. We also, however, attempt
to call attention to major exceptions to the generalizations that we make when they do not
apply to other dialects, especially to British English.
The Grammar Book
____________________________________________________________________
ON VARIETIES AND VARIABILITY______________ ____________________________________________
But even within a particular regional dialect, there is variety. What we describe here is
Standard American English. Which variety of English is considered Standard English is the
result of historical sociopolitical factors, not linguistic ones. Thus, there is no inherently
superior linguistic variety. It is true, however, that those who can use the standard variety of
any language enjoy access to opportunities that others lack. This alone is a good reason for
helping students in an ESL context learn Standard English.
Of course within Standard English, we also encounter variability. The fact of the matter is
that language is both an abstract system and a socially constructed practice. As a social construct,
it is fluid, changing as it is used (Larsen-Freeman, 1997). Since our grammar is descriptive of
what English speakers do, it must reflect the variable performance of its users. We report the
variability where we have usage studies that reflect what speakers judge to be acceptable.
It is important to point out that a book such as this one may give the impression that
language use by native speakers (a problematic concept in its own right) is the ultimate target.
We make no such claim. Some students may need to pass an international standardized test or
wish to study abroad in an English-medium academic institution, in which case native speaker
use of a particular variety may be the standard applied. Others, such as English language
learners in the บ.ร., will need to learn not only “general” English, but academic English in
order to succeed in บ.ร. schools. Still others, especially in a context where English is not the
environmental language, will perhaps be more interested in using English as a lingua franca,
among themselves for local or for international transactions. In such cases, native speaker norms
may not be appropriate. Students (and their teachers) will have different aspirations. Whether
or not they choose to conform to native speaker use is up to them. We fully appreciate the value
of knowing another language, we see any attempt to learn another language as a laudable quest,
and we reject comparisons with native speakers that suggest deficiency on the learners’ part.3
____________________________________________________________
ON APPROPRIATENESS OF USE ___________________________________
In the same vein, our category of use especially warrants some explanation. As we have
said, there are two components to use: discourse or text considerations and social ones. We
illustrated both with the use of pronouns. We want to add here that the appropriateness
of social use is not rule-governed, but rather has to do with social conventions. In other
words, our example concerning using the pronoun “he” for both a male and a female
is not contrary to a grammatical rule; however, as we have written, some individuals
might find insensitive the use of “he” to refer to both a male and a female. We feel that
it is important for English learners to know how their language use will be perceived, so
we give them our perceptions. What learners do with the information, i.e., whether they
continue to use the masculine pronoun for individuals of both sexes, is up to each individual.
In short, it would be a misapprehension if we left the impression that learning is a matter
of replicating internally an external model. Nor do we want to imply that responsibility
for achieving mutual understanding and respect rests solely with the learner. Clearly,
understanding is achieved through a negotiated process involving co-adaptation on the part
of all speakers. Because language is a complex adaptive system (Ellis & Larsen-Freeman,
2009), each member of a speech community will come to use language in a unique way. In this
book, we are giving you as accurate and up-to-date descriptions as we are capable of. What
you decide to teach, and, importantly, what your students decide to learn are matters to be
decided locally and individually.
Chapter 1: Introduction
9
PRESCRIPTIVE AND DESCRIPTIVE GRAMMARS ______
Along these same lines, we should point out that this is not primarily a prescriptive grammar.
We are not prescribing what should be said. We are more interested in accounting for what
speakers of English do say. Prescriptive grammars tell US to say It is I, not It is me. They
also tell US always to use whom in object position. A prescriptive grammar can be abused by
those who insist on outdated conventions, or those who try to tell others what a form ought
to mean rather than the meaning understood in general usage. Nevertheless, we feel that
prescriptive grammar has its place in formal writing, at least, and students who are preparing
to take standardized examinations like the TOEFL will need to know the prescriptive rules.
Thus, while our grammar is mainly descriptive, we will call attention, whenever possible, to
different norms where there is an obvious conflict between description and prescription.
A DYNAMIC SYSTEM
Finally, it would be worth pointing out that conceiving of grammar as an inventory of
constructions runs the danger of objectifying language—making it a thing, as opposed to
a dynamic system (Larsen-Freeman, 1997). The objectification of language (Linell, 2005)
is compounded if we think of language only in its written form.4 In contrast, our view of
grammar is much more aligned with that of Hopper (1998), who sees grammatical forms
as “sedimented”out of language use. In other words, certain uses of language recur, and
these recurrent patterns then become the “grammar” of the language. We certainly do not see
language as an object. Nonetheless, there are patterns in language, and we will call attention
to these, and where possible and desirable, we point out the differences between the patterns
present in speech and in writing. For instance, we should always remain cognizant of the
fact that the patterns are not replicated exactly, that they are subject to change as they are
used (Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 2008), and that the social context in which they are used
makes a difference (Tarone, 2010). Nowhere is this more evident than in the changing use of
language in social media (Crystal, 2001) and through other technologies, a point we return to
in the conclusion of this book.
This Book
As you begin your course, we recognize that the sheer length of this book might be
intimidating. Just as with everything, you learn as you teach. This book is meant to guide you
in understanding the basic constructions of English, but it is also meant to be available to you
to use for reference purposes after your course is completed. Because it is a course book and
a reference grammar, it contains a lot of detail, which we do not expect you to master, but
which we do expect you will find useful to refer to as you teach.
DEFINING THE LEARNING CHALLENGE
Of course, it is not possible to teach everything about English to ESL/EFL students. Further,
as instructional time is usually so limited, it is not even possible to teach ESL/EFL students all
that is presented in this book. Students may need to learn it, but it doesn’t all have to be taught.
Where we have attempted to be comprehensive, within limits, ESL/EFL teachers of grammar
will have to be selective. Teachers, therefore, have to choose what to focus their students’
The Grammar Book
attention on, trusting that students will be able to acquire on their own other aspects of
English grammar. Thus, it is important that teachers define students’ learning challenges:
What is it that students most need to learn about a particular structure that they will not
easily pick up on their own?
Knowing something about students’ native dialect and the language(s) they speak is very
helpful in defining students’ learning challenges. Although we cannot report all the findings
from contrastive linguistics, we selectively include information about different languages and
language typologies—that is, how other types of languages differ from English.
Students’ learning challenges will depend not only on what knowledge they bring of
their native language or dialect, but also upon what they already know about English. Since
the most effective instruction builds on what students already know, ESL/EFL teachers
should continually informally assess what their students know about English and know how
to do in English. It is not teaching if you are showing students how to use a construction that
they already know.
It also helps to define students’ learning challenges by knowing where English is inherently
difficult. Difficulties often arise when constructions are infrequent, unusual, or nonsalient, when
one construction has many functions, when there are semantic overlaps among constructions,
when their linguistic behavior defies easy generalization, and so on. We hope to contribute
to teachers’ knowledge about these learning challenges by providing relevant facts about the
form, meaning, and use of each major construction of English. With regard to these facts, we
have attempted to be as comprehensive as space permits. Knowing, however, that instructional
time is so limited, we conclude our treatment of each construction by discussing what our
experience has led US to believe are the most challenging aspects of that construction.
THE ORGANIZATION^
Each chapter includes our analysis of the form, meaning, and use of a particular grammar
construction or cluster of constructions and any other pertinent information. Following the
analysis, we provide teaching suggestions that illustrate ways of raising students’ consciousness
about certain aspects of English grammar and providing the necessary structured and
communicative practice. We label each of these activities according to the dimension—form,
meaning, and/or use—that it addresses. We also include exercises of two types: The first
allows you to check your own comprehension of the material presented in each chapter, and
the second asks you to apply what you have learned to teaching issues. We also include sample
answers to the exercises at the end of the book. The final feature of each chapter is a list of
references that allow you to explore further the construction in focus and its teaching.5
You Can Learn Grammar!
Many people are under the impression that the facts about a given language are all known.
Nothing could be further from the truth. Much is not known about English, particularly
at the level of discourse and in the dimension of pragmatics. Thus, one of the reasons that
we ask you to work with the formalism and frameworks that we provide is to give you some
tools to go beyond the facts presented in this book. We use linguistic terminology for the
same reason. Besides giving US a metalanguage, a language to talk about language, the use
of linguistic terms will allow you to consult reference grammars and other sources in order
to augment your knowledge as new facts become known. We are interested, therefore, not
Chapter 1: Introduction
only in your acquiring knowledge from our text but also in your developing the means to go
beyond what has been presented here. Incidentally, the pie chart has been a useful tool for US
personally in helping US expand our knowledge about English. We can map what we know
about a particular grammar structure on a pie chart and create our own research agendas for
what we don’t know. Many linguistic conundrums await solutions. We call explicit attention
to some of these throughout the text, and we encourage you to join US in the fun of trying to
figure them out.
It has been our experience that some readers approach the task of learning grammar with
some trepidation. While we understand this feeling, we have learned that by carefully reading
the material in each chapter and conscientiously doing the exercises at the end, readers can
develop a working knowledge of English grammar. Moreover, many actually come away from
the experience believing, as we do, that learning grammar is fun!
Bibliography
REFERENCES	~	~
Borg, ร. (1999). The use of grammatical terminology in the second language classroom: A qualitative study
of teachers’ practices and cognitions. Applied Linguistics, 20, 95-126.
Crystal, D. (2001). Language and the Internet. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Ellis, N. c., & Larsen-Freeman, D. (Eds.). (2009). Language as a complex adaptive system [Special issue].
Language Learning, 59(1).
Hopper, p. (1998). Emergent grammar. In M. Tomasello (Ed.), The new psychology of language (pp. 155-175).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Jenkins, J. (2000). The phonology of English as an international language: New models, new norms, new goals.
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (1997). Chaos/complexity science and second language acquisition. Applied Linguistics,
18(2), 141-165.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2003). Teaching language: From grammar to grammaring. Boston, MA.: Heinle, Cengage
Learning.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2011 [2012]). The emancipation of the language learner. Studies in Second Language
Learning and Teaching, 2(3), 297-309.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2012). On the roles of repetition in language teaching and learning. Applied Linguistics
Review, 3, 195-210.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2013). Transfer of learning transformed. Language Learning, 63 (Suppl. 1), 107-129.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (In press). Research into practice: Grammar learning and teaching. Language Teaching.
Larsen-Freeman, D., & Cameron, L. (2008). Complex systems and applied linguistics. Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press.
Lasnik, H., & Uriagereka, J. (1988). A course in GB syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Levinson, ร. (1983). Pragmatics. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Linell, p. (2005). The written language bias in linguistics. London, England/New York, NY: Routledge.
Long, M. (2007). Problems in SLA. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Mukherjee, J., & Hundt, M. (Eds.). (2011). Exploring second-language varieties of English and learner Englishes:
Bridging the paradigm gap. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins.
Norris, J., & Ortega, L. (2000). Effectiveness of L2 instruction: A research synthesis and quantitative
meta-analysis. Language Learning, 50, 417-528.
The Grammar Book
Pawley, A., & Syder, F. (1983). Two puzzles for linguistic theory: Nativelike selection and nativelike fluency. In
J. Richards & R. Schmidt (Eds.), Language and communication (pp. 191-226). London, England: Longman.
Schumann, J. (2007). A linguistics for the evolution and neurobiology of language. Journal of English
Linguistics, 35, 278-287.
Tarone, E. (2010). Social context and cognition in SLA: A variationist perspective. In R. Batstone (Ed.),
Sociocognitive perspectives on language use and language learning (pp. 54—72). Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press.
Tarone, E., Bigelow, M., & Hansen, K. (2009). Literacy and second language oracy. Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press.
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a language. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
For one example of each of the different schools of linguistic thought or types of analysis referred to in this
chapter, consult:
Case Grammar:
Fillmore, c. (1968). The case for case. In E. Bach & R. Harms (Eds.), Universals in linguistic theory
(pp. 1-90). New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Cognitive Grammar:
Langacker, R. พ. (2009). Investigations in cognitive grammar. Berlin, Germany: Mouton de Gruyter.
Construction Grammar:
Goldberg, A. (2006). Constructions at work: The nature of generalization in language. Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press.
Contextual Analysis:
Frodesen, J., & Holten, c. (Eds.). (2004). The power of context in language teaching and learning. Boston,
MA: Heinle.
Conversational Analysis:
Schegloff, E. A. (2007). Sequence organization in interaction: A primer in conversation analysis. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Corpus Linguistics:
Sinclair, J. (2012). Essential corpus linguistics. London, England/New York, NY: Routledge.
Discourse Analysis:
Paltridge, B. (2012). Discourse analysis: An introduction (2nd ed.). London, England: Bloomsbury Publishing.
Functional Grammar:
Givón, T (1995). Functionalism and grammar. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins.
Lexical Grammar:
Lewis, M. (1993). The lexical approach. Hove, England: Language Teaching Publications.
Usage-based Grammar:
Bybee, J. (2010). Language, usage, and cognition. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Systemic-Functional Grammar:
Halliday, M. A. K., & Matthiessen, c. Μ. I. M. (2014). Halliday's introduction to functional grammar (4th ed.).
London, England/New York, NY: Routledge.
Traditional Grammar:
Jespersen, o. (1965). Syntax: A modem English grammar on historical principles (Vol. 2), Copenhagen,
Denmark: Munksgaard and London, England: Allen & Unwin.
Chapter ใ ะ Introduction
For readers who would like to investigate different issues for teachers of grammar to consider, we recommend:
Bygate, M., Tonkyn, A., & Williams, E. (1994). Grammar and the language teacher. London, England:
Prentice Hall International.
Cowan, R. (2008). The teacher's grammar of English. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Cullen, R. (2008). Teaching grammar as a liberating force. ELTJ, 62(3), 221-230.
DeKeyser, R. (Ed.). (2007). Practice in a second language. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Ellis, R. (1998). Teaching and research: Options in grammar teaching. TESOL Quarterly, 32, 39-60.
Harmer, J. (1987). Teaching and learning grammar. Essex, England: Longman.
Hinkel, E., & Fotos, ร. (Eds.). (2002). New perspectives on grammar teaching in second language classrooms.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Holisky, D. (1997). Notes on grammar. Arlington, VA: Orchises Press.
Holme, R. (2010). A construction grammar for the classroom. International Review of Applied Linguistics, 48,
355-377.
Keck, c., & Kim, Y-J. (In press). Pedagogical gram-mar. Amsterdam, Netherlands/Philadelphia, PA: John
Benjamins.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2003). Teaching language: From grammar to grammaring. Boston, MA: Heinle/Cengage.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2009). Teaching and testing grammar. In M. Long & c. Doughty (Eds.), The handbook
of language teaching (pp. 518-542). Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2014). Teaching grammar. In M. Celce-Murcia, D. Brinton, & M. A. Snow (Eds.),
Teaching English as a second or foreign language (4th ed., pp. 256-270). Boston, MA: National Geographic
Learning, Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Liu, D., & Master, p. (Eds.). (2003). Grammar teaching in teacher education. Alexandria, VA: TESOL.
Nassaji, H., & Fotos, ร. (2004). Current developments in research on the teaching of grammar. Annual
Review of Applied Linguistics, 24, 126-145.
Odlin,T. (Ed.). (1994). Perspectives on pedagogical grammar. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Rutherford, พ. (1987). Second language grammar: Learning and teaching. London, England: Longman.
Thornbury, ร. (2001). Uncovering grammar. Oxford, England: Macmillan Heinemann.
For teachers' books containing ESL/EFL grammar teaching activities, we recommend:
Celce-Murcia, M., & Hilles, ร. (1988). Techniques and resources in teaching grammar. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Davis, P., & Rinvolucri, M. (1995). More grammar games. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Firsten, R., & Killian, p. (1994). Troublesome English. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall Regents.
Hall, N., & รhepheard, J. (1991). The anti-grammar grammar book: A teacher's resource book for discovery
activities for gramm-ar teaching. Essex, England: Longman.
Kealey, J., & Inness, D. (1997). Shenanigames: Grammar-focused interactive ESL/EFL activities and games.
Brattleboro, VT: Pro Lingua Associates.
Madden, c., & Reinhart, ร. (1987). Pyramids: Structurally based tasks for ESL learners. Ann Arbor,
MI: University of Michigan Press.
McKay, ร. (1985). Teaching grammar. New York, NY: Pergamon Press.
Pennington, M. (Ed.). (1995). New ways in teaching grammar. Alexandria, VA: TESOL, Inc.
Thornbury, ร. (2006). Grammar: Resource books for teachers. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Ur, p. (2009). Grammar practice activities: A practical guide for teachers (2nd ed.). Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
For more information on the sociopolitical aspects of dialect use and how social power relationships motivate
choices of linguistic form, see:
Fairclough, N. (1989). Language and power. London, England: Longman.
The Grammar Book
For ล discussion of the issue of varieties of English and English language testing, refer to:
Brown, J. D. (2014). The future of World Englishes in language testing. Language Assessment Quarterly, 11,
1,5-2 6.
For a useful summary contrasting English with a number of other languages, consult:
Swan, M., & Smith, B. (Eds.). (2001). Learner English: A teacher's guide to interference and other problems
(2nd ed.). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
To read further on English as a lingua franca, see:
Jenkins, J. (2007). English as a lingua franca: Attitude and identity. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Seidlhofer, B. (2001). Closing a conceptual gap: The case for a description of English as a lingua franca.
International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 11, 133-158.
Seidlhofer, B. (2011). Understanding English as a lingua franca. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
For contrasts between British and North American English, see:
Algeo, J. (2006). British or American English? A handbook of word and grammar patterns. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Rohdenburg, G., & Schluter, J. (Eds.). (2009). One language, two grammars? Differences between British and
American English. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
For a discussion of prescriptive and descriptive grammars, see:
Curzan, A. (2009). Says who? Teaching and questioning the rules of grammar. PMLA, 124(3), 870-879.
End notes
1.	For those who would like to know more about these various grammars, we have listed some references
at the end of this chapter.
2.	Although to us, of course, it is an oversimplification to talk about focusing on form without also
examining the meaningfulness and appropriate use of the form. Then, too, we prefer to think not of
research as dictating pedagogy, but rather to see its contribution as challenging teachers to think
differently, to experiment with new practices, and to help teachers make the tacit explicit by cultivating
new ways of talking about their practice (Larsen-Freeman, in press).
3.	For the same reason, we have tried to minimize using the term "error." Indeed, based on the form alone,
it is impossible to distinguish a linguistic innovation from an error (Larsen-Freeman, 2011; Mukherjee &
Hundt, 2011). เท addition, as Jenkins (2000) argues, from an English as a lingua franca perspective, "There
really is no justification for doggedly persisting in referring to an item as'an error'if the vast majority of
the world's L2 English speakers produce and understand it"(p. 160).
4.	Crystal (2001) characterizes spoken language as time-bound, spontaneous, face to face, loosely
constructed, socially interactive, immediately revisable, and prosodically rich; in contrast, written
language is space-bound, contrived, visually decontextualized, elaborately structured, factually
communicative, repeatedly revisable, and graphically rich kpp. 42-43). Schumann (2007) also writes
about the contrasts between spoken and written language, and Tarone, Bigelow, and Hansen (2009)
warn that "our own literacy may bias our perception" (p.31).
5.	For the references on teaching, we each draw from grammar textbook series which we have worked on
or with which we are familiar.
Chapter 1: Introduction
IS

Grammatical
Terminology
Introduction
The purpose of this chapter is to introduce you to some grammatical terminology. For many
of you, the terms will be familiar, and you may wish only to skim this chapter. For some of you,
this chapter provides an initial exposure to some common terminology, and you may need time
in order to become familiar with the new terms. Learning the vocabulary of any new language
takes time. Be patient. These new terms will become more meaningful as you encounter them
in context throughout the book as you explore the grammatical constructions of English.
Some ESL/EFL teachers choose not to use grammatical terminology with their
students, feeling that it presents an additional learning burden. Other teachers find that by
using the terminology, they can call their students’ attention to certain aspects of English
grammar more efficiently; thus, they conclude that students’ time spent learning the terms is
a worthwhile investment. Then, too, some teachers find that their students are more fluent
in the terms than they are! As we stated in the previous chapter, we do not want to give the
impression that knowing the terms is the same as knowing the grammar. Nevertheless, for
teachers, knowing the terms can be helpful in several respects.
First, the terms provide a metalanguage, a way of talking about grammar, that helps
in the conceptualization of grammar. Use of the terms also serves a referential function,
providing a means to identify these concepts when referring to them subsequently. Finally, by
learning the terms, teachers will have better access to the many linguistic resources available
to them apart from this textbook.
In the previous chapter, we discussed the three levels of grammar that we are addressing
in this book: subsentential (word or phrase level), sentential, and suprasentential (or textual)
levels. We use this ternary hierarchy in introducing the terminology in this chapter.
Subsentential Terminology:
Words and Phrases
CLASSIFYING WORDS: SEMANTIC STRUCTURAL, AND FUNCTIONAL CRITERIA
It may surprise some readers to learn that even classifying words by their part of speech
is an enterprise fraught with difficulty. Consider, for example, the standard definition of a
noun with which many of you are familiar: “A noun is the name of a person, place, or thing.”
This definition works to classify Kevin, Cincinnati, and computer as nouns, but it becomes
problematic when we think about a word such as blue. Those of you conversant with part-
of-speech terms may immediately identify blue as an adjective since it is a descriptive word.
But one could argue that blue is the name of a “thing”—a color—and is, therefore, rightfully
a noun. The structural or descriptive grammarians, eschewing such traditional semantic, or
meaning-based, classifications of words as the one just given, chose instead to classify words
through their structural, or formal, characteristics: their position in a sentence, adjacent
function words, if any, and their constituents. For instance, common nouns in English
typically occupy positions such as the following and are preceded by function words such as
the or their·.
The was very amusing.
Did you notice their?
As for the constituents of nouns, a simple noun like book is a minimal unit; there is no way to
break it down further. As such, we say that it has one morpheme. A morpheme is the smallest
meaningful linguistic unit. It can be a word or a word constituent. A noun like books, then, has
two morphemes, book and the inflectional morpheme -s, which shows that more than one book
is intended.
There are two grammatical morphemes that can be used to mark nouns in English.
Countable nouns have plural inflections to distinguish between “one” and “more than one” (book
vs. books), and all nouns can have possessive inflections (girl’s) to signal possession or a number
of other meanings (see Chapter 16). Of course, nouns can mark both plurality and possession,
e.g., girls’. In addition to plural and possessive inflectional morphemes, English nouns often
have derivational morphemes that mark nouns derived from other parts of speech (see Chapter
3). For example, adding -ness to the adjective sad gives US the noun sadness. There are several
dozen noun derivational morphemes, although some are used only in a few words, such as -dom
as in kingdom and ivisdom (Roberts, 1958), whereas others like -ness are frequent and productive.
However, relying on structural criteria for classifying words can create problems. Not
all nouns have distinctive noun-like morphemes, and even when they do, the nouns may
have different functions; for example, tvilderness is a noun that functions as a modifier in the
compound 'พilderness park. Furthermore, many of the words without distinctive morphology
appear to belong to more than one part of speech, such as fly as a noun or a verb and orange
as a noun or an adjective.
Due to the inadequacy of classifying words according to parts of speech based upon
semantic and structural criteria, a third criterion is sometimes employed. Known as a
functional criterion, it classifies a word by the grammatical function that it has in a sentence.
For example, from a functional perspective, a noun is a part of speech that can serve as a
subject of a verb in a sentence. Thus, in the following sentence, we know in part that the word
glass is a noun because it is the subject of the verb is·.
The glass is dirty.
The problem here is that a noun such as glass can also precede another noun and modify it
much as an adjective would without changing its form (cf. its adjective form, glassy), as in
The glass jar is dirty.
As can be seen, then, none of these attempts to classify a word as a noun are complete
by themselves. They all direct attention to different characteristics of nouns: their common
meaning, their form/position, and their grammatical function. It is therefore better to think
of a particular part of speech as being determined by a cluster of criteria. Most linguists
now acknowledge that it is not simple to define even these elemental building blocks of
grammar, the parts of speech. Culicover (1999), for instance, demonstrates that many of the
The Grammar Book
part-of-speech classes are not really classes at all, but merely loose collections of individual
lexical items, each of which has its own behavioral profile. The items in these collections are
all covered by the same term, by tradition and convenience only (Tomasello, 2003, p.173).
A further complication for ESL/EFL students is that sometimes there are cross-linguistic
differences in parts of speech; for example, the English adjective tall has a noun equivalent in
many West African languages. Some linguists would even say that classifying a word as a noun
or a verb is impossible apart from the discourse in which it occurs (Hopper & Thompson,
1984). Teachers should take heart from the observation, though, that most learners have no
difficulty identifying parts of speech inductively when they have become familiar with a variety
of typical examples. Ironically, it is not the recognition of a word’s part of speech that appears
to be problematic—it is the definition of the parts of speech that is elusive. In order to be as
thorough as possible, we use all three criteria in defining the following parts of speech.
_______	______________________________________________________________________
________	_________________________________________________________________________
The parts of speech are usually grouped into two categories: the major and minor word
classes. The major word classes—norms, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs—are termed “major”
because they carry most of the content or meaning of a sentence. Such classes are also “open”
in that new words are added as they are coined. The other category, the minor word classes,
plays a more structural role in a sentence and each of its classes is more “closed,” in that
normally no new words are added. Classes in this category include, but are not limited to,
auxiliary verbs, prepositions, pronouns, determiners, and conjunctions. These words are
sometimes also called “structure” words or “function” words, or even “functors.” To contrast
the two categories, notice the difference between the following two sentences:
With the function words (content words deleted):
The___________for the______________in the_________.__________
With the content words (function words deleted):
_____	broom sweeping floor belongs closet.________________	_____
Clearly, the central message can be grasped better when the content words are left in than
when only the function words remain.
However, it is prudent to be cautious here too. As you saw just a moment ago,
grammatical definitions are often not so airtight as they first seem. This observation holds
here, too, in the division between major and minor word classes. To start with, the minor
word classes do convey some meaning. Furthermore, not all the major word classes are
truly open. Only certain adverbs can be added to the adverb class (namely, the “manner”
adverbs, which usually end in -ly); however, other types of adverbs are usually closed to
new members. Then, too, as you have already observed, many words appear to belong to
more than one category. A word likefew, for instance, may function as a determiner (There
were few objections) or a pronoun (There were few), both minor word classes. In spite of these
concessions, we will retain the conventional division here and describe the major word
classes first, followed by the minor ones.
Nouns
As we have already treated nouns when illustrating the three criteria for defining parts of
speech, much of what follows will either recapitulate or expand upon the earlier discussion.
The notional, or semantic, definition of a noun is as you have seen—a noun is the name of
a person, place, or thing. Some linguists add “or idea” to account for abstract nouns such as
democracy, environment, and life.
Chapter 2: Grammatical Terminology
IS
As we also noted earlier, nouns have endings or derivational morphemes that formally
indicate that a word is a noun; recall the -ness of sadness. They also have grammatical
morphemes, or inflections, for plural and possessive. In terms of their position, they are
frequently preceded by determiners, such as articles (e.g., the).
As pointed out earlier, nouns serve functionally as subjects of verbs. However, they can also be:
direct objects of verbs: He watered his lawn.
subject predicates:1 We are all learners.
object predicates: They elected Ann president.
indirect objects of verbs: Ann gave the people confidence.
appositives: Albany, capital of New York, is located on the Hudson River.
objects of prepositions: Troy is also located on the Hudson River.
vocatives: Let me tell you, my friend, grammar is just plain fun!
Not all these labels may be familiar, but your intuitions alone should be enough to convince
you of the multiple functions that nouns fulfill.
Another fact worth knowing about nouns is that there are three types. By far, the most
frequent in occurrence are Cffmmon nouns, or nouns referring to a kind of person, thing, or
idea. Common nouns themselves are divisible into two subcategories: count nouns, which take
the plural inflection (e.g., farmers'), and mass, or noncount, nouns, which don’t (e.g., air).1 In
contrast to common nouns are proper nouns, or names for unique individuals or places (e.g.,
Kevin; Cincinnati). Proper nouns can be singular or plural (Kevin Smith vs. the Smiths'). A small
number of nouns that refer to groups are called collective nouns. Collective nouns differ from
other nouns in readily being able to take either singular or plural verb forms, depending on
the interpretation given to the noun—that is, whether it is seen as a unit (The family is together
again) or as a collection of individuals (The family are all coming for the weekend).
To conclude this section on nouns, we should note that grammatical gender is not an
important feature of Modern English grammar, although it was in Old English and certainly is
in many other languages of the world. Grammatical gender in English does still exist in certain
pairs of nouns, such as actor/actress and host/hostess, but most often these days, the masculine
noun is used to refer to both males and females, or neither is used, in favor of a gender-neutral
form, such as using server instead of waiter/waitress. Grammatical gender is still present in
pronouns, with the contrast between subject pronouns he and she, object pronouns him and
her, reflexive pronouns himself and herself, and the possessive determiners and pronouns forms
his and her/hers. At one point in time, feminine pronouns, e.g., she, were used with certain
nouns, such as countries and ships, but such usage is discouraged in style manuals today.
Verbs
The notional, or semantic, definition of a verb is that it is a word that denotes an action or state
of being. Verb morphology in English is richer than noun morphology. Four grammatical
morphemes can be used with English verbs:
1.	-s of third person singular present tense verbs: Sue jogs every day.
2.	-ed of past tense verbs: She jogged yesterday.
3.	-en of the past participle: He has seen the movie three times already.
4.	-ing of the present participle: I am teaching three courses this term.
The Grammar Book
In terms of their position, verbs follow nouns that function as subjects and may be followed in
turn by adjectives, adverbs, or other nouns, as depicted in the following sentences:
seemed cautious.
The authorities	planned carefully. adopted the plan.
Functionally, adding Pauline snores.	a verb to a noun is enough to complete a sentence:
We can categorize verbs by what follows them syntactically, adding more detail in the
chapters that follow.
intransitive verbs, which take no following object: Mavis slept until noon.
transitive verbs, which require an object: Doug raises llamas.
ditransitive verbs, which take two objects (indirect and direct): I handed Flo the package.
linking verbs, where what follows the verb relates back to the subject: We are teachers.
complex transitive verbs, where what follows the object relates to the object: They
considered the project a waste of time.
prepositional verbs, which require a prepositional phrase to be complete: Steve glanced at
the headlines.
Two qualities that verbs have are tense and aspect. We devote an entire chapter to
discussing these characteristics of verbs; therefore, at this point, let US simply note that tense
traditionally refers to the time of an event’s occurrence (hence the present, past, or future
tenses), while a typical aspect distinction denotes whether or not the event has occurred earlier
(perfect aspect) or is still in progress (progressive aspect) .To illustrate aspect, compare the
following two sentences, where the have verb + the past participle of the first sentence signals
that the action is complete and the be verb + the present participle of the second sentence
shows the action is in progress, i.e., incomplete:
John has written his term paper.
Now he is studying for his final exams.
To conclude our discussion of verbs, we should point out that verbs, too, are marked
for number, but only with subjects in the third person singular in the present tense or with
the verb be. In such instances, subject-verb agreement occurs, and the verb is marked to agree
with the singular or plural subject noun. For example:
present tense, subject in third person singular	be verb, all subjects, present and past tense
Josh loves chocolate.	I am surprised that you said that.
She mows the lawn on Saturdays.	Jack is making the punch.
We are baking brownies.
Lloyd was absent.
They were frightened by the storm.
We investigate subject-verb agreement in more detail in Chapter 4.
Adjectives
The semantic definition of an adjective is that it describes or denotes the qualities of someone
or something. Adjectives commonly occur between a determiner and a noun, or after be or
other linking verbs, although they can also follow a noun (e.g., She made her brother happy
Adjectives have no typical form, but certain derivational morphemes are associated with
adjectives, such as -able (liktable), -ish (childish), -fill (thought^//) and -y (lazjy)(Chalker, 1984).
Chapter 2: Grammatical Terminology
21
English adjectives do not agree in number or gender with nouns they modify as they
do in some other languages; however, certain of them have inflectional morphemes for
comparative and superlative forms such as happy, happier, happiest.
The function of adjectives is to modify nouns. There are two adjective types: attributive,
which precede nouns, and predicative, which follow linking verbs:
attributive: The old bucket sprang a leak.
predicative: He became angry at the very thought.
The semantic contrast between attributive and predicative adjectives is discussed in Chapter 20.
Adverbs
Adverbs modify verbs and contribute meanings of various sorts to sentences. Particularly
common are adverbs of direction, location, manner, time, and frequency:
direction: Jim pointed there.
location: Isabel shops nearby.
manner: The choir sang joyfully at the ordination.
time: Soon Rachel will retire.
frequency: We visit our friends in Detroit sometimes.
As you can see, adverbs are quite flexible in terms of their location. They can occur in a
sentence finally, medially, and initially. Manner adverbs are the only ones with distinctive
form; they usually take the -ly ending.
The primary function of adverbs is to modify verbs, as in the previous examples, but
they may also modify a whole sentence, as in the following:
Fortunately, they arrived home before too much damage had been done.
Grammars also distinguish adverbs of degree, which modify adjectives and other adverbs:
It is too early to plant a garden.
Ben was barely late to school.
Finally, we should note that there are multiword units that can occupy the same position
in a sentence as single-word adverbs and can convey the same meaning. For example:
direction: Jim pointed at the constellation Pisces.
location: Isabel shops at the mall.
manner: The choir sang with iov at the ordination.
time: Next year, Rachel will retire.
frequency: We visit our friends in Detroit every once in a while.
The above discussion of adverbs concludes our survey of the major parts of speech. What
follows is a more abbreviated introduction to some of the members of the minor word classes.
Pronouns
Pronouns refer to or replace nouns and.noun phrases within a text (e.g., “my aunt, she ...") or
as direct reference to an outside situation (e.g., In response to sudden loud noise, I can say,
“ What was that?”). They occupy the same position as a noun or noun phrase does. There are
many different kinds of pronouns: subject (I) you, he, she, it) we, they), object (me, you, him, her,
it, us, them), reflexive (myself, yourself himself, herself, itself, ourselves, themselves), possessive
(mine, yours, his, hers, its, ours, theirs), demonstrative (this, that, these, those), and others. The
forms within each category are distinguished by number (singular, plural), person (first,
second, and third), gender, and in the case of the demonstratives, by number and proximity.
(See Chapter 16 for a fuller discussion.)
The Grammar Book
Determiners
Older grammars make no special reference to determiners, incorporating them into the
adjective word class. We will use the term determiner to refer to that special class of words
that limit the nouns that follow them. Various types of words fit into this category: articles
[the, a(ท)], demonstratives (this, that, these, those), and possessive determiners (my,your, his, her,
its, our, their), to cite the major ones.3 They precede an adjective if one is present; otherwise,
they are positioned directly in front of a noun:
I put my backpack on the front porch, and now I can't find it.
Prepositions
Prepositions connect words to other parts of a sentence and have a close relationship with
the word that follows, which is usually a noun. Together, a preposition and noun comprise a
prepositional phrase. Prepositions are usually one word (in, to, at), but they sometimes can be two
or three (out of, on top of). Prepositions prototypically signal spatial and temporal relationships:
spatial: Ying works at a downtown office.
temporal: Sometimes, she doesn't leave until late.
Conjunctions
Conjunctions are words that join. There are coordinating conjunctions, such as and, but, and or,
which join “like” constituents (see Chapter 24). For example:
Marianne and Diane wrote this book.
Marianne lives in California, but Diane lives in Michigan or Vermont.
And there are subordinating conjunctions, which we call adverb subordinates, such as because
and although, which join a subordinate or dependent clause to an independent one:
It was hard to write a book together because they live so far apart.
Although Marianne and Diane live far apart, they are still friends.
There are also conjunctive or linking adverbs, which connect two independent clauses:
Stu has retired; however, he still keeps busy professionally.
A PHRASE
We realize that we haven’t defined clause as yet, but we will do so shortly. However, before
doing so, we should briefly deal with one other grammatical concept at the subsentential
level, namely phrase. A phrase is a group of two or more words that function together. For
example, if you were asked to divide the following sentence into phrases, using slash marks,
you would probably not do so as follows:
The impatient/customer was acting very/cranky at the/time.
Our grammatical intuitions tell US that these words grouped this way don’t work together.
Conversely, the following division is much more satisfying:
The impatient customer/was acting very cranky/at the time.
The impatient customer/was acting/very cranky/at the time.
In the last two versions of these sentences, the words between slash marks somehow cluster
together better. We have divided the first of these alternatives into three phrases and the second
into four phrases. We will discuss the different analyses in Chapter 6. For now, the point is that
you intuitively understand what a phrase is.
Chapter 2: Grammatical Terminology
23
Sentential Terminology
A CLAUSE	~ ~
Any construction containing a subject and a verb is a clause. Clauses that stand independently
as sentences are called independent or main clauses; clauses that cannot are called dependent
or subordinate, clauses. The latter are typically preceded by an adverb subordinate or some
other grammatical marker. Thus, in the sentence, “Although they live far apart, they are still
friends,” the first clause is a subordinate, or dependent, clause, and the second is the main, or
independent, clause.
Simple, Compound, /พผ/ Complex Sentences
A simple sentence contains at least one subject and one verb and can stand alone as an
independent clause. Notice that in the previous example, “they are still friends,” could stand
alone as a complete sentence, whereas the first clause, “although they live far apart,” would be
a sentence fragment.
There are seven basic simple sentence patterns in English:
subject + verb: The building collapsed.
subject + verb + object: They bought a new car.
subject + verb + prepositional phrase: Aziz went to the store.
subject + verb + object + prepositional phrase: We put the books on the desk.
subject + verb + indirect object + direct object: She wrote him a letter.
subject + verb + subject predicate: Janet's my friend.
subject + verb + object + object predicate: She makes me happy.
In contrast to a simple sentence, a compound sentence consists of two or more clauses of equal
grammatical importance. As we saw earlier, a coordinating conjunction connects the two clauses:
He went to the party, but I stayed home.
One type of complex sentence contains a main clause and one or more subordinate clauses.
We have just considered one example describing Marianne and Diane. Here is another:
Peggy frequently calls because she wants to stay in touch.
In this sentence, the main clause, “Peggy frequently calls” is followed by a subordinate clause,
“because she wants to stay in touch.” As you can see in these examples, subordinate clauses are
often, although not always, introduced by an adverb subordinator.
In the second type of complex sentence, a dependent clause is embedded, or included, in
an independent clause. Embedded clauses can take the place of a subject:
That he didn't want to go to the ballet was obvious. (It was obvious.)
or an object:
I argued that it would be a mistake. (I argued my position.)
or even of an adjective:
The person who was responsible for the accident fled. (The person responsible fled.)
Thus, when we move beyond the simple or monoclausal sentence, three processes are
at work: coordination, or the joining of two clauses of equal grammatical stature; subordination
of one clause to another; and embedding, when a dependent clause is included within a main
or independent clause.
The Grammar Book
SENTENCE MOODS	~
English sentences are said to display three main moods—declarative (sometimes called
indicative), interrogative, and imperative—and two minor moods: exclamatory and subjunctive.
As its name suggests, mood conveys the speaker’s attitude toward the factual content of the
sentence. For instance, the subjunctive mood can indicate a speaker’s uncertainty or the
hypothetical!ty of the propositional content, or meaning of the clause. In the following
sentence, the subjunctive mood is signaled by the use of the base form of the be verb,
rather than the inflected form is:
If that be so, I'll leave now.
It can also indicate that something is contrary to fact, or counterfactual, here signaled by
the use of the be verb in its third person plural past tense form:
If I were a bird, I wouldn't eat worms.
Four of the five moods have sentence type counterparts (see below), but the subjunctive in
English can be marked only by using a different form of the verb from the form ordinarily
called for. Usually, the subjunctive uses either the uninflected base form or were.
declarative (statement sentence type): Today is Tuesday.
interrogative (question sentence type): What are you going to wear to the party?
imperative (command sentence type): Pass the milk, please.
exclamatory (exclamation sentence type): What a beautiful autumn it is!
subjunctive (here realized with the were form): I wish I were going with you.
It has been said that the three main options in the English mood system correspond
to the three main communicative functions of language: telling someone something, asking
someone something, and getting someone to do something (Allen & Widdowson, 1975,
p. 75). We should not lose sight of the fact, however, that a sentence type does not necessarily
match its function. It is possible to ask someone to do something using any of the following
three types, even though the first is a more indirect way than the other two.
statement: I am thirsty.
question: Could you bring me something to drink?
command: Please bring me something to drink.
It should be mentioned that the three main sentence types have negative forms as well:
negative statement: I am not thirsty.
negative question: Couldn't you bring me something to drink?
negative command: Don't bring me anything to drink.
It is interesting to see that among these, the negative question, at least, is still capable of
accomplishing the same function as its affirmative counterpart. As we will see later in the
book, context and expectation will determine when affirmative and negative yes/no questions
are used in English.
THEME/RHEME _______________________________________________________
English has a fairly fixed word order compared with many other languages; still, some
variation is possible. For example:
a.	The Cub Scouts held the car wash despite the rain.
b.	The car wash was held by the Cub Scouts despite the rain.
c.	Despite the rain, the Cub Scouts held the car wash.
Chapter 2: Grammatical Terminology
25
The question that should come to mind is this: What is the difference among these three
word orders? The sentences appear to have the same propositional content, or core meaning,
so what purpose does word order variation serve?
A helpful concept to draw on in answering this question is the distinction that systemic
functional linguistics, following the Prague School of Linguistics, makes between theme
and rheme. According to Halliday and Matthiessen (2014), the theme provides the “point
of departure of the message” (p.83). In (a), it is the Cub Scouts; in (b), the car wash; and in
(c), the rain. In other words, the theme provides the framework for interpreting what follows.
What follows is the rheme, the remainder of the message in the clause.
English, then, typically uses word order to assign the roles of theme and rheme. Since
English is a grammatical subject-predicate language—that is, every English sentence is
composed of two major constituents, a subject and a predicate—it is commonly the case that
the subject in English will be the theme and the predicate the rheme, as in (a) and (b) (we
explain (c) later):
The Cub Scouts held the car wash despite the rain.
The car wash was held by the Cub Scouts despite the rain.
subject	predicate
(here the theme)	(here the rheme)
Other languages use different means for making the theme-rheme distinction. For example,
Japanese and Tagalog mark the theme with special particles. In Chinese, referred to as a topic-
comment language (see Chapter 5), the topic establishes what the clause is concerned with,4
but it does not necessarily correspond to a grammatical subject:5
My back, it hurts.
topic comment
Since English does not strictly forbid such word orders, in speech at any rate, and since
English even has other topic-like ways of establishing the theme (e.g., As for fundraising,
I prefer bake sales to car washes), Chinese, Tagalog, and Japanese speakers will need a great
deal of practice with subject-predicate sequences in order to avoid overusing topic-comment
structures in English (Lock, 1996).
MARKEDNESS ~	____
As we have just seen, English too, can thematize something other than the subject. Such
is the case with (c) above, where the adverbial prepositional phrase despite the rain is the
theme. Linguists use the term marked to refer not only to such instances of thematization
of nonsubjects, but also to refer to any exceptions from what is very typical, very
predictable. It is perhaps better to think of markedness as a continuum from structures
that are unmarked, meaning that they are typical, to highly marked structures, meaning
that they are exceptional.
VOICE _________________________________________________________________________
We have not yet accounted for the difference between sentences (a) and (b) above. Both
sentences have subjects that are themes; both have the same propositional content or core
meaning. The difference between the two lies in their voice. Sentence (a) is in the active voice;
sentence (b) is in the passive voice. Voice is another linguistic device that languages employ
to allow for different constituents to function as themes. In the active voice, the subject
The Grammar Book
functions as the theme and is most often the actor or agent of some action, as the Cub Scouts in
our example. In the passive voice, the thing acted upon by the agent—the car wash—has been
made the theme. There are other differences between (a) and (b) as well, and these are dealt
with in detail in Chapter 18 on the passive voice. For our purposes here, it will suffice to say
that the selection of the passive over the active allows the speaker or writer to thematize noun
phrases other than agents.
Suprasentential Terminology
So far, we have been discussing terms that are useful for describing subsentence and sentence-
level phenomena. We turn now to introducing terminology that applies to the suprasentential,
or textual or discourse, level of language.
BACKGROUNDINC AND FOREGROUNDING
It has been observed that in a narrative, certain sentences provide background information,
while others function in the foreground to carry the main storyline. What often distinguishes
one from the other are their verb tenses. For instance, in the following narrative, the past
tense is used for the foregrounded information, the present tense for the background:
Yesterday I went to the market. It has lots of fruit that I like. I bought several different
kinds of apples. I also found that plums were in season, so I bought two pounds of them...
In this example, the foregrounded past narrative is interrupted by the second sentence with a
present tense verb. This sentence provides information (here a statement about the market)
that is general background information to the story.
COHESION	~____
Another quality of English grammar at the suprasentential level that we might illustrate
with this simple narrative is the fact that texts, units of spoken or written language at the
suprasentential level, have an organizational structure of their own. It is not possible to put
the second sentence first in the above narrative and have it mean anything, for example. For
the most part, we can no more move sentences around in a paragraph (unless we alter them
in some way) than we can move words around in a sentence without making some other
modifications.
Five linguistic mechanisms that Halliday and Hasan (1976) point to in order for texts to
have cohesion or structure at the level of text are the following:
reference: The boy wanted a new bike. One day, he... (he refers back to the boy)
ellipsis: A* Who wrote the letter?
B: Marty. (The response Marty elliptically signals that Marty wrote the letter.)
substitution: I plan to enter college next year. If I do,... (do substitutes for enter college)
conjunction: Peter needed some money. He, therefore, decided to get a job. (therefore
makes explicit the causal relationship between the first and second sentences)
lexical cohesion: (here through synonymy): He was grateful for the money he had been
given. He slipped the coins into his pocket and hurried down the street.
(The word coins refers back to money.)
Chapter 2: Grammatical Terminology
27
__________________________________________________________
REGISTER _____________________________________________
Another concept that applies at the suprasentential level is register. We used the word
register earlier in this book to mean the level of formality of language. While this is true
enough, it is something of a simplification. According to systemic functional linguistics
(Halliday & Matthiessen, 2014), register actually involves three variables: field, tenor, and
mode. Field refers to the social activity in which the language is being used and what is being
talked about. Field is reflected in choices of content words. Tenor is concerned with the roles
and relationships of interlocutors. For example, one’s choice of sentence type to express a
request—declarative, interrogative, imperative—would be conditioned by the nature of the
relationship between the person making the request and the person being asked to fulfill it.
The mode refers to the channel of communication, whether the language is written or spoken
and, with regard to the latter, whether it is face to face or more remote. Cohesive ties in a text,
among other things, will be affected by mode.
______________________________________________________________________
GENRE	~
A closely aligned linguistic concept to register is genre. Genre, too, refers to linguistic
variation. Rather than variation due to level of formality, however, the variation is due to
the communicative purposes to which the language is put. For example, the language used
in a scientific research paper is different from that in a recipe or a letter of recommendation.
They differ in their patterns of words, structures, and voice. For instance, in the interest
of leaving no room for ambiguity, a legal document is often characterized by “very long
sentences containing numerous and elaborate qualifications (all those elements beginning
notwithstanding, in accordance with, without prejudice to, etc.)” (Swales, 1990, p. 63).
Teachers whose job it is to teach English for special or academic purposes know full well
the challenge of teaching students the necessary patterned structures of a particular genre.
Then, too, teachers of English language learners in elementary and secondary schools have to
teach their students how to understand and construct academic language genres. In order for
such learners to succeed in school, they must move beyond using conversational language or
Basic Interpersonal Communicative Skills (BICS) to academic language, CALP or Cognitive
Academic Language Proficiency (Cummins, 1999). They have to learn how science texts
are structured, how history texts are structured, etc. (Schleppegrell, 2004). It might even be
said that professional training (including becoming ESL/EFL teachers) involves learning to
speak and write a particular genre so that one can join a particular discourse community as a
participating member.
_____________________________________________________________
GIVEN/NEW	——~	-
We conclude this discussion of suprasentential features by revisiting the theme-rheme
distinction, which was introduced earlier. While theme-rheme has to do with the structure of
clauses, there is a close relationship between this pair and the way information is structured
through sentences in a text. A principle of information structuring, which we alluded to in
Chapter 1, is to introduce new information first in the rheme of one clause and then to treat
it as given information in the theme or themes of a subsequent clause(s). Given information
is that which is assumed by the writer to be known by the reader. This assumption is made
either because the given information has been previously mentioned or because it is in
some way shared between the writer and reader. New information, on the other hand, is
28
The Grammar Book
“newsworthy”—not something the writer can take for granted that the reader knows. This
principle explains why our example in the previous chapter, *z looked up it in the dictionary, is
ungrammatical. The pronoun, it, refers to something that is already known. It therefore does
not ordinarily occur in the rheme if there is another place for it to go. We return to this point
in Chapter 22.
For now, consider the first five sentences that begin the previous paragraph. The words
theme-rheme distinction occur in the rheme of the first sentence. They are echoed in the
theme of the second sentence. In the rheme of the second sentence, the notion of information
structuring is introduced and mentioned again in the theme of the third sentence. In the rheme
of the third sentence, the concept of given information is introduced. Given infomation is
treated in the theme of the fourth sentence. In the rheme of the fourth sentence, the words
which is assumed by the writer occur. The theme of the fifth sentence picks up on this rheme
by referring to this assumption. In this way, the information flows from rheme to theme, from
sentence to sentence, from new to given.
The tendency to place new information toward the end of a clause is called end focus.
End focus occurs in spoken discourse as well, although speakers have other means at their
disposal in speech for identifying new information. Information units in the spoken language
are defined by the tone group. Each tone group has a syllable made prominent by pitch
movement:
I went to the movies with LUcy.
One syllable in each tone group, the tonic syllable, functions to focus the attention of the
listener. While the focus is typically at the end, it need not be:
I went to the MOvies with Lucy.
However, when the prominent syllable is in nonfinal position, one typically interprets the
stress as contrastive; that is,
I went to the MOvies with Lucy, (not to the concert)
But while given/new and theme/rheme are related, they arise from a different perspective.
Halliday and Matthiessen (2014) put it this way:
The Theme is what I, the speaker, choose to take as my point of departure. The Given is
what you, the listener, already know about or have accessible to you. Theme + Rheme is
speaker-oriented, while Given + New is listener-oriented.
But both are, of course, speaker-selected. It is the speaker who assigns both structures,
mapping one on to the other to give a complete texture to the discourse and thereby relate
it to its environment, (p.120)
The speaker’s (writer’s) choices are thus predicated on what has gone before and what is
to come. In this way, the structure of a single sentence both contributes to and depends
on the physical context in which it occurs and the discourse or text around it. As you will
see throughout this book, discourse and grammar have this symbiotic relationship in that
grammar is a resource for creating discourse, while the discourse context shapes grammar to
accomplish very specific communicative goals.
Conclusion
This chapter introduces the terms that you will find in this book. Don’t worry if you are
not clear on all of them. Throughout the book, we revisit what has been introduced here
and provide you with opportunities to reinforce the understanding that you have acquired
thus far.
Chapter 2: Grammatical Terminology
29
Exercises
Test your knowledge of what has been introduced.
1.	Write an original sentence or short text that illustrates each of the following concepts.
/'Underline and label the following pertinent word(s) in your sentence.
a. noun	e. pronoun	i. phrase/clause	m.	subordination
b. verb	f. determiner	j. subject/predicate	ท.	genre
c. adjective	g. preposition	k. simple sentence	0.	register
d. adverb	h. conjunction	I. coordination	p-	given-new
2.	Identify the part of speech (noun, verb, determiner, etc.) of each word in the following
sentences. Use semantic, structural, and functional criteria as necessary.
a.	John and Paul were fighting.
b.	John gave Paul a black eye.
c.	The principal sent them to his office immediately.
3.	List the three major moods in English and write a sentence that corresponds to
each type.
4.	Illustrate the fact that a pragmatic function, such as a request, doesn’t always
correspond to a particular sentence type.
' 5. Give an original example for each of the five ways that Halliday and Hasan (1976) give
to describe cohesion in discourse.
6.	It is said that the theme is less important than the rheme in terms of its information-
bearing status. Explain why this is so.
Test your ability to apply what you know.
7.	Rearrange the sentences in the following short text so that it makes sense. In addition
'' to rearranging the sentences, what other types of changes do you need to make?
There are only two ways to get to Culebra. One is to fly from San Juan. The other is
to take a ferry from Fajardo. Unless, of course, you know someone with a boat. If you
do, it will be easy.
; 8. Choose one of the following genres: a newscast, a web-based news source, or an
advertisement in a newspaper or on the radio or television. Can you identify any
special grammatical features of the genre you have chosen?
9.	Discuss the following in terms of their themes:
a.	Out of nowhere came a giant blue, heron.
b.	I was given a gold pen by my parents at graduation.
c.	Concerning homework, I don’t believe in it.
10.	It is said that language acquirers, whether acquiring their native language (Gruber,
1967) or their second language (Givón, 1979), go through an initial stage in which all
of their utterances are of a topic-comment structure. This has been reported to be true
30
The Grammar Book
regardless of the type of native or target language. Collect some beginning learner
speech data and see if you find this to be the case as well. Consult Fuller and Gundel
(1987) for some more background.
Bibliography
REFERENCES
Allen, J. p. B., & Widdowson, H. G. (1975). Grammar and language teaching. In J. p. B. Allen & ร. p.
Corder (Eds.), Papers in applied linguistics (pp. 45-97). London, England: Oxford University Press.
Chalker, ร. (1984). Current English grammar. London, England: Macmillan.
Culicover, p. (1999). Syntactic nuts. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Cummins, J. (1999). BICS and CALP: Clarifying the distinction. Retrieved from ERIC database. (ED438551).
Fries, p. (1996). Theme and new in written English. Journal ofTESOL France, 5(1), 69-85.
Fuller, J., & Gundel, J. (1987). Topic-prominence in interlanguage. Language Learning, 37(1), 1-18.
Givon, T. (1979). õn understanding grammar. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Gruber, J. (1967). Topicalization in child language. Foundations of Language, 3, 37-65.
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion in English. London, England: Longman.
Halliday, M. A. K., & Matthiessen, c. Μ. I. M. (2014). Halliday's introduction to functional grammar (4th ed.).
London, England/New York, NY: Routledge.
Hopper, p., & Thompson, ร. (1984). The discourse basis for lexical categories in universal grammar.
Language, 60{4), 703-752.
Lock, G. (1996). Functional English grammar. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Reid, พ. (1991). Verb and noun number in English: A functional explanation. London, England: Longman.
Roberts, p. (1958). Understanding English. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Schleppegrell, M. (2004). The language of schooling: A functional linguistics perspective. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a language. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
For general references on English grammar, consult:
Carter, R., & McCarthy, M. (2006). Cambridge grammar of English. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Crystal, D. (2008). A dictionary of linguistics and phonetics (6th ed.). Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
Hewings, A., & Hewings, M. (2005). Grammar and context: An advanced resource book. London, England:
Routledge.
Huddleston, R., & Pullum, G. (2005). A student's introduction to English gramm-ar. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Leech, G. (1989). An A-Z of English grammar and usage. London, England: Edward Arnold.
For more information on topicalization, see:
Haegeman, L. (2006). Thinking syntactically: A guide to argumentation and analysis. Malden, MA: Blackwell
Publishing.
Poole, G. (2002). Syntactic theory. New York, NY: Palgrave.
Radford, A. (2005). English syntax: An introduction. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Chapter 2: Grammatical Terminology
31
Endnotes
1.	เท traditional terms, these have been called subject complements, and for the next function, object
complements. However, we refer to them as subject and object predicates, reserving the term complement
for embedded clauses of various types (see Chapter 31, on complementation).
2.	Actually, nouns have more flexibility in number than this traditional distinction reveals (Reid, ใ 991). See
Chapter 4 for further discussion.
3.	Here, we deal with one type of determiner, core determiners. Other types are introduced เท Chapter 16.
4.	Although similar, theme and topic are somewhat different concepts (see Fries, 1996).
5.	Some languages, such as Japanese and Korean, readily use both options—subject/predicate and
topic/comment.
32
The Grammar Book
Lexicogrammar
Introduction
In this chapter, we briefly treat the lexicogrammar of English. Traditionally, the lexicon has
been characterized as a mental inventory of words and productive word derivational processes.
We take a broader view of the lexicon; we consider it to comprise not only single words,
but also word compounds and conventionalized multiword phrases. Furthermore, from a
pedagogical perspective, vocabulary and grammar have usually been viewed as two different
areas of language. As we mentioned in Chapter 1, however, we believe that it is better to
conceive of grammar and lexicon as intertwined, and for this reason, in keeping with Halliday
and Matthiessen (2014), we prefer to think in terms of lexicogrammar.
There are three reasons for our preference. First is the interlingual argument: that
which is accomplished lexically in one language can be realized grammatically in another. For
example, Indonesian can convey the meaning “more than one” with reduplication. It can use
two nouns in a row: buku buku means more than one book. In English, this same meaning is
conveyed with an inflectional morpheme -s for the plural. Over time, a shift from lexis (words)
to grammar can happen within a language as well. The process is called grammaticalization,
when words coalesce and become a grammatical construction. An example of this is be going
to, which transformed from a three-word lexical unit with a verb of forward motion (go) to
a grammatical unit, signalling future time, partly fusing in speech to “gonna” (Bybee, 2006).
Second, we note that many multiword lexical units conform to the grammar of a
language; that is, they adhere to acceptable word order. For example, the English multiword
phrase is always by the way, not way by the. Recent work in computer analyses of large corpora of
English texts suggests that these highly frequent recurrent sequences of words (e.g., Simpson-
Vlach & Ellis, 2010) are basic intermediate units between lexis and grammar (Nattinger &
DeCarrico, 1992).
Third, often a false dichotomy is made between meaning and form, with the former
allegedly the province of the lexicon and the latter the product of the grammar. Such a
distinction is problematic because the grammar/form and lexicon/meaning dichotomy is
really more of a continuum. For instance, at the grammatical end of the continuum, we could
place the function words, such as the preposition of and the pronoun it. At the other end, we
could assign content words, such as the noun garden and the verb grow. If we leave it at this,
the distinction seems sensible. However, we soon see that the differences are really matters
of degree, and intermediate examples are easy to find. For example, a preposition such as
in would seem to have more semantic content than a noun such as thing. Content words
33
(i.e., nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs) vary enormously in their concreteness of meaning
and in their semantic specificity (Langacker, 1987).
WHAT DOES IT MEAinOK^^
A question we might reasonably pose to help US understand what is entailed in lexicogrammar
is this: What does it mean to know a word? We might answer as follows. 1b really know a
word, one needs to know its
•	spelling (orthography)
•	phonetic representation [pronunciation, syllabification, and stress (if multisyllabic)]
•	morphological irregularity (where applicable)
•	syntactic features and restrictions (including part of speech)
•	common derivations and collocations (i.e., words with which it co-occurs)
•	semantic features and restrictions
•	pragmatic features and restrictions
Consider, for example, the form of the word child. The knowledge of an English
speaker would include its spelling, c-h-i-l-d, and its pronunciation,/cayld/. With respect
to morphological irregularity, the speaker would need to know that the noun child has an
irregular and idiosyncratic plural, children, which is not generated by the regular rules for
forming plurals in English.1 Syntactic features and restrictions would include the word’s
part of speech—a noun—and in particular, the fact that child is a common countable noun.
Common derivatives include childlike, childish, and childhood, while common collocations
include child’s play, child labor, and child psychology.
Semantic information would include the concept human and also information indicating
that the word is neutral regarding gender distinction. It would contrast the term child with
similar terms for younger humans, such as infant and baby, and it would also contrast the word
with parallel items denoting older humans, such as adolescent or adult.
Finally, from a pragmatic or use perspective, the speaker would be able to contrast child
with other words with the same meaning—for example, an informal counterpart, kid. Notice
that there is a pragmatic restriction on the latter form, however. While many speakers of
English are quite comfortable using the plural version of this informal form, kids, they find
that its singular form has a certain pejorative connotation:
It's a snow day today. My kids are home from school, (acceptable)
It's a snow day today. ?My kid is home from school, (questionable)
Many speakers of English would prefer to use son or daughter or some other word when
referring to one child. We might also note that it is used for a young child when its sex is
unknown (e.g., What’s its namef.	Λ
Speakers of English use this information in various ways. For example, we use
orthographic information when we alphabetize words, phonological information when we
make words alliterate or rhyme, and syntactic information when we match determiners and
nouns appropriately. Here are some examples of the latter:
this child (not *these child)
these children (not *this children)
many children (not*much children)
Semantic information is used when we accept a lexical item in certain combinations as
meaningful:
The child slept for two hours.
34
The Grammar Book
But we reject it in others as nonsensical—at least in any literal sense:
*The child evaporated two hours ago.
Semantic information also helps to distinguish among words with similar, but not identical,
meanings. To truly know a word means to know both how it differs from and how it is similar
to others. Pragmatic information is useful when we try to be sensitive to the appropriateness
of the register of our lexical choices. It also helps US in the realm of usage—to identify patterns
of words that collocate, or go together, in particular contexts.
In order to truly know how to use a word appropriately in English, then, a speaker
or writer would need to know much more than simply the general “meaning” of the word.
To make this same point more generally, for the remainder of this chapter, we consider the
features of lexicogrammatical items: their form, meaning, and use.
The Form of Lexicogrammatical Items
MORPHOLOGY
We begin by discussing the morphology of words. Morphemes can be divided into two basic
categories: free morphemes and morphemes that are bound or attached to other words. Each
of these two major categories can be subdivided further into two types: those morphemes that
have more lexical content and those that are more grammatical in function, although, as we
already admitted, the line between the two is sometimes hard to draw. The free morphemes
with lexical content represent the major parts of speech: nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs.
The free grammatical morphemes include the minor parts of speech: pronouns, determiners,
prepositions, and conjunctions, among others.
English morphemes
Free	Bound
Lexical	Grammatical	Lexical	Grammatical
content function	content function
Major parts Minor parts Derivational Inflectional
of speech of speech morphemes morphemes
The bound morphemes consist of two kinds of affixes: derivational, which are more
lexical in nature, and inflectional, which are more grammatical in nature. When a morpheme
added to a word results in either a different part of speech or the same part of speech with a
different lexical meaning, it is a derivational morpheme. Derivational affixes can be prefixes
(e.g., unbend) or suffixes (e.g., argument).
If a morpheme simply adds some element of meaning required by the grammar and
changes the form of a word without changing its basic part of speech, then it is called an inflection
or inflectional morpheme. An example of an inflectional morpheme would be the addition of
-ing to the verb watch in I am watching television. Watch remains a verb after the -ing has been
affixed, but the suffix adds a grammatical meaning, namely that the action is an ongoing one.
As introduced in the previous chapter, there are eight inflectional morphemes in
English, all of them suffixes.
Chapter 3: Lexicogrammar
35
Four of them involve verbs:
present participle: watching
present tense—third person singular: walks
past tense: jumped
past participle: eaten
Two are added to nouns:
possessive: John's
plural: books
And two of them come at the end of adjectives and adverbs:
comparative: dearer; faster
superlative: clearest; fastest
The only inflections that are not suffixes involve the irregular forms, which can have
internal vowel changes, no changes at all, or some completely different and historically
unrelated (i.e., suppletive) form. For example:
internal vowel change:	mouse —> mice (plural)
ring -> rang (past tense) -> rung (past participle)
no change:	one deer —> several deer (zero plural)
hit -> hit -> hit (zero past tense and past participle)
suppletive form:	go -> went: be -»was (past tense)
good —> better (comparative) —> best (superlative)
bad —> worse (comparative) —»worst (superlative)
The pronunciation of several of the regular affixes depends upon the phonological
environment in which they occur. The regular suffixes for the plural, the possessive, and the
third person singular of the present tense, all pattern the same way:
PRONUNCIATION OF SUFFIXES
	Plural	Possessive	Third person singular, present tense
After Is/, 111, /s /, /z /, /c /, /J /, the suffix is pronounced as /az/	judges	Rose's	rushes
After all other voiced consonants and	dogs	John's	runs
. all vowel sounds, the suffix is pronounced as/z/	toys	Jay's	cries
After all other voiceless consonants, the suffix is pronounced as /s/	.cats	Mark's	walks
The regular past tense and regular past participle suffixes (they take the same form) are
pronounced /ad/ after /t/ and /d/ (e.g., wanted, scolded), but /d/ after all voiced sounds other
than /d/ (e.g., played, judged), and /t/.,after all voiceless sounds other than /t/ (e.g., walked,
kissed).
36
The Grammar Book
_______________________________________________________________
SYNTACTICALLY RELEVANT LEXICAL FEATURES______________
Determiner-Noun Restrictions
Within noun phrases, determiner-noun restrictions are important because a few determiners
co-occur only with uncountable nouns (e.g., much and little), other determiners co-occur only
with singular countable nouns (e.g., a/an, each), and still others co-occur only with plural
countable nouns (e.g., these, many, few). There are also determiners that may occur with all
nouns irrespective of countability or number (e.g., the, my, his). However, to ensure that
only grammatical sequences are produced, the countability and number restrictions of all
determiners and nouns must be learned.
Verb-Noun Restrictions
The most complicated lexicogrammar restrictions in English involve verbs. First, we must
distinguish between verbs that take objects (i.e., transitive verbs) and verbs that do not take
objects (i.e., intransitive verbs). The lexical features (—transitive) for disappear and (+transitive)
for bring allow US to accept these sentences as grammatical:
The stain disappeared.
The man brought a gift.
and help US explain the unacceptability of sentences such as these:
*The dry cleaners disappeared the stain.
"The man brought.
Some verbs occur both transitively and intransitively with little or no change of meaning.
These are ergative or change-of-state verbs, where the direct object in the transitive sentence
is the same as the subject of the verb in the intransitive one:
John opened the door. The door opened.
Inflation increased prices. Prices increased.
These verbs would be marked (+/— transitive).
Finally, ditransitive, linking, complex transitive, and prepositional verbs (see Chapter 2)
all have qualities that would have to be learned. For instance, prepositional verbs require a
prepositional phrase of location, direction, or a recipient (which can be expressed either as
a prepositional object or an indirect object):
location: The child lay on the bed. ("The child lay.)
direction: The boy headed to work. ("The boy headed.)
recipient: I handed the note to John. {*] handed the note.)
(or, I handed John the note.)
Adjective-Prepositional Phrase Restrictions
Adjectives that take objects must have a preposition before the object noun. Some adjectives
are inherently transitive, which means that they must be followed by prepositions and noun
objects:
Aziz is fond of sweets. ("Aziz is fond.)
Elliott is related to Larry. ("Elliott is related.)
Other adjectives are intrinsically intransitive and are not followed by an object:
Gavin is handsome.
Lucia is always happy.
Chapter 3: Lexicogrammar
However, some adjectives can be used both transitively and intransitively without a change of
meaning in the adjective itself—that is, the noun object limits the scope of the adjective but
does not change its meaning. For example:
Sally is nervous.
Sally is nervous about the quiz.
Co-Occurrence Restrictions Involving Prepositions
Frequently, a verb or a transitive adjective must be followed by a particular preposition (e.g.,
to rely on X, to distinguish Xfrom Y, to be cognizant ofX). Similarly, a given noun phrase must
be preceded by a given preposition (e.g., in my opinion, to my mind, from my point of view) and
sometimes followed by one, too (e.g., in lieu of, with regard to). Whenever new words are
introduced to ESL/EFL students, we recommend the prepositions with which they co-occur
be introduced as well. With these and other co-occurring forms, ESL/EFL students will need
a great deal of practice.
Collocation
Certain types of word co-occurrences that are governed by conventional use have long been
studied under the label collocation. As Mueller (2011) notes, second language learners’ successful
performance can be partially attributed to their knowledge of collocations. For example:
adjective-noun: a tall person or building (not a"high"one)
adverb-adjective: statistically significant (not "important")
verb-direct object: ask/answer a question (not"say"/"tell")
Some collocations are more fixed than others: binomials, such as high and dry, hat and coat,
and pick and choose, and trinomials, such as a king’s ransom, a pretty penny, and a raw deal. The
difference between these fixed collocations and idioms has to do with the transparency of
meaning. Idioms have meanings that are difficult to retrieve from the lexical items themselves
(e.g., kick the bucket as a euphemism for dying), whereas words that go together in collocations
still retain their lexical meaning. Collocations, therefore, should be decipherable, although it
is probably better to think of them being on a cline—a continuum of idiomaticity (Fillmore,
Kay, & O’Connor, 1988).
Computer-assisted corpus research has demonstrated that a great deal of text in English is
composed of words in common patterns or in slight variants of these patterns (Sinclair, 1991).
Francis (1996), reporting on the 320-million-word COBUILD corpus of British, American,
and Australian English, claimed that researchers have identified over 700 patterns that are
blends of lexical and grammatical elements. One such pattern, for example, consists of phrases
with the verb insist:
insist (that)
insist on
insist on Verbing
insist on Noun Phrase
insist + quote
One conclusion that we can derive from this observation is simply that words don’t occur
randomly. Once you have chosen a word, you are limited in your choice of what comes next.
The second point underscores what we have alluded to several times already. When it comes
to performance, grammar and lexicon are intertwined.
38
The Grammar Book
Halliday and Hasan (1976) use the term lexical collocation in another sense. They refer to
the expectation that other words will occur in a text (oral or written) once a particular word
has occurred. Thus, if the word professor occurs in ongoing text, one might expect other words
such as lecture, university, teach, or publish to occur. However, this is a much more general
use of the term lexical collocation, and it seems to refer to related or associated vocabulary
on a specific topic, rather than the syntactically constrained collocations that we have been
discussing.
Lexical Phrases or Lexicalized Sentence Stems
Lexical phrases, like collocations, are groups of words that co-occur; the difference is that
lexical phrases serve specific functions. For example, the phrase by the way serves the function
of enabling the speaker to shift the topic in discourse (Nattinger & DeCarrico, 1992). As
with collocations, some lexical phrases are more fixed than others: at any rate and what on
earth are fixed; a phrase like a(ท) N [+ time] ago is more open, allowing any noun of time
(e.g., day, week) to fill the slot, the same with N [+ time] by N [+ time] as in day by day, and
moment by moment (Taylor, 2002).
While Nattinger and DeCarrico write of conventionalized form-function composites,
Pawley and Syder (1983) use the term lexicalized sentence stems for regular form-meaning
pairings. They claim that English speakers know hundreds of thousands of such lexical units
in which the grammatical form and lexical content are wholly or largely fixed but which are
not true idioms.
Lexicalized sentence stems can be clause length or multiclausal complex sentences:
Clause length:	What's for dinner?
Need any help?
You would ask that question.
Multiclausal:	I told him, but he wouldn't listen.
Be careful what you're doing with that.
If I'd known then, what I know now...
In addition, according to Pawley and Syder (1983), many semilexicalized (because they are
less fixed) sequences possess permissible expansions or substitutions. In such cases, a formula
can be extracted that consists of a nucleus of lexical and grammatical morphemes. For example,
in the conventional expressions of apology for tardiness,
I'm sorry to keep you waiting.
I'm so sorry to have kept you waiting.
Mr. X is sorry to keep you waiting all this time.
a recurrent sequence can be isolated together with a grammatical frame:
NP be-TENSE sorry to keep-TENSE you waiting
Another example comes from Schmid (2001). He proposes that English speakers use Nbe that
(where N is an abstract noun) to bluff. For example by using the hope is that... rather than I
hope that, the speaker/writer’s role is backgrounded and the proposition that follows sounds
more objective and less open to question.
While lexical phrases and lexicalized sentence stems adhere for the most part to rules
of English syntax, some are “extragrammatical” (Fillmore, Kay, & O’Connor, 1988) or “non-
canonical” (Nattinger & DeCarrico, 1992). Consider the phrases sight unseen, all of a sudden,
and so far, so good; each has a grammatical structure, but not one predictable from the rules of
English. Nevertheless, canonical and noncanonical phrases exist in other languages as well
and perform the same functions as they do in English (Nattinger & DeCarrico, 1992), so
their existence and behavior should not come as a surprise to ESL/EFL students.
Chapter 3: Lexicogrammar
39
It has been known for some time that many beginning first and second language learners
use large lexical units, giving them a fluency that they wouldn’t ordinarily be capable of at
such an early stage of acquisition. Bolinger (1976) maintains that a child learns collocations
by hearing them in a variety of concrete contexts and later analyzing and abstracting the
meaning of individual words. Then, too, evidence suggests that by later analyzing the stock
of formulas they have acquired, learners are able to induce the grammatical rules and regular
patterns of the target language (Wong Fillmore, 1976), a view very much in keeping with
a usage-based perspective (Eskildsen, 2012). In addition, no doubt like native speakers of
English, learners retain many of the lexical phrases and sentence stems as wholes because they
conveniently fulfill certain functions or convey certain meanings. Indeed, Pawley and Syder
(1983) observe that knowing these lexical phrases and sentence stems contributes to speakers’
conversational fluency.
Such patterns are also indispensable when it comes to writing. Macqueen (2012) shows
how English learners at the university level gradually developed mastery of constructions
in their writing. One learner appeared to be working on the construction “have a/an...
impact on....” The learner wrote, “...it can have a negative impact above some people.... ”
Macqueen reports that from the beginning, the learner used the verb have to collocate with
(adjective) impact, followed by a preposition. The learner also seemed to understand that
impact is often preceded by a negative adjective. However, the learner had to work out which
preposition to use, especially since the prepositions on and above are one form in her native
language, Spanish.
The Meaning of Lexicogrammatical Items
We move now to the meaning of lexicogrammatical items. We begin with discussing processes
that lead to the creation of new words and then go on to examine other semantic features.
PRODUCTIVE LEXICOGRAMMATICAL PROCESSES
In addition to fairly structured lexicogrammatical information such as we have given in the
previous examples, the lexicogrammar is also shaped by three productive processes: compounding,
derivational affixation, and conversion. It is important to understand these as well, for these
processes are responsible, in part, for the creation of new items.
Compounding
Compounding, or putting together existing words to form a new lexical unit (rain + coat —
raincoat), is a word-formation process that occurs in some languages. For example, the Germanic
languages (this includes English) and the Chinese languages make rich use of compounding,
whereas other languages make much less use of this process. According to the Collins COBUILD
English Grammar (Sinclair & Fox, 1990)7almost any noun can modify any other noun in English.
Take the noun house, for instance. When it is first in the compound, we have household, housemate,
house sitter, houseboat, house arrest, houseguest, housefly, housekeeper, houselights, housewife, househusband,
and housework; when house is in second position in the compound, we have lighthouse, birdhouse,
steakhouse, jailhouse, pumphouse, doghouse, and alehouse; and this list is not exhaustive by any means.
Because both meanings are partly present, compound processing looks like a simple process, but
their merging does not simply add both meanings; it creates a new semantic blend (Jullian, 2002).
Many parts of speech can be combined in this way, sometimes ending up as one word, sometimes
as two or more (e.g., bathroom towel rack).
40
The Grammar Book
Some of the most frequent English compounding patterns are:
noun + noun: stone wall, baby blanket, rainbow
noun + verb: homemade, rainfall, lip-read
noun + verb-er: babysitter, can opener, screwdriver
adj + noun: blackbird, greenhouse, cold cream
adj/adv + noun + -err. quick-frozen, nearsighted, dim-witted
prep + noun: overlord, underdog, underworld
prep + verb: underestimate, undercut, overstep
verb + particle: makeup, breakdown, stakeout
ESL/EFL students who speak a native language with little word compounding or
with very different rules of word compounding may have trouble understanding and using
compound words in English. Speakers of Romance languages may paraphrase and say “the
sheet of the bed” instead of “the bedsheet” or may even reverse the order of elements in a
compound and say “wine table” when they intend to say “table wine.”
As can be seen, the spelling of compound words proves a further complication because
some are written as one word, some as two or more words, and some hyphenated. Sometimes
the same word is written in more than one way: baby sitter, baby-sitter, or babysitter, with the
spelling as two words eventually coalescing into one compound word after a period of use.
Students have to be taught to use their dictionaries when in doubt about the proper spelling.
Derivational Affixation
Earlier in this chapter, we introduced the eight inflectional affixes of English. English words
can also have derivational affixes, affixes that combine with stem (or base) forms to derive
new words. Derivational affixes can be prefixes, which often change the meaning (expatriate,
unrepentant). or suffixes, which usually change the part of speech of the word stem ('washable.
childish}. In fact, it is possible for a word stem to have both a derivational prefix and suffix
(unthinkable} or more than one suffix (governmental}.1
ESL/EFL teachers should help their students learn the most common and useful
derivational prefixes (e.g., anti-, bi-, inter-, intra-, pre-, un-) and suffixes (e.g., -able, -er, -ism,
-ist, -less, -ness). This will help students expand their productive and receptive vocabularies.
It is also worthwhile to spend some time on the common suffixes whose major function is
to change one part of speech into another. For example, -OUS, -ary, and -ful transform nouns
into adjectives such จร famous, customary, successful; and -ness and -ity transform adjectives into
nouns such as happiness and serenity. ESL/EFL students can sometimes derive the nouns and
verbs (e.g., minimum, minimize)·, much harder for them are deriving adjectives and adverbs
(e.g., minimal, minimally), which they often avoid (Schmitt & Zimmerman, 2002).
It should be noted, however, that which words take which affixes is not always predictable.
Students will sometimes attempt a new form with a derivational suffix that does not work
(jsuggestment) or will think that a word has a common prefix, when in fact the “prefix” is part
of the root (e.g., relay, resend). There is also potential confusion (on native English speakers’
parts as well) when having to choose between two words with different morphology that
seem to be opposites, or at least different, but that actually have very similar meanings (e.g.,
invaluable/valuable; slow up/slow down; admission/admittance; joyful/joyous).
A final point to be made is that when both a derivational and an inflectional suffix are
affixed to the same word, the inflectional suffix occurs last:
weaknesses *weaksness
Chapter 3: Lexicogrammar
41
Conversion
The other important productive lexical process in English is conversion, which occurs
when one part of speech is converted into another part of speech without any derivational
affixation. Most conversion in English takes place when the underlying verb has a very
general meaning, and the meaning of a noun object (direct or prepositional) becomes
incorporated into the verb to show that something has been (1) added, (2) taken away, or
(3) used for something.
1.	He put butter on his bread. -> He buttered his bread.
He poured water on the plants. -» He watered the plants.
2.	Jo removed dust from the desk. -» Jo dusted the desk.
I took the pits out of the dates. -»I pitted the dates.
3.	He cut the log with a saw. -» He sawed the log.
Sue gathered the leaves with a rake. -» She raked the leaves.
This is a very productive process, and new words, or rather new functions for existing words,
are always being coined. We can say “That book was a good read!” and novel conversions
often accompany innovations; for example, we now email and text messages and fedex packages.
The example with read reminds us to mention that even though the dominant English
conversion pattern occurs when noun meanings are incorporated into verbs, sometimes other
parts of speech are involved. In the example, the verb read is nominalized.3 In the following
case, a prepositional meaning is incorporated into the verb:
Hal walked across the street. -» Hal crossed the street.
HOMONYMY ANIDPOLYSEMY
Sometimes words have the same form but different meanings, as in bear (an animal, to carry).
With such homonyms, there is identity of spelling and sound, but it is possible to have identity
with regard to only one of these. When the similarity is with sound, it is called homophony
(there, their, they're), and when it is with spelling, it is called homography (wind blowing versus
wind the clock). Sometimes the part of speech is the same, but the meaning is different: live in
He lives (= resides) in Bangor versus He lives (— is alive). In such cases, we have an example of
polysemy, when one form with the same part of speech has a range of meanings.4
Homophones, homographs, and especially, polysemous forms represent problems for
ESL/EFL students. Early on in their acquisition of vocabulary, students often adhere to the
“one form, one meaning” principle. Since polysemous words are the most common words
in the lexicon, confusion can reign. When students are struggling to understand a particular
lexical item, sometimes it makes more sense to use a lower-frequency word to define it in
order to avoid the ambiguity that can occur when using a word with more than one meaning.
For example, we have found from our own teaching of beginning-level students that the
polysemous adjective hard gets misconstrued, though the adjective difficult does not, when
used to describe something that students find challenging.
An additional challenge in working with polysemy with ESL/EFL students is
that sometimes a word in one language will share some of the meanings of the word
in another language, but not all. Thus, a Spanish speaker learning English might
speak of the fingers on his foot, as the Spanish word for fingers includes what English
speakers have a separate lexical item for, toes. A related problem is the occurrence
of faux amis, or false cognates—words that look as if they share the same meaning, but
42
The Grammar Book
do not. For example, the French word librairie corresponds to bookstore, not library in
English. These last two examples hint at the difficulties of relying on translation from
the lexicon of one language to another. Indeed, Slobin (1996) writes of “thinking for
speaking” in explaining that languages encode certain ways of thinking. For instance,
compare these English and Spanish sentences from Negueruela, Lantolf, Rehn Jordan, and
Gelabert (2004).
The little bird hops out of the cage.
El pajarito sale de la jaula dando saltitos. ('The little bird leaves from the cage giving hops.')
The meaning of the English verb hops tells US the manner in which the bird exited the cage.
Spanish speakers rarely conflate manner with motion, preferring to use a separate lexical
item, here “giving hops,” for manner. While comprehension both ways is obviously possible,
the lack of correspondence presents a challenge for relying on direct translation.
SEMANTIC ΡΕΑΤυΡΙΕΪΊΑΝ^ΚΕΪΤΚΚτίΟΝΪ
The information associated with a lexicogrammatical item also allows US to account for
semantic compatibility (or semantic incompatibility) in several types of constructions:
subject-verb:
โ. a. The idea developed.
2.	a. The dog sneezed.
b.	*The idea laughed.
b.	*The worm sneezed.
verb-object:
3.	a. The harsh winter killed the plants. b. *The winter killed the rocks.
adjective-noun:
4.	a. The basement was mildewed.	b. *The government was mildewed.
5.	a. The mare was pregnant.	b. *The stallion was pregnant.
We can account for these incompatibilities in terms of a hierarchy of semantic features
(going from low to high): common nouns are abstract or concrete, and concrete nouns are living
or nonliving; living nouns are plant or animal, and animal nouns are human or nonhuman;
finally, human and nonhuman animal nouns are masculine, feminine, or gender neutral.
Chapter 3: Lexicogrammar
43
Our hierarchy is simplified, but it will suffice to demonstrate why sentences lb through 5b
are unacceptable. Nouns with features at the bottom of the hierarchy are excluded when a
higher feature is required; for example, the verb laugh in lb requires a human subject, so
any noun lower on the features hierarchy is excluded semantically. Although not reflected
in our hierarchy, it is probably necessary to divide nonhuman animals into higher and lower
animals because dogs and horses can “sneeze,” but worms and centipedes cannot (2b). Only
living nouns can literally be killed, so that leaves 3 b unacceptable; and only concrete (as
opposed to abstract) nouns can literally be involved in action or processes such as falling,
breaking, and mildewing, accounting for the unacceptability of 4b (although we admit it has
appeal as a metaphor!—see the next section in this chapter). Finally, the adjective pregnant
modifies or describes a mature female animal (hence the unacceptability of 5b). One of the
most interesting things about these restrictions is that they are often violated in extension of
meaning and figurative usage (e.g., a pregnant pause, a broken heart). And it is in these meaning
extensions that languages differ.5
MEANING EXTENSION
Nature Personified
The wind whispered.
The brook roared.
The saplings danced.
A great many word meanings are figurative or metaphorical rather than (or in addition to)
being literal. Indeed, it is the deliberate violation of these semantic constraints that results
in the rich imagery of poetic language. For example, the following examples show how
descriptions of natural phenomena can be coded as actions without external agents or even as
personified human-like action:
Nature as Action
The wind blew.
The brook flooded.
The saplings swayed.
Ascribing action and personification to nature represent common meaning extensions. Lakoff
and Johnson (1980), in their book Metaphors We Live By, show just how pervasive our use of
metaphoric language is. For example, the “container” metaphor is used frequently in English
as a normal extension of meaning:
Literal	Metaphoric
Put it into the basket. Put it into words.
He's in the garage.	He's in love.
Sometimes the same expression has both literal and figurative meaning, and the connection
between literal and figurative use is not as obvious as in the previous examples. The nonobvious
interpretation then becomes an idiom, a notoriously difficult type of lexical item for language
learners:	"
It's in the bag. (= tfre object is located in the bag)
(= the proposal is a reálity/accepted)
44
literal
idiomatic
Familiarity with the extensions of meaning, the metaphors, and the idioms commonly
employed in everyday language (and also, of course, in fables, allegories, poems, etc.) can be
a great asset to learners in acquiring-a new language.
The Grammar Book
DENOTATIONS, CONNOTATIONS, AND CULTORAL ASSOCIATIONS
A word’s denotation is its dictionary definition or referential meaning. For example, a cat is a
feline quadruped. A connotation is the emotional association with a word. This association can
be personal (as, for example, positive associations with the word for the month of your birth),
or communal. With regard to the latter, Wierzbicka (1986) shows that while only, merely,
mA just all denote “It is not more than X” in the frame
I am going to buy that pen. It is
only
merely
just
50 cents.
their connotations for English speakers are different. Only is more neutral, whereas merely is
deprecating, and just is mildly positive. Another example from Wierzbicka shows this even
better: the expression just for fun could be used as an advertising slogan, but merely for fun
wouldn’t work to sell much!
When it comes to the communal or shared connotations of lexicogrammatical items,
we can see how much our frame of reference influences the interpretations we give to words.
Fillmore (1995) cites the tongue-in-cheek definition of boy from A Feminist Dictionary,
compiled by Kramarae and Treichler (1985):
boy. A male youth (cared for primarily by women) who is in training to support the
institutions which state that his caretakers are kindly but otherwise inferior beings.
We can begin to appreciate how difficult it is to expect that a word in one language will
have an equivalent in another. Wierzbicka (1988) points out that even concrete concepts such
as mouse have culture-specific associations, determined by speakers’ interests and attitudes
as much as by any denotation. Although students will naturally resort to translating from
their native language, as much as possible the lexicogrammatical items of English should be
learned in their own right and within meaningful contexts.
LEXICAL ASPECT; SEMANTIC CLASSES OF VERBS
Verbs in any language can be classified according to the type of action or state they describe
(Vendler, 1967). Some verbs, for example, are inherently punctual, such as kick or hit, meaning
that the action is momentary, having no duration. Another category contains verbs that are
inherently durative, such as live or work; use of these verbs implies that the action takes
place over time. This semantic feature is often referred to as lexical aspect, a topic we discuss
in Chapter 7, which deals with tense and aspect in English. What is significant about the
lexicogrammatical aspect of verbs is that they express different meanings when they combine
with certain grammatical morphemes. For example, punctual verbs take on an iterative
meaning when they combine with the progressive (be... -ing), whereas durative verbs take on
a sense of “temporariness” with the progressive:
She is hitting the rug with a stick in order to clean it. (repeatedly)
She is working in Halifax for the summer, (temporarily)
We could cite many other categories of verbs in which the meaning of the verb affects
other aspects of the sentence, such as what kind of complement structure—gerund or
infinitive—follows the verb. We will deal with these categories as they arise in connection
with particular grammatical constructions. For now, though, these observations should
remind US of why the term lexicogrammar is an appropriate hybrid.
Chapter 3: Lexicogrammar
45
ARGUMENT STRUCTURE OF VERBS
Closely related to the noun-verb syntactic restrictions and the notions of transitivity we discussed
previously is the more semantic notion of “argument structure,” a term used by linguists
and philosophers to describe the number of nouns or participants (i.e., arguments) typically
associated with a verb and the relationship that those nouns have with the verb. If a verb takes
one argument in English, it is intransitive and the noun argument functions as the subject:
One argument: Milly arrived late.
If the verb takes two arguments, one noun argument will function as the subject; however, the
other noun argument could function as a direct object or as a locative prepositional phrase,
or it could have some other role:
Two arguments: Lloyd drank the beer.
Andrew lives เท Vancouver.
If the verb takes three arguments, one noun argument will function as the subject, one will
function as the indirect object or recipient, and the other may function as a direct object; or
the three arguments might function as subject, direct object, and locative prepositional phrase:
Three arguments: Len gave me a book.
Rhonda put the vase on the table.
Some arguments are optional. For example, a change-of-state or ergative verb like open must
have as an argument the object that opens. Alternatively, it can also have an argument that
expresses the agent, or cause, of the opening:
One or two arguments: The door opened.
Rafah opened the door.
According to Liu (2008), other intransitive verbs are object-deleting verbs, such as forget, know,
promise, remember, and see (as in understand), where the object is recoverable from the context:
Yes, I promise.
And there are also transitive-turned-intransitive verbs of activity, such as eat, drink, play, and
read, which focus on the activity, not the object:
He reads every night before he goes to bed.
Then, too, Goldberg (2006) shows how verb-argument constructions can have an abstract
meaning that applies beyond specific verbs. For instance, one particular verb-argument
construction has an underlying meaning of causing motion:
X causes Y to move z (Z = path or location)
X Y z
Sally set the plates on the table.
Julie hit the ball against the wall.
Tom chased the cat from the plants, r
The meaning of this verb-argument construction can apply to verbs that don’t ordinarily enter
this construction, an intransitive verb, for example, in which case a new meaning is created.
Sally sneezed the napkin across the table.
Fillmore’s approach to distinguishing verb meanings shows one application of the
notion of semantic features and argument structure of verbs that we have been discussing.
Beginning with the following examples, Fillmore (1968) proceeds to elaborate the semantic
distinctions that must be captured in the lexical entries of the verbs touch, strike, and break·.
1.	Peter touched the window. 3. Peter broke the window.
2.	Peter struck the window.
46
The Grammar Book
Fillmore points out that break in 3 is different from touch in 1 and strike in 2, in that 3 has a
related intransitive sentence that the other two verbs do not have—that is, one of the noun
arguments is optional:
4.	*The window touched.	6. The window broke.
5.	*The window struck.
In addition, the verb break seems to require that its object be rigid, while touch and strike do
not share this requirement. Consider these examples:
7.	Peter touched the dog.	9. ?Peter broke the dog.
8.	Peter struck the dog.
In 7 and 8, the dog can be a living animal, and the difference in meaning is one of relative
intensity of impact: striking denotes a stronger, sharper impact than touching. In 9, however, the
dog has to be an inanimate figure made of something breakable, such as plaster, ceramic, or glass.
Fillmore (1968) made several other useful generalizations about these verbs, but these
examples demonstrate that understanding a lexicogrammatical item entails, among other
things, knowing precisely how it differs from other similar items. This brings US to the issue
of semantic fields.
SEMANTIC FIELDS~	~_______
As we have been attempting to show, words can often be understood only in terms of their
relationship to other words. On a very simple level, when an ESL student asks what tvet means,
perhaps the best explanation would be to use its antonym, or opposite, and reply, not dry. This
explanation would not work, of course, unless the student knew the meaning of the antonym.
Another concept that is helpful in defining words in relation to other words is the
concept of a semantic field, a cluster of words that cover a particular semantic area and can
best be understood in relation to one another. Examples of semantic fields most often cited
are kinship terms and terms for colors in a language. The precise meaning of a color word
can best be understood by seeing it in relation to other words that cover the spectrum.
Even though defining colors is difficult, as there isn’t necessarily a one-to-one
correspondence between languages, they can be illustrated more easily than words in other
semantic fields. Take, for example, adjectives denoting physical attractiveness (beautiful,
lovely, pretty, attractive, good-looking, handsome, etc.), items from the same semantic field, which
therefore have some features in common. We could apply a semantic feature analysis (also
called a componential analysis) by listing the features across the horizontal axis of a grid and the
words belonging to the same semantic field along the vertical axis.
A SEMANTIC FEATURE ANALYSIS
	Making a pleasant impression on the senses	Close to an ideal	Suggesting relative smallness	Suggesting feminity or delicacy	Arousing interest
beautiful	X	X			
pretty	X		X	X	
attractive	X				X
Adapted from Gairns and Redman (1986)
Chapter 3: Lexicogrammar
47
Even this abbreviated analysis of the semantic features shows that we can to some extent
become more precise about the meaning of a word. These three words—beautiful, pretty,
attractive—are not synonyms. Such an analysis, modified for the sake of comprehension,
may assist ESL/EFL students who ask about the differences among words in a semantic
field. Still, even this level of precision is not very satisfying. While such an analysis can assist
us in being able to detect differences among these items, it should also be clear that this
type of discrete feature analysis can also be misleading. For one thing, we may not agree
on the exact defining features of a word. For another, it may be impossible to pin down all
the semantic nuances of a word in sufficient detail. Leech (1981) suggests that most words
have “fuzzy” meanings.
______________________________________________________
PROTOTYPICALITY ______________________________________________________
To explore further the fuzziness of meaning, consider the notion of prototypicality. It is well
known that mammals have certain characteristics: They have fur or hair, they give birth to live
offspring, and they nurse their young. And yet, it is also well known that certain animals are
classified as mammals even though they do not meet all the criteria (e.g., a platypus lays eggs
but is considered a mammal). As Givón (1993) reminds US, membership in natural categories
is not determined by rigid adherence to all criteria. Rather, membership is determined by
a cluster of criteria. Further, some of these criteria are more central than others. Thus, we
might say that a bear is a more prototypical mammal than a platypus.
To take a linguistic example, there are many verbs of speaking: say, tell, speak, talk,
mention, remark, comment, shout, whisper, and so on. Were we to perform a componential
analysis of these verbs and others in their semantic class, we would find that some of the
features are true of some of the verbs but not true of others. We saw this earlier with
adjectives of physical attractiveness. We would also see, however, that some of the features
are more central for membership in the class than others. For instance, that they all have to
do with oracy is central, while the manner in which the oracy is performed is only encoded
in two of the verbs and is therefore less central. If someone were to ask US to give an example
of a prototypic verb of speech, we would most likely choose one of the first four on the
list. We revisit the concept of prototypicality later in this book. As Lewis (1997) reminds
us, considerations of prototypicality are very important when thinking of examples to give
ESL/EFL students of a certain lexicogrammatical phenomenon. Indeed, Ellis and Larsen-
Freeman (2009) discuss how frequently-occurring, semantically-prototypical verbs may aid
second language learners in acquiring the semantics of English verb-argument constructions.
The Use of Lexicogrammatical Items
You may be asking yourself why we have not yet mentioned true synonymy—two words
with the same meaning. The reason is simple. Rarely will two linguistic forms mean exactly
the same thing, for if they did, there would be little reason to have them both in the
language. Thus, at best we can talk about partial synonymy. We do not mean to dismiss
the use of synonyms, for giving a partial synonym is often the most efficient way of giving
students the meaning of a particular word. It is important, though, to remain cognizant
of the differences between words and, in the case of more intermediate and advanced
students, to highlight the semantic differences. It is also true that what distinguishes words
is not always their semantic differences; words can differ because of their use: different
48
The Grammar Book
dialects (e.g., British English lorry versus North American English truck)·, different registers
(e.g., friend versus buddy)·, or they are age-graded, meaning that a certain age group will use
them (e.g., adolescents using awesome as an adjective of approval); or they are no longer
fashionable (e.g., adolescents today would not accept groovy as a substitute for awesome).
Whatever one learns about the meaning and formal requirements of a lexical item, one
cannot ignore the context in which it is used. For example, Carter and McCarthy (1988) discuss
the example of the word stocking, which takes on quite a different meaning when it refers to
silk or nylon stockings as opposed to Christmas stockings. The former type of stockings are
worn by women, but the latter type are worn by no one. They are simply stocking-shaped
containers intended for small Christmas gifts or simply Christmas decorations attached to a
fireplace mantel (or a wall or door).
______________________________________________________________________
REGISTER	___________________________________________________________.
Even with lexicogrammatical items that seem to mean the same thing, there may be register
differences. For instance, there are four common quotative verbs (say, be like, go, be all), used
especially in young English speakers’ speech:
"But now he's like,'OK, we've got to make this happen.'"
Barbieri (2005) examined their use in four different registers: casual conversation, university
service encounters and workplace conversation, university students’ study groups, and academic
office hour consultations. She found that be like and go occur in all four registers, while be all is
less common. In addition, the last three quotatives, the newer ones, all occur more frequently
with the present tense, while the traditional quotative, say, takes the past tense more frequently.
Her analyses of the patterns of use of the quotatives support the hypothesis that be like is
expanding in American English. We will have more to say about quotatives in Chapter 3 3 on
reported speech and writing.
__________________________________________________________________
_________
DISCOURSE COmMmÊS
We mentioned earlier the effect of cultural differences with regard to the connotation of
words. Other linguistic differences have been viewed from a cultural perspective as well. For
example, Atkinson and Ramanathan (1995) showed the disadvantage that nonnative speakers
of English experience when their ESL writing instructors operate with a different set of
cultural norms about what academic writing is than do instructors of writing classes for native
speakers.
Other differences accompany divergent social practices or discourses (Gee, 1990). Within
each discourse community, certain norms exist concerning what constitutes appropriate ways
of speaking or writing. For example, an educational administrator might say,
Prior to the administration of the assessment instrument, a skills-level analysis must
be conducted to ascertain the critical level of preparedness of the target population.
whereas a classroom teacher might say,
Before we give the test, we'd better find out if these particular students are ready for it.
So, assessment instruments are administered and tests are given. The administrator’s statement
might seem wordy and obscure compared with the teacher’s simple and direct way of
saying the same thing. However, it is important to remember that language does not
serve only to express propositional meaning. A particular discourse functions as “a sort of
‘identity kit’, which comes complete with [ways] to act, talk, and often write, so as to take
Chapter 3: Lexicogrammar
49
on a particular social role that others will recognize” (Gee, 1990, p. 42). Clearly, knowing
a language is not simply knowing a phrase book.
It would seem that when language is formulaic, lexical items and conventions of use (i.e.,
collocations and lexical phrases) appear to be extremely important, whereas when language
is more original and less formulaic, where precision and disambiguation are crucial, then the
grammatical end of the continuum is more important than the lexical. As Nyyssõnen (1995)
notes, it follows that if the learner could make appropriate and effective use of the collocations
and lexical phrases that are routinely employed by proficient speakers in large quantities,
and if the learner could also make use of grammar to adapt the patterns as necessary and to
achieve contextual fit, his or her language acquisition process would be well served.
Conclusion
The information that learners of English must master regarding the lexicogrammar is extensive.
It is not sufficient simply to know many lexical items and their general meanings. For each item,
speakers must master a network of related information about its form, meaning, and use if they
wish to use the item accurately, meaningfully, and appropriately. Also, clearly, we can no longer
think of the lexicon as a list of words having specified properties subject to combinatory rules.
We must think of the lexicogrammar as being composed of multiword units with semantic and
pragmatic features as well.
Despite the complexity of what we have presented here, we must introduce yet another
level of difficulty. We have treated the lexicon as a static inventory. In fact, lexicogrammar
is anything but static. It has been estimated that English increases by about 20,000 words
annually. At a more local level, it has also been argued that many of the features and constraints
that we have treated here as part of a lexicogrammatical item, are in fact, mutable in dynamic
discourse. For example, Thompson and Hopper (1997) have asserted that argument structure
isn’t a fixed property of predicates in the mental lexicon; rather, it is fluid and adaptable to
conversational goals. Language can be described both as a process and a product. While we
deal more with language as product in this book, we acknowledge that both perspectives are
necessary, and so we return to consider the dynamism of language at several points later on.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form. When teaching vocabulary, it is good not just to teach words, but to teach clusters
of factors that will help students to use lexicogrammatical items correctly. For example,
use a/an when introducing countable nouns (e.g., a theory); use to when introducing
verbs (e.g., to arrive); show that verbs are transitive by adding an indefinite object such as
something (topropose something); an4,use to be when introducing adjectives (e.g., to be naive).
Also indicate any prepositions needed, where relevant (e.g., to be interested in something).
2.	Form. Recommend to students that they use good learners’ dictionaries to find
grammatical information themselves. In addition, with dictionary activities you can ask
students to find collocations either from learners’ dictionaries or online sources.
a.	Find two adjectives that can go before the noun tone.
b.	What two prepositions can be used after the noun rejection?
c.	Is arouse a transitive or intransitive verb? Find three nouns that go before or after the
verb arouse.
50
The Grammar Book
3.	Form. Nation (1990, p. 151) suggests an inductive method to draw students’ attention to
the form of words, using exercises like the following:
a.	Look at the word insanity in this sentence. What part of speech is it? Is it countable
or uncountable? How do you know this?
He saw the beginning of insanity in her.
b.	Look at inhabit in this sentence. What part of speech is it followed by?
Woodpeckers inhabit hollow trees.
4.	Form. Low-intermediate ESL/EFL students often confuse the related forms of a word.
If a new item has related forms as other parts of speech, these other parts should also be
introduced with example sentences that make the learner actively discriminate among
them. For example:
a theory	to theorize	to be theoretical
Cynthia is very (1)about everything. She has just developed a new_________
(2). She (3)that the less one works, the more one will succeed at_________	_________
certain tasks.
5.	Form. Norbert Schmitt (in Nation, 1994, p.148) suggests a game of collocation bingo, in
which the teacher reads out a list of words, and students have bingo cards containing words
that collocate with the teacher’s words. Students write the word they hear in the same square
as a word on their card that they think collocates with it. The normal game of bingo proceeds.
6.	Meaning. To encourage students to use productive word-formation processes that have
been introduced to them, contextualized definition exercises such as the following can
be useful:
a.	A_________is a machine that detects smoke in a home, school, or office building
and sounds an alarm.
b.	Someone who believes in and follows the ideas of Marx is called a._________
c.	A person who employs others is an (1); a person who is employed by__________
someone else is an (2)._________
7.	Meaning. Intermediate to advanced-level students often confuse related derivations that
have the same root and are the same part of speech, such as the following adjectives:
various	discriminating	identifying	fortunate
varied	discriminatory	identifiable	fortuitous
Exercises that teach students to distinguish such forms provide contexts that call for one
or the other, but not both, such as the forms discriminating or discriminatory:
a.	The minority students complained because they felt some of the school regulations
were._________
b.	I knew that I could trust his judgment; he has_________taste in such matters.
Students should understand why the words have the same root and part of speech (i.e.,
what the similarity in meaning is), yet why the words are different (i.e., what the crucial
distinction is).
8.	Use. As a consciousness-raising activity, have your students locate on the Internet or
from material in other courses several texts, two to three paragraphs in length, that
all deal with the same topic in a particular discipline. Guide students in conducting a
search for lexicogrammatical patterns that appear to be norms of the particular discourse
community from which the texts come.
Chapter 3: Lexicogrammar
51
9.	Use. Teach students how to create a concordance from a linguistic corpus (e.g., Reppen,
2010). With a concordance, students will be able to discover for themselves contexts in
which target words are used.
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1. Provide an original sentence or two illustrating each of the following terms. Underline
the pertinent word(s) or word parts in your examples.
a. verbs requiring a locative prepositional phrase	j.	transitive verb k.	verb with three arguments
b. determiner requiring an uncountable noun	I. irregular plural
c. conversion	m.	lexical phrase n.	durativeverb
d. change-pf-state verb	o. verb-direct object collocation
e.	compound word f.	derivational affix	p.	co-occurrence with a preposition q.	quotative verb
g.	inflectional affix h.	transitive adjective	r. polysemy
i. semantic field
2.	Why are the following sentences ungrammatical?
a.	"The burglar lurked.
b.	Tt fascinated the alarm clock.
c.	T don’t like these book.
d.	"There have to be some breaksthrough soon.
e.	"Anyone who is a good friend must be trustful.
f.	"My favoritism is for coffee, but I also drink tea.
Test your ability to apply what you know.
3.	If your students produce the following sentences, what norms of Standard English
have they not followed?
a.	"I got many informations from the book.
b.	"In my point of view, I think that's a bad idea.
c.	?They are remodeling the streets.
d.	"People living in the United States use crackerfires on the Fourth of July.
e.	"Photography has passionated me since I was a child.
f.	"Solutions to reduce birth rates, especially within developing countries, need to
be met.
g.	"Mr. Wilson was not aware to his daughter’s problems.
h.	?By pure fortune, we met on the train.
52
The Grammar Book
4.	How would you answer an ESL/EFL student who asks you what the differences are
among the following verbs: see, look, watch, stare, peer, and glance?
5.	How would you answer an ESL/EFL student who asks you why pretty, which has to
do with beauty, is used with soon, in the phrase pretty soon.
k. How would you answer an ESL/EFL student who asked you what the difference is
between owing to and due to?
7.	To make the point that compounds are not just two words added together, but rather
that fusing two words often creates a new meaning, Jullian (2002) offers the following
examples where one of the two words is board. Paraphrase each example to show
how the interaction with board differs.
keyboard	ironing board
whiteboard	snowboard
chessboard	clipboard
Bibliography
REFERENCES	~	______________
Atkinson, D., & Ramanthan, V. (1995). Cultures of writing; An ethnographic comparison of LI and L2
university writing/language programs. TESOL Quarterly, 29(3), 539-566.
Barbieri, F. (2005). Quotative use in American English. Journal of English Linguistics, 33(3), 222-256.
Bolinger, D. (1976). Meaning and memory. Forum Linguisticum, 1, 1-14.
Bybee, J. (2006). From usage to grammar: The mind’s response to repetition. Language, 82(4), 711-733.
Carter, R., & McCarthy, M. (1988). Vocabulary and language teaching. London, England: Longman.
Ellis, N. c., & Larsen-Freeman, D. (2009). Constructing a second language: Analyses and computational
simulations of the emergence of linguistic constructions from usage. Language Learning, 59(Suppl. 1), 93-128.
Eskildsen, ร. (2012). L2 negation constructions at work. Language Learning, 62(2), 335-372.
Fillmore, c. J. (1968). Lexical entries for verbs. Foundations of Language, 4, 373-393.
Fillmore, c. J. (1995, March). Something to look at while listening to discourse features of dictionary definitions.
Paper presented at the International Linguistic Association Conference 40.
Fillmore, c. J., Kay, R, & O’Connor, M. c. (1988). Regularity and idiomaticity in grammatical
constructions: The case oilet alone. Language, 64(3), 501-538.
Francis, G. (1996, August). Grammar and lexical patterning. Paper presented at the 11th World Congress of
Applied Linguistics: Perspectives on Lexical Acquisition in a Second Language, Jyvãskylâ, Finland.
Gairns, R., & Redman, ร. (1986). Workingwith words. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Gee., J. (1990). Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourse. Bristol, PA: Falmer Press.
Givón, T. (1993). English grammar: A function-based introduction. Amsterdam, Netherlands/Philadelphia, PA:
John Benjamins.
Goldberg, A. (2006). Constructions at work. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion in English. London, England: Longman.
Halliday, M. A. K., & Matthiessen, C.M. I. M. (2014). Halliday's introduction to functional grammar (4 th ed.)
London, England/New York, NY: Routledge.
Jullian, p. (2002). Uncovering implicit information in original compounds. ELTJ, 56(4), 359-367.
Kellerman, E. (1979). Transfer and non-transfer: Where are we now? Studies in Second Language Acquisition,
2, 37-57.
Chapter 3: Lexicogrammar
53
Kramarae, c., & Treichler, p. (1985). A feminist dictionary. London, England: Pandora Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Langacker, R. พ. (1987). Theoretical prerequisites: Foundations of cognitive grammar (Vol. 1). Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Langacker, R. พ. (1991). Descriptive application: Foundations of cognitive grammar (Vol. 2). Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Leech, G. (1981). Semantics (2nd ed.). Harmandsworth, England: Penguin.
Lewis, M. (1997). Implementing the lexical approach. Hove, England: Language Teaching Publications.
Liu, D. (2008). Intransitive or object deleting? Classifying English verbs used without an object .Journal of
English Linguistics, 56(4), 289-313.
Macqueen, ร. (2012). The emergence of patterns in second-language writing. Bern: Peter Lang.
Mueller, c. (2011). English learners’ knowledge of prepositions: Collocational knowledge or knowledge
based on meaning? System, 59(4), 480-490.
Nation, I. ร. p. (1990) Teaching and learning vocabulary. New York, NY: Newbury House.
Nation, I. ร. p. (Ed.). (1994). New ways in teaching vocabulary. Alexandria, VA: TESOL.
Nattinger, J., & DeCarrico, J. (1992). Lexical phrases and language teaching. Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press.
Negueruela, E., Lantolf, J., Rehn Jordan, ร., & Gelabert, J. (2004). The “private function” of gesture in
second language speaking activity: A study of motion verbs and gesturing in English and Spanish.
International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 14(f), 113-147.
Nyyssõnen, H. (1995). Grammar and lexis in communicative competence. In G. Cook & B. Seidlhofer
(Eds.), Principle and practice in applied linguistics: Studies in honour ofH. G. Widdowson (pp. 159-170).
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Pawley, A., & Syder, E (1983). Two puzzles for linguistic theory: Nativelike selection and nativelike fluency.
In J. Richards & R. Schmidt (Eds.), Language and Communication (pp. 191-226). London, England: Longman.
Reppen, R. (2010). Using corpora in the language classroom,. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Ruhl, c. (1989). On monosemy. A study in linguistic semantics Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Schmid, H. (2001). Presupposition can be a bluff: How abstract nouns can be used as presupposition
triggers. Journal of Pragmatics, 55(10), 1529-1552.
Schmitt, N., & Zimmerman, c. (2002). Derivative word forms: What do learners know? TESOL Quarterly,
56(2), 145-171.
Simpson-Vlach, R., & Ellis, N. c. (2010). An academic formulas list. New methods in phraseology research.
Applied Linguistics, 51(4), 487-512.
Sinclair, J. (1991). Corpus concordance collocation. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Sinclair, J., & Fox, G. (1990). Collins COBUILD English grammar. London, England: Collins.
Slobin, D. (1996). From “thought and language” to “thinking for speaking.” In ร. Gumperz & ร. Levinson
(Eds.), Rethinking linguistic relativity (pp. 70-96). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Taylor, J. R. (2002). Cognitive grammar. Oxford, England Oxford University Press.
Thompson, ร., & Hopper, p. (1997, May). “Emergent grammar” and argument structure: Evidence from
conversation. Presentation^ UCLA, Los Angeles, CA.
Vendler, z. (1967). Verbs and times. Linguisticsdn philosophy (pp. 97-121). Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Wierzbicka, A. (1986). Precision in vagueness: The semantics of English approximatives. Journal of
Pragmatics, 10, 597-614.
Wierzbicka, A. (1988). The semantics of grammar. Amsterdam, Netherlands/Philadelphia, PA:
John Benjamins.
Wong Fillmore, L. (1976). The second time around: Cognitive and social strategies in second language acquisition
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
54
The Grammar Book
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
For a thorough analysis of what it takes to know a lexicogrammatical item, see:
Fillmore, c. J., Kay, p., & O’Connor, M. c. (1988). Regularity and idiomaticity in grammatical
constructions: The case of let alone. Language, 64(3), 501-538.
For exercises to work with English affixes, see:
Farid, A. (1985). A vocabulary workbook: Prefixes, roots, and suffixes for ESL students. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
For research on affixation, consult:
Ryder, M. (1999). Bankers and blue-chippers: An account of -er formations in present-day English. English
Language and Linguistics, 5(2), 269-297.
For a list of verbs and adjectives followed by particular prepositions, consult:
Clark, R., Moran, p., & Burrows, A. (2007). The ESL miscellany (4th ed.). Brattleboro, VT: Pro Lingua
Associates.
For a list and treatment of prepositional clusters, see:
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
For many examples of compounding patterns, see:
Bolinger, D. (1975). Aspects of language (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
For research on binominals, see:
Benor, ร., & Levy, R. (2006). The chicken or the egg? A probabilistic analysis of English binominals.
Language, 82(2)9 233-278.
For a list of lexical phrases, see:
Keller, R. (1979). Gambits: Conversational strategy signals. Jottrnal of Pragmatics, 5, 219-237.
Martinez, R., & Schmitt, N. (2012). A phrasal expressions list. Applied Linguistics9 55(3), 299-320.
For an example of a pedagogical approach in which words are grouped into semantic sets (groups of related
words), take a look at:
Seal, B. (1990). American English vocabulary builder (Vols. 1-2). New York, NY: Longman.
For pedagogical issues dealing with the lexicon, see:
Carter, R., & M. McCarthy (Eds.). (1988). Vocabulary and language teaching. London, England: Longman.
Coady, J., & Huckin, T. (Eds.). (1997). Second language vocabulary acquisition: A rationale for pedagogy.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Hatch, E., & Brown, c. (1995). Vocabulary, semantics, and language education. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Lewis, M. (1993). The lexical approach. Hove, England: Language Teaching Publications.
Lewis, M. (1997). Implementing the lexical approach. Hove, England: Language Teaching Publications.
Lewis, M. (2000). Teaching collocations. Further developments in the lexical approach. Boston, MA: Cengage
Learning.
McCarthy, M., O’Keeffe, A., & Walsh, ร. (2010). Vocabulary matrix: Understanding, learning, and teaching.
Boston, MA: Cengage Learning.
Nation, I. ร. p. (2001). Learning vocabulary in another language. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Nation, I. ร. p. (2009). Teaching vocabulary: Strategies and techniques. Boston, MA: Cengage Learning.
Walker, B. (2012). English vocabulary for academic success. Practicing academic English words and grammar.
Publisher: Author.
Willis, D. (2003). Rules, patterns, and words: Grammar and lexis in English language teaching. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Chapter 3: Lexicogrammar
55
For online searchable English corpora, see:
The British National Corpus, version 3 (BNC XML Edition). (2007). Distributed by Oxford University
Computing Services on behalf of the BNC Consortium. Retrieved from http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/
Davies, M. (2008). The corpus of contemporary American English (COCA): 425 million words, 1990-present.
Retrieved from http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/
Michigan Corpus of Upper-Level Student Papers. (2009). Ann Arbor, MI: The Regents of the University of
Michigan. Retrieved from http://micusp.elicorpora.info/
Simpson, R. c., Briggs, ร. L-, Ovens, J., & Swales, J. M. (2002). The Michigan corpus of academic spoken
English. Retrieved from httpy/quod.lib.umich.edu/m/micase/
For academic word and phrase lists and working with them, see:
Cobb, T. (2006). Web VP Classic (Version 2.7) [Software]. Available from http://lextutor.ca/vp/eng/
Cobb, T. (2007). Web VP BNL (Version 2.3) [Software]. Available from http://lextutor.ca/vp/bnl/
Coxhead, A. (2000). Academic word list. Retrieved from http://www.victoria.ac.nz/lals/resources/
academicwordlist/
Hancioglu, N., Neufeld, ร., & Eldridge, J. (2008). Through the looking glass and into the land of
lexicogrammar. ESP, 27(4), 459-479.
Simpson-Vlach, R., & Ellis, N. c. (2010). An academic formulas list. New methods in phraseology research.
Applied Linguistics, 31(4), 487-512.
Endnotes
1.	The only way that English nouns are morphologically irregular is with respect to plural formation. Only
countable nouns, of course, would exhibit such irregularity.
2.	Multiple prefixes are unusual but not impossible, to wit: antidisestablishmentarianism. Note that this
word has two prefixes, but four suffixes.
3.	Interestingly, Langacker (ใ 991) notes that there is a crosslingual asymmetrical pattern whereby it is
normal in languages for another part of speech to be nominalized—that is, made into a noun—without
any apparent change in meaning, whereas when a noun is converted into a verb, some new meaning
has been added. As we have indicated previously, the new meaning might be "add noun" (to salt),
"remove noun" (to weed), "use noun as an instrument" (to g/ue), "turn into noun" (to//quefy), and so on.
4.	It should be noted as a counterpoint that the lexicographer, Charles Ruhl (1989), argues that virtually
all polysemy is an illusion. He means that if you get abstract enough, you can find a single "general"
meaning for each word, which holds regardless of context. We will return to this notion when we
consider prepositions, and will thus explore it more fully in Chapter 21.
5.	And even when languages don't differ in the meaning extensions, learners are uncertain as to whether
or not they can use the English lexical item in the same way. For instance, Kellerman (ใ 979) found that
although Dutch and English use the verb "to break" (breken in Dutch) เท a similar manner, Dutch learners
of English accepted the possibility of using English break literally (He broke his leg), but not figuratively
(He broke the record), even though both meanings were acceptable in Dutch and English.
56
The Grammar Book
H A p T E R 1B
Copular Verbs and
Subject-Verb
Agreement
Introduction
In Chapter 2, we introduced a category of verbs called linking verbs. They are often referred
to as copular verbs, verbs that link the subject with the predicate. They connect the subject of
a sentence to additional information concerning the subject, such as the subject’ร identity and
qualities.
Marion is a librarian.
She is helpful.
As may be evident from our examples, the most common linking verb is the copula to be (is
being one form of the be verb). Many languages do not have an equivalent verb. Chinese,
for example, doesn’t use a be verb in sentences with adjectives such as helpful, our second
example, especially when the sentence contains an auxiliary verb, such as will (Chan, 2010,
2014). In other words, a perfectly acceptable Chinese sentence in its English translation
is She will very helpful. Then, too, African-American Vernacular English, Hebrew, Arabic,
and Russian, do not use a copula before adjectives, e.g., He crazy.
Other typical problems for Russian learners are the substitution of the auxiliary verb do
for be, e.g., *Does Prague a nice city? and the overuse of be in sentences with other main verbs,
e.g., *He is like sport. (บท!น & Hatipoglu, 2012). Similarly, Japanese learners omit the copula in
English, e.g., *My father a teacher and overuse it elsewhere, e.g., *He is like music (lode, 2003).
Tode observes that such overuse errors may be due to students treating the frequent sequence
of pronoun + is as a formula. In other words, students are not thinking in terms of supplying
a copula verb; they are simply using pronoun + is as a clause-initial unit.
Another feature of the English verb to be is that its five forms make it the most irregular
verb in English. For students who speak languages without a copular verb, learning to use one
then will be a challenge, especially for students at the beginning proficiency level.
A far more persistent challenge for ESL/EFL students is remembering to put
the -s on the end of other present tense verbs when the subject is the third person singular
(e.g., He walks to school.). Perhaps for a combination of reasons—its relative infrequency, as
compared with other forms of verbs, its lack of salience (the final ร, in all its forms, is hard
to detect in speech), and the fact that it possesses limited semantic content—all conspire
to make the addition of -r a notorious problem long after students have gone beyond the
beginning level.
In this chapter, we will examine more closely the be verb and other copular verbs.
Then, we will examine the forms of other verbs, especially focusing on the third person
singular present tense. We will discuss the rule of subject-verb agreement in English,
whereby the verb must agree in number and person with the subject. One would think
that making the verb form agree with the subject would be especially easy in English,
as there are relatively few verb forms; however, as we shall see, subject-verb agreement
presents some difficulty even for native speakers of English. One reason for this is that the
prescriptive rules that learners are given often clash with actual usage. Thus, even though
subject-verb agreement appears to be a rule about form, the long-term learning challenge
is learning when to apply it.
Copular Verbs
There are at least four very good reasons for making a distinction between copular verbs
(especially the be verb) and other verbs. First of all, be, which is the most frequent verb in
English, has more distinct forms with respect to person, number, and tense than any other
verb in English. The traditional paradigm for be compared with that for a lexical verb such as
walk makes this clear:
COPULA BE
Present Tense			Past Tense	
Person	Singular	Plural	Singular	Plural
1st	I am	we are	I was	we were
2nd	you are	you are	you were	you were
3rd	he/she/it is	they are	he/she/it was	they were
VERB WALK
Present Tense			Past Tense	
Person	Singular	Plural	Singular	Plural
1st	1 walk	we walk	1 walked	we walked
2nd	you walk	you walk	you walked	you walked
3rd	he/she/it walks	they walk	he/she/it walked	they walked
Thus, a verb like walk has two present-tense forms and one past-tense form:
Present:	walks—third person singular
walk—all other persons and numbers
Past:	walked—all persons and numbers
The verb be, on the other hand, has three distinct present-tense and two past-tense forms to
distinguish person and number (singular or plural). Some of the forms are more restricted in
their range than others, and this is represented in the following diagrams:
58
The Grammar Book
Second, the copula be may be followed by adjective phrases, a defining characteristic
that it shares with many other copular verbs.1 Although be is the most frequent and the
semantically most neutral copula, there are three other types of copular verbs:
1. perception copulas (mental or sensory):
They
appear
seem
feel
look
smell
sound
taste
funny (to me).
2. state copulas (tend to take participial adjectives):2
They
lie
remain
rest
stand
protected.
3. change-of-state copulas (not all of these copulas collocate with all of these adjectives):3
They
become	
come fall	tall
get	true
go	ill
grow	wild
run turn	
The copula be can be followed not only by adjective phrases, but also by noun phrases and
adverbial phrases4 (i.e.j it is the grammatically most flexible copular verb):
Naomi is
attractive
an actor
เท New York
Most of the other copular verbs can be followed only by adjective phrases except for the
change-of-state copulas become5 and turn,6 which can be followed by noun phrases as well as
adjective phrases:	an actor 1
Naomi became	attractive 1
She turned
traitor
wild
Chapter 4: Copular Verbs and Subject-Verb Agreement
59
Hal is an engineer.
Hal an engineer?
Hal lisln't a teacher.
The third reason that copula be is so different is due to its syntactic behavior. It
behaves like an auxiliary verb with regard to negation (see Chapter 10), question formation
(see Chapter 11), and other constructions. What this means is the copula is very different
from other verbs like walk, which require the addition of a do auxiliary to form questions
and negatives if no other auxiliary verb is present.
Hal walkQ to work.
Does Hal walk to work?
Hal does n't walk home.
Other copular verbs take a do auxiliary in questions and negatives, too:
Did he get taller?
I don't feel well.
Failure to recognize the special status of the be copula in the formation of questions and
negative sentences leads learners to make questions and sentences such as the following:
*Do they be happy? (for "Are they happy?")
*We don't be teachers, (for "We aren't teachers.")
Finally, as we have seen, the copula be does not occur in all languages, but all languages
have verbs. Especially in the present tense, many languages have nothing equivalent to
the copula be; speakers of such languages simply express the literal equivalent of sentences
in their LI like the three below, and this pattern readily transfers to English during their
initial learning stage:
*Hal engineer. *Hal in next room.
*Hal tall.
In sum, a verb is copular if it specifically predicates something about the subject of the
verb. However, we agree with Langacker (1991) that be is not merely a semantically empty
linking verb, as some linguists have suggested. For Langacker, be is a true verb marking a
stative relation (p. 65).
Subject-Verb Agreement
FORM ■ ''
Third Person Singular Present
Standard grammatical treatments state that for verbs other than be, number agreement
between the subject and verb (sometimes referred to as subject-verb concord) is a factor only in
the present tense, where third person singular forms are explicitly inflected and other forms
are not:	'
Number		
Person	Singular	Plural
1st	J speak French.	We speak French.
2nd	You speak French.	You speak French.
3rd	He/she/it (the parrot) speaks French.	They speak French.
60
The Grammar Book
According to the rule of subject-verb agreement, then, the subject and verb number
choice will agree: In the present tense, we use the third person singular inflection (ร or the
be form is) if the subject refers to one entity, whether it is a singular proper name, a singular
common noun, a non-count noun, or a third person singular pronoun. Elsewhere—for nouns
or pronouns referring to more than one entity or for first or second person pronouns referring
to one entity7—no inflection is used in the present tense:
Third person singular inflection on verb	No inflection on verb
Leon walkQ to school.	The Smiths walk to church.
The bus stopJH here.	These books contain good information. We
This water tasteQ funny.	You want an apple. They .
She wantQ an apple.	„ want an apple. You
To this formulation, we should add that if there is an inflectable, tense-bearing auxiliary
verb such as be or have, it is the auxiliary verb that takes the third person singular inflection
(not the main verb):
Leon is walking to school.
This water has boiled for ใ 0 minutes.
Some Typical Learner Productions
As we mentioned earlier, ESL/EFL learners tend to simplify and leave off altogether the
third person singular inflection:
*Sharon live in Seattle.	*Harry say he will come.
Occasionally, however, some learners will overgeneralize the inflection and apply it to
uninflected forms, such as modal auxiliaries, or to verbs following modals (see Chapter 8):
*Jack cans dance disco.
*Jack can dances disco.
They also may overuse it as an agreement marker with subjects of inappropriate person and/
or number:
*1
*They hangs out at the mall on the weekends.
*You
Yet another reason why some learners overuse this form is that they interpret the -y ending as
a plural marker on the verb and use in agreement with plural subjects:
*They
*The boys
goes to the movies there.
Finally, it has also been observed that some Spanish speakers tend to initially overuse the
-s inflection with the second person singular pronoun because a similar form is used in their
language when the subject noun reflects this person:
Spanish: Tú hablalsl inglês. English: *You speaklsl English.
Chapter 4: Copular Verbs and Subject-Verb Agreement
61
By far, the most common error in subject-verb agreement is the first one we mentioned,
that of the learner simply omitting the inflection for third person singular. Research in
both language typology and second language acquisition can help US understand why
this is so.
The languages of the world can be roughly divided into topic-prominent languages
with pragmatic word order (e.g., Chinese, Japanese, and Korean) and subject-prominent
languages with grammatical word order (e.g., English, Spanish, and Arabic); the former
never mark subject-verb agreement, whereas the latter typically do. Thus, it seems
plausible that learners of English with a topic-prominent first language would find it
more difficult to master subject-verb agreement than learners whose native language
is subject-prominent like English. However, research in second language acquisition
by Fuller and Gundel (1987) suggests that most learners pass through an early
topic-prominent stage regardless of their first language. In analyzing the elicited oral
narratives produced by low-intermediate learners of English, these researchers found no
significant differences between native speakers of topic-prominent languages and those
of subject-prominent languages. Speakers of both types demonstrated lack of agreement.
Language acquisition researchers (e.g., Klein & Perdue, 1997) have also reported that
untutored adult learners with many different language backgrounds often initially speak
a “basic variety” of the language that they are learning—one with no inflections, where
words occur in invariant form.
Agreement errors may be due to phonological or perceptual factors rather than
syntactic or morphological cross-linguistic differences. ESL/EFL teachers should be aware
of the fact that some learners of English fully understand the third person singular present
ending and can even produce it systematically when they write in English; however, they
omit it frequently when they are speaking. One reason for this is because the sound system
of their native language tends not to permit final /s/ sounds in particular or final consonants
in general. Speakers of French and a variety of other languages have been observed to do
this when speaking English.
Of course, other reasons for the slow and late acquisition of the third person singular
present inflection on the verb—even when there is no phonological interference from the
learner’s native language—might be its lack of perceptual saliency8 and its low frequency of
occurrence in native speaker speech (Larsen-Freeman, 1976; Goldschneider & DeKeyser,
2005). The third person singular present tense inflection tends to be omitted for these and
other reasons as well. For example, the omission of the ร is a feature of English as a lingua
franca, likely due to a regularization process (Jenkins, 2012). Also, it is the only inflection
in the present tense and has little communicative utility since the person/number is almost
always clear from the subject noun phrase, just as it is with the other persons and numbers
that do not take any inflection. Such is not the case, of course, when the subject remains the
same whether it is singular or plural. For example, with nouns of animals, such as “sheep,” the
inflection is meaningful:'
เท the spring, the sheep graze in the meadow.
In the spring, the sheep grazes in the meadow.
However, there are relatively few times when the subject is not distinguished in number.
Of course, the ร is also important in distinguishing present and past tense when they are
isomophic, as they are with verbs such as read, hit, fit, etc:
Stan reads the newspaper every day.
Stan read the newspaper every day.
62
The Grammar Book
_________________________________________________________
MEANING.........___________________________________________
Reid (1991) believes that the subject-verb agreement rule is not grounded in syntactic
automaticity, but that its use reflects a series of semantic choices and decisions made by
the speaker-writer. In other words, it is not simply a matter of agreement based on form.
There are reasons for using a singular or plural verb. Reid proposes that all English
nouns (in this case, nouns that happen to function as subjects) have a number, which
is either one or more than one. The number more than one can be encoded either lexically
(e.g., people, they) or, more typically, morphologically with the plural inflection -s' (e.g., several
boys). In some cases, lexical and morphological number can even co-occur and give new
meaning to words (e.g., peoples).
Similarly, all English verbs have a number. Except for the verb be, English verbs encode
number only in the present tense:
Present tense		
verb ending	Meaning	Exampie
-s	One	The boy runs.
-0	More than one	The boys run.
Reid further proposes that the choice of number is made separately for both the subject noun
and the verb (be or present tense lexical verbs) and that both choices contribute independently
to the speaker’s message. This perspective allows Reid to explain why the number of the subject
noun and the verb, while most often the same, do not always agree since all combinations are
possible though not equally frequent. The most frequent choices (i.e., the agreements) are the
examples in the shaded boxes numbered 1 and 4:
NOUN
SUBJECT
VERB		One	More Than One
	One	The boy	1 likes candy.	Ten dollars is not	2 a lot of money.
	More Than One	The family 3 are all here	The boys	4 like candy.
The examples in boxes 2 and 3 are unusual in that an overtly plural subject in 2 is reinterpreted
as a singular lump sum, and an overtly singular subject in 3 is reinterpreted as a plural entity.
We know this has been done by the speaker/writer because of the verb forms chosen: singular
is in 2 and plural are in 3. The choice is complex, and for Reid, it is based on the speaker's
message and communicative intent in each case.10
Examples of Reid’s (1991) semantic system are easy to understand and cause little or no
difficulty—at least not at the conceptual level. Here are ten examples where this is the case.
1.	Collective nouns (see Chapter 17), like the one in box 3 of the preceding matrix, may take
either a singular or plural verb inflection depending on the meaning.11 If the subject noun
is conceived of as one entity, the verb carries the -J inflection; if the subject is felt to be
more than one entity, the verb takes no inflection. (Note that other forms showing number
agreement (e.g., determiners or pronouns) may also change to reflect the number selected.)
Chapter 4: Copular Verbs and Subject-Verb Agreement
63
Our school team has won all its games, l- the team as a whole)
Our school team have won all their games. (= individual team members)
2.	Some common and proper nouns ending in -J, including -ics nouns and certain diseases,
are always conceived of as a single entity and take a singular verb inflection:
No news is good news.	Physics is a difficult subject.
This series is very interesting.	Wales is lovely to visit.
Measles is a contagious disease.
3.	Titles of books, plays, operas, films, and such works—even when plural in form—take
the singular verb inflection because they are conceived as a single entity:
Great Expectations was written by Dickens.
The Pirates of Penzance is my favorite operetta.
4.	Nouns occurring in sets of two take the singular when the noun pair is present but take the
plural when pair is absent—even if only one pair is being referred to:
A pair of trousers is on the sofa.	This pair of shoes needs new heels.
Todd's trousers are on the sofa.	These shoes need new heels.
5.	A number of normally takes the plural, while the number of normally takes the singular:
A number of students have dropped that course.
The number of students in this school is 2,000.
This generalization holds true most of the time because the noun number in the phrase
the number of generally modifies or implies a single entity such as a sum or a totality,
whereas the noun number in the phrase a number of normally modifies or implies more
than one entity.12
6.	Fractions and percentages take a singular verb inflection when modifying a noncount
noun and the plural verb inflection when they modify a plural noun; either the singular
or the plural verb inflection may be used when they modify a collective noun, depending
on the speaker’s meaning:
noncount: One half of the toxic waste has escaped.
Fifty percent of the toxic waste has escaped.
plural:	Two thirds of the students are satisfied with the class.
Sixty-six percent of the students are satisfied with the class.
.. ..	_ __ โ is Christian,
collective: One tenth of the population of Egypt!___ __._-___
[ are Christians.
___________.	________1..____, _____. โ is Christian.
Ten percent of the population of Egypt \	"1 . 7.
are Christians.
7.	Majority/Minority (Off3
a. The proximity principle
When majority or minority are followed by an of phrase, the proximity principle
dictates subject-verb agreement in the vast majority of cases. In other words, when
the noun in the of phrase—which will be situated nearest the verb—is singular,
singular agreement results, and when it is plural, plural agreement results:
64
The Grammar Book
Agreement
Type of Noun
Example
singular	singular	• However, the majority of policy analysis has determined salary increases have a minimum effect in retaining teachers. - Only a small minority of human communication is mediated through the words used.
plural	plural	. The minority of buyers insist on a golf-course view. • Just because a minority of drivers abuse a privilege is no reason to get rid of the privilege.
b. Collective nouns		
The situation is somewhat more complex when no o/phrase is present. An explanation
that is often put forward for subject-verb agreement treats majority and minority
as collective nouns. Either singular or plural subject-verb agreement is possible,
depending on whether the speaker/writer is viewing the majority/minority in question
as comprised of its many parts or as a single entity:
Agreement	Example
plural	Most grade-three kids say they like reading, and the vast majority think they're good at it.
singular	Among other voters, a majority thinks that climate change is caused by people.
8.	Plural unit words of distance, money, and time (like the example in box 2 of the matrix
on page 63) take the singular verb inflection when one entity is implied, but a plural
verb inflection when more than one entity is encoded in the subject:
distance: 1,000 miles is a long distance.
one	■	,	-
■money:	2 million dollars is a lot of money.
entity	7	_
[time:	5 years is a long time to spend on an M.A. thesis.
distance: 10 miles are to be added to this freeway next year.
more than	'	-
money:	2 dollars are on the table in the kitchen.
one entity	_	’	_	__
[time:	3 years (i.e., 1602,1649, and 1687) are missing from this set
of calendars for the 17th century.
9.	Arithmetical operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division) take the
singular because they are perceived as reflecting a single numerical entity on both sides
of the equation or equal sign. For example:
addition: One plus one
is
equals
two.
Chapter 4: Copular Verbs and Subject-Verb Agreement
65
10.	The quantifiers all (of), a lot of, lots of, and plenty of take singular verb agreement if the
subject head noun is noncount, but plural verb agreement if the subject head noun
is plural:
A lot of nonsense was published about that incident.
A lot of people were present when it happened.
_________________________________________________________________
USE	_____________________________________________________
So far, what we have discussed concerning the form of the subject-verb agreement rule and
the meaningful choice of which verb to use (the reason) do not sound especially difficult.
However, when it comes to use, there are complications, partly due to conflicts between
prescriptive rules and actual usage. Below we discuss five such instances.14
1.	Quantifiers
None. Rules conflict for none, and sometimes for all, each, and every. Many prescriptive
grammars state that when used as a subject, none is always singular regardless of what
follows in a prepositional phrase. The argument for this rule has been that none means not
one. However, usage surveys give us a different picture of what native speakers are doing
and thinking when they use none. When none refers to a noncount noun, the inflection is
uncontroversially singular:
None of the toxic waste has escaped.
But when none refers to a plural noun—human or nonhuman—usage seems to be more or
less equally divided between the singular and plural inflection. A check of the Corpus of
Contemporary American English (COCA) found that plural forms of the verb followed none
as often as singular forms:
None of those things are neurological.
None of the jobs have lasted for longer than 13 months.
None of the injuries was life-threatening.
None of the cases has come to trial.
Clearly, the traditional prescription that none is always singular is inadequate. Additional
research based on analysis of tokens from current spoken and written English should be carried
out to see if a more descriptively adequate rule of usage exists. In the meantime, ESL/EFL
teachers must be aware of the fact that when the subject none refers to a plural countable noun,
the plural verb inflection may well be chosen if current usage is any indication.
Although none is the most problematic quantifier with respect to subject-verb agreement,
ESL/EFL learners also experience problems with the quantifiers all, each, and every (one).
All. The prescriptive rules for subject-verb agreement with all are as follows: If the noun that
all modifies is a noncouilt subject, then subject-verb agreement is singular:
All (of) (the) water is polluted.
If all modifies a countable plural subject noun, subject-verb agreement is plural:
All (of) (the) students have arrived.
A problem arises, however, when all is used with a collective noun subject.Theoretically, one
should be able to use either singular or plural subject-verb agreement in such cases. We tested
such an item with 40 native speakers of English (graduate students and professors), and the
results seem to support this theoretical duality:
All of my family___________________________________present.
is—55%; are—43%; no response—2%
66
The Grammar Book
Many style books, however, admonish US not to use the preposition of after the quantifier all
in our writing. We thus administered a similar item, minus the of to the same group of people
a week later. The results were as follows:
All my family_______________________________present.
is—68%; are—26%; used both—6%
Thus the presence or absence of the prepositional phrase with of seems to have an effect on
subject-verb agreement, since in the item without of, our consultants favored singular agreement
to a noticeably greater degree. There are clearly other factors at play though (see Peterson, 1990).
Each or Every (One). When the subject quantifier is each or every (one), the rules are more
straightforward. When the quantified subject noun is singular, there is no problem: the
subject-verb agreement is always singular:
Each
Every
Each and every
student has a textbook.
However, when the quantified noun refers to a definite plural set, there can be problems since
the quantifiers are grammatically singular, yet the set that they are modifying is notionally plural:
Each of his examples \ were 1 out of context.
Every one of these athletes 1 r the mile in four minutes.
The traditional prescriptive rule maintains that singular subject-verb agreement applies in
such cases because each and every (one) are functioning as grammatically singular subjects. In
these cases, native speaker preference appears to closely mirror the prescriptive rule, since the
same 40 consultants that reported divided usage for all were in agreement (93 percent or more)
that the verbs in the above two sentences should be was and runs. A search of COCA also shows
a preference for singular verbs with each and every:
Each of you is questioned privately.
"Every one of US is a hero in waiting," says author Allison.
However, there were some instances of plural verbs, although they were far less frequent:
...each of these were performed six times.
...and every one of US were happy to see him again.
2.	Clausal and phrasal subjects
Traditional grammars tell US that when a clause functions as a subject, the subject-verb
agreement is singular—regardless of any plural noun phrases that occur as part of the subject
clause or the verb phrase. For example:
That the children want friends doesn't surprise me.
What they want is revolutions everywhere.
This rule also extends to phrasal subjects that are gerunds or infinitives because they
also take singular verb agreement; however, they seem to cause fewer learning problems
than clausal subjects:
Reading books is my hobby.
To err is human.
What we find, in fact, is that this rule is applied most of the time, but not always. A search
of the MICASE corpus (Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English) turned up several
examples where the main verb was in the plural, presumably due to the plural noun that
followed it:
Cha pter 4: Copular Verbs and Subject-Verb Agreement
67
What we see are interpreted in gendered terms.
What we see are populations that fluctuate.
It seems that especially in spoken discourse, where speakers have to contend with time and
processing constraints, this rule of subject-verb agreement is not always strictly adhered to.
3.	Correlatives: The proximity principle
For the correlatives either... or and neither... nor, traditional grammarians argue for a proximity
rule; that is, subject-verb agreement should occur with the subject noun nearest to the verb:
Either my sister or my brothers are going to do it.
Either my brothers or my sister is going do it.
Neither the books nor the movie was helpful.
Neither the movie nor the books were helpful.
Survey data suggest that speakers do seem to follow the proximity principle, although not
uniformly, especially in the case of neither...nor·.
Either your eyesight or your brakes_____________________at fault.
was—31%; were—69% (van Shaik, 1976)
Either the professor or her assistants__________________________explain every lesson
has to—33%; have to—67% (Farhady, 1977)
Neither the students nor the teacher____________________that textbook.
likes—49%; like—51 % (van Shaik, 1976)
Examples from COCA generally support these questionnaire findings:
The committee found no evidence that either the book or the negotiations were mentioned
at the meeting...
...neither the appointment nor the hearings were about race.
Personal pronouns pose special problems when used with full correlatives, where the
rule of proximity would have US produce either you or I am, neither you nor he is, and so on. In
such cases, Farhady and van Shaik found even less agreement with the proximity principle in
their data than they did when correlatives involved lexical nouns:
Neither you nor he_____________________able to answer the question.
พธร—40%; were—60% (Farhady, 1977)
Neither you nor I____________________________trained for that job.
am—12%; is—15%; are—73% (van Shaik, 1976)
The immediately preceding example is especially interesting because are is a colloquial gap-
filling substitute for am in some other constructions (I'm going, too, aren’t I? Aren’t I lucky?). Am
is apparently perceived by native speakers as too limited a form for use in those correlatives
where I is the second noun phrase constituent.
4.	There
We devote Chapter 23 to a thorough ^discussion of there in subject position, so we won’t
delve too deeply into issues of its subject-verb agreement here. Suffice it to say that there
are complications here as well. Traditionally, the form of the verb, typically be in sentences
with there in subject position should agree with the noun phrase that follows the verb, what
is called “the logical subject.”
There is a leak in the kitchen sink.
There is water on the floor.
There are no plumbers available when you need one!
68
The Grammar Book
However, speakers appear to make two exceptions to this generalization. First, with a
compound subject, they apply the proximity principle:
There is a leak in the kitchen sink and one in the bathroom.
And, in the case of the contracted singular form there’s, it is often used for both singular and
plural subjects in everyday speech:
There's no plumbers when you need one!
Crawford (2005) explains “the tendency of spoken language to use less elaboration and more
contraction, combined with the processing constraints of spoken language, results in the
formulaic use of contracted existential there + be (there’s) without conscious reference to the
prescriptive rule of agreement”(p. 59).
5.	The non-intervention principle
One problem that frequently arises for both native and non-native speakers of English is
identifying the true subject of the sentence. This often occurs when subjects include a head
noun and a long modifying clause or phrase, especially one with a plural noun that precedes
the main verb directly.
The main argument as it has been portrayed in all the news stories is...
The verb is agrees with the head noun argument, but stories directly precedes the main verb
and could cause confusion as to which form of the be verb to use.
Many reference grammars make a point of emphasizing that a singular subject noun
or pronoun should take a singular verb inflection regardless of what else occurs between
the subject and the verb; that is, the speaker or writer should ignore all plural forms in
intervening prepositional phrases and expressions such as together with, along with, as well as,
and not others:
For the most part, the nonintervention principle seems to be well supported:
The major cause of highway accidents in 1976________________drunk drivers.
was—93%; were—7% (Farhady 1977)
Peter, along with his brothers,to open a store._________________
plans—84%;plan—16% (van Shaik 1976)
The boy, not his parents,being punished.______________
is—88%; are—12% (van Shaik 1976)
Neither of them was convinced by what he said. (COCA)
Conclusion
In many English sentences, subject-verb number agreement is straightforward and
noncontroversial. However, it is quite clear that a number of unresolved questions remain.
When a form is syntactically singular but notionally plural (or vice versa), there is a potential
conflict. Agreement based on form is straightforward, but when agreement is driven by
meaning or use, this gives rise to the possibility of variation among users. Here, Reid’s (1991)
formulation, which holds that all co-occurrences of subject noun number and of verb number
are possible, though not equally frequent, helps to explain meaning-driven choices and guide
the listener or reader to the intended interpretation. This is what we mean by teaching reasons
rather than, or in addition to, rules. Teach students the meanings of forms, so they can see why
speakers make the choices that they do.
Chapter 4: Copular Verbs and Subject-Verb Agreement
69
There is also the question of appropriate use. Our advice to ESL/EFL teachers is that
they be aware of the major traditional rules and also be aware of those instances where current
usage seems to clearly deviate from the traditional prescription. Also, teachers should keep in
mind that informal contexts permit a greater range of acceptable forms than formal contexts;
therefore, flexible correction standards, which differ for formal writing than for informal
writing and colloquial speech, might be in order.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form. The copula be causes ESL/EFL students trouble because it is the most irregular
verb in the English language. A lot of practice will have to be given to all its various forms:
Present		Past	
1 am	we are	1 was	we were
you are	you are	you were	you were
he, she, it is	they are	he, she, it was	they were
a.	Have your students associate forms of the be verb with the appropriate subject pronouns,
as in the chart. One way to do so is to have your students introduce themselves and ask
for the names of others using the formulaic question “What is your name?”
Teacher·. I am Mr. Simon. What is your name?
Student 1 ะ I am Manuel. What is your name? (to S2)
Student 2:1 am Elka. What is your name? (to S3)
b.	Then give students an opportunity to practice another form of the be verb
and another formulaic question.
Teacher: I am from the United States. Where are you from?
Student J: I am from Mexico. Where are you from? (to ร2)
Student 2:1 am from Bulgaria. Where are you from? (to S3)
Then the students can ask each other the question.
c.	Have the students do a chain drill, adding a name with each turn.
Student ไ: I am Manuel.
Student 2: He is Manuel, and I am Elka.
Student 3: He is Manuel, she is Elka, and I am Fatimah.
d.	Finally, students can introduce themselves to the class.
Student 1:1am Manuel. I am fromA/lexico.
Student 2:1 am Elka. I am from Bulgaria.
2.	Form. Badalamenti and Henner-Stanchina (2007) suggest using the names of famous
people from all over the world to practice the copula be with country of origin and nationality.
For example, the teacher can give one or two examples and then provide only a name.
Arnold Schwarzenegger is from-Au st ria. He's Austrian.
Messi is from Argentina. He's Argentinian.
3.	Form. The problematic area with regular present-tense verbs other than be involves the
third person singular form of the verb. Since the third person singular form of the verb is
the only one inflected for person and number agreement in the present tense, ESL/EFL
students frequently and persistently omit the necessary -r marker by simplifying or by
70
The Grammar Book
overgeneralizing the basic pattern to third person singular. Practice with the present tense
should thus put a great deal of focus on the third person singular inflection and on the
contrast with all other persons. The teacher can introduce a fictional character Jack and
talk about what he does every day. To enhance the input, the teacher can stress the verb,
making sure that the students hear the -s inflection.
He gets up at 7:00 A.M.	He runs in the park at 5:00 P.M.
He eats breakfast at 7:30.	He comes home at 6:00.
He goes to work at 8:00. etc.
Jack’s schedule can be practiced by the class with the teacher using pictures and/or a clock
with movable hands as prompts. Then students can do pairwork. The teacher writes on
the board "get up,” “eat breakfast,” "go to school.” Each member of the pair can make a
sentence about his or her schedule. For example:
Maria: I get up at 7:30.1 eat breakfast at 8:00.1 go to work at 9:00.
Maria’s partner then reports to the class:
Partner: Maria gets up at 7:30. She eats breakfast at 8:00. She goes to work at 9:00.
4.	Form. For intermediate-level students, Wisniewska, Riggenbach, and Samuda (2007)
suggest that job descriptions and names of occupations be first matched and then
generated to practice the third person singular present tense.
a.	He wears a uniform and usually travels many miles a day. He serves food and drinks,
but he hardly ever prepares them for himself. He's.____________
b.	She wears a uniform and drives many miles a day. She never serves food or drinks.
She's.____________
a flight attendant	a nurse
a teacher	a bus driver
a librarian	a student
Now students write similar descriptions for the job names that are still left.
5.	Meaning. To practice with intermediate learners the notion that it is sometimes possible
to use a plural or singular verb with a particular noun depending on how the noun is
construed, give the students sentences and ask them to respond with “one” when the
subject is singular and “more than one” when the subject is plural. They should also
specify the entity or unit being referred to.
ล. Teacher: The class is going to celebrate at the end of this term.
Students: one (class)
b.	Teacher:The 20 minutes are going to pass quickly.
Students: more than one (minute)
c.	Teacher:Twenty minutes is not a long time!
Students; one (time unit)
d.	Teacher;The faculty are meeting after school today.
Students: more than one (faculty member)
6.	Use. Ask your more advanced students to conduct a survey of class members regarding
their preferences in how they spend their free time or some other issue that you think will
interest them. The survey should be designed, conducted, and the results summarized in
small groups. Each group should report to the class, using the quantifiers, fractions, and
phrases such as the majority of) a number of etc.
7.	Use. Frodesen and Eyring (2007) suggest that teachers give students many statements
and have them decide which items have verb forms that are appropriate for formal
Chapter 4: Copular Verbs and Subject-Verb Agreement
71
written contexts (i.e., the traditional prescriptive rule) and which would be acceptable for
informal written or spoken contexts:
a.	Neither of those political surveys are valid because the sample was not random.
b.	In conclusion, either of the textbooks reviewed above is an excellent choice for an
introductory chemistry course.
c.	There’s a number of errors in this report.
d.	As far as we know, none of the experiment’s results has been duplicated to date.
Exercises
Test your knowledge of what has been presented.
1.	Provide an original example sentence illustrating each of the following concepts.
Underline the pertinent word(s) in your example.
a.	copula be
b.	a copular verb other than be
c.	an auxiliary function of be
d.	collective noun subject
e.	noncount noun subject
f.	third person singular present
inflection
g.	the proximity principle
h.	the nonintervention principle
i.	subject-verb agreement with a
clausal subject
2.	What are two structural reasons for distinguishing the copula be from other verbs in
English?
3.	In what instances should your ESL/EFL students be aware that verbs must agree with
subjects in person and number? Also, in what instances does subject-verb agreement
not apply?
4.	Name and illustrate two cases where a traditional subject-verb agreement rule is not
supported by current usage.
Test your ability to apply what you know.
5.	If your students produce the following, and they want to speak and write Standard
English, what would you tell them?
a.	*Is you from Mexico?	d. *Nora wills read the book.
b.	*Felix go to school every day.	e. *They sings in a choir.
c.	*1 tired.	f. *1 don’t be angry anymore.
6.	What will you say to a high-intermediate ESL/EFL student who complains to you that
you correct mistakes in his compositions when he writes sentences like this one, but
that he hears native speakers say things like this all the time?
Either my roommates or my friend Bill are going to buy the refreshments.
7.	How would you present the rilles for fractions and percentages to an intermediate-
level high school ESL/EFL class? What contexts would you provide to help them have
meaningful practice?
The Grammar Book
8.	Some noun plurals are irregular (men, mice/ and some have a change from -f (sg.) to
-ves (pl.), such as wife/wives. How would you review irregular noun plurals with a
low-intermediate ESL/EFL class?
9.	If a student asks you which is correct in the following pair of sentences, how would
you answer?
(The students are disappointed that the football team is no longer undefeated.)
The majority is upset at the loss.
The majority are upset at the loss.
Bibliography
~ ~ .........................'
Badalamenti, V, & Henner-Stanchina, c. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning) and use 1 (4th ed.).
Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Bock, K., Cutler, A., Eberhard, K., Butterfield, ร., Cooper Cutting,}., & Humphreys, K. (2006). Agreement
in British and American English: Disagreeing to agree collectively. Language, 82(1), 64-113.
Chan, A. (2010). Toward a taxonomy of written errors: Investigation into the written errors of Hong Kong
Cantonese ESL learners. TESOL Quarterly, 44(2), 295-319.
Chan, M. (2014). Acquisition o/be by Cantonese ESL learners in Hong Kong and its pedagogical implications.
Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang.
Crawford, พ. (2005). Verb agreement and disagreement. FM---?/?/ of English Linguistics, 33(1), 35-61.
Davies, M. (2008). The corpus of contemporary American English (COCA): 425 million words, 1990-present.
Retrieved from http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/
Depraetere, I. (2003). On verbal concord with collective nouns in British English. English Language and
Linguistics, 7(1), 85-127.
Farhady, H. (1977). Subject-verb agreement in English: A usage study (Unpublished English 215 paper).
University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Fuller, J. พ., & Gundel, J. K. (1987). Topic-prominence in interlanguage. Language Learning) 57(1), 1-18.
Goldschneider, J., & DeKeyser, R. (2005). Explaining the “natural order of L2 morpheme acquisition” in
English: A meta-analysis of multiple determinants. Language Learning, 55(1), 27-77.
Hudson, R. (1999). Subject-verb agreement in English. English Language and Linguistics 3(2), 173-207.
Jenkins, J. (2012). English as a lingua franca from the classroom to the classroom. ELT Journal, 66(4), 486^-94.
Klein, พ., & Perdue, c. (1997). The basic variety (Or: Couldn’t natural languages be much simpler?).
Second Language Research, 15,301-347.
Langacker, R. พ. (1991). Descriptive application: Foundations of cognitive grammar (Vol. 2). Standford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (1976). An explanation for the morpheme acquisition order of second language
learners .Language Learning, 26(1), 125-134.
Peterson, L. M. (1990). Subject-verb agreement with select subject quantifiers: A usage study o/all, each, every,
either, neither, and none (Unpublished independent professional project). School for International
Training, Brattleboro, VT.
Reid, พ. (1991). Verb and noun number in English: A functional explanation. London, England: Longman.
Simpson, R. c., Briggs, ร. L., Ovens,}., & Swales,}. M. (2002). The Michigan corpus of academic spoken
English. Retrieved from httpy/quod.lib.umich.edu/m/micase/
Chapter 4: Copular Verbs and Subject-Verb Agreement
73
Tode, τ. (2003). From unanalysed chunks to rules: The learning of the English copula be by beginning
Japanese learners of English. IRAL, 41, 23-53.
บท!น, E. A., & Hatipoglu, Ç. (2012). The acquisition of copula be in present simple tense by native speakers
of Russian. System, 40, 255-269.
van Shaik, J. D. (1976). Subject-verb agreement in English: What the books say vs. native speaker usage
(บทpublished English 215 paper). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
พiรทiewska, I., Riggenbach, H., & Samuda, V (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 2
(4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHERREADING	Z".ZZ ..
Other reference grammars or handbooks or online resource on style with useful descriptions of
subject-verb agreement are:
Crews, F. (1991). A Random House handbook. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Lunsford, A. (2009). Easy Writer guide (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Bedford/St. Martins.
Purdue Online Writing Lab (OWL). Handout on subject-verb agreement. Retrieved from http://owl.
english.purdue. edu/owl/resource/5 99/01/
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, ร., Leech, G., & Svartvik, J. (1985). A comprehensive grammar of the English language.
London, England: Longman.
ESL texts with useful discussions and exercises for treating the copula be and subject-verb agreement are:
Alexander, L. G. (1988). Longman English grammar. London, England: Longman.
Badalamenti, V-, & Henner-Stanchina, c. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 1 (4th ed.).
Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Danielson, D., & Porter, p. (with Hayden, R.). (1990). Using English: Your second language (2nd ed.).
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall Regents.
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Wisniewska, I., Riggenbach, H., & Samuda, V. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 2
(4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Endnotes
1.	Verbs that are not copulas can be followed only by adverbiais and/or noun phrases. They do not take
adjective phrases. เท colloquial utterances like "He talks funny," funny is functioning adverbially (i.e., "เท a
funny manner"), not adjectivally.
2.	Participial adjectives are derived from either the -ing present participle (e.g., standing; walking, sleeping),
e.g., They lie sleeping, or the -en past participle (which takes the -ed ending in regular verbs and a variety
of endings in irregular verbs) (see Chapter 7) (e.g., protected, forgotten, distraught).
3.	While become, get, and turn can take many different adjectives, the other change-of-state copulas tend
to take only one or two fixed adjective constructions, such as fall ill, come undone, grow tall/old, run wild/
amok.
4.	These adverbiais typically are prepositional phrases and their substitutes (e.g., in the room, there).
5.	It derives historically from come to be*,...
6.	Turn is unusual in that it takes articleless nouns: He turned traitor. It also can take a prepositional phrase,
in which case the noun object may take an article: He turned into a gentleman.
7.	Remember that the verb be in the present tense would take the form am with a first-person subject and
E with a second-person subject.
74
The Grammar Book
8.	What is meant by the perceptual saliency of a form is whether or not it is easy for learners to hear.
Because final consonants and consonant clusters tend to be more weakly articulated in English than
initial consonants or clusters, this morpheme is in fact somewhat difficult to hear.
9.	Recall the regular morphological plural ending -stakes three different forms phonologically:/3z/ after
sibilant consonants (consonants produced with friction forced through a narrow opening): bushes; buses;
mazes, peaches; badges; /s/ after non-sibilant voiceless consonants (consonants where vocal cords are
not vibrating): books, hats, lips; and /z/ after voiced non-sibilant consonants and vowels (sounds where
the vocal cords are vibrating): bags, gads, ribs, eyes, toes.
10.	However, we would like to point out that Reid's system does not properly explain why sentences like
these are not acceptable under any circumstances:
*The boy like candy.
*The boys likes candy.
Some English nouns like boy are more individuated and countable than others like gang, dollar, or number. It
is less-individuated nouns that have flexibility of number and support Reid's arguments.This is an issue that
we discuss further in Chapter ใ 5. We should also note that Hudson (1999) takes exception to Reid's semantic
account as well. Instead, he proposes a new feature "agreement-number," noting that the grammatical feature
of "person" is really only relevant when it comes to the be verb.
11.	เท American English, there still is a strong tendency to use the singular verb inflection with a collective
noun subject. เท British English, plural inflections are frequently preferred.
(Am. E.) My family is on vacation.	(Br. E.) My family are on holiday.
The government is cheating US.	The government are cheating US.
However, recent experimental and corpus work has revealed that British English speakers are more likely
these days to join their American counterparts and use singular verbs with collective noun subjects
(Depraetere, 2003). เท fact, Depraetere goes so far as to advise teachers to tell their students that a singular
verb is the default form, unless there are clear semantic or pragmatic factors that favor the use of a plural one.
Some collective nouns (i.e., the police, and those formed from adjectives that describe people: the rich, the
young, the privileged) require a plural verb:
The police are looking for that man.
The rich are getting richer all the time!
Indeed, Bock, Cutler, Eberhard, Butterfield, Cooper Cutting, and Humphreys (2006) argue that the question
of whether to use a singular or plural verb is really decided at the lexical level, not at a categorical level. For
instance, British English speakers prefer the plural for the collective noun staff, and American English speakers
favor the plural for faculty. According to them, therefore, it is more a matter of usage, not rule or reason.
12.	However, as Reid (1991) points out, authentic counterexamples do exist for this heuristic—especially
if adjectivals that semantically support the opposite number interpretation are modifying the noun
number so as to make "(the) number (of)" reflect more than one entity or make "(a) number (of)" reflect
a single entity:
... the increased number of cancers were occurring at radiation exposure levels well below the
official limit.... (p. 219)
A smaller number of steps suggests a growing ability to organize, (p. 282)
13.	We are grateful to Claire Chikfor the substance of the treatment of this section. Her examples come from
the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA).
14.	We thank Steffi Wulff for these examples from COCA.
Chapter 4: Copular Verbs and Subject-Verb Agreement
75
Word Order and the
Phrase Structure Rules
for the Subject of
a Sentence
Introduction
There are a few grammatical resources that languages of the world use. Two of them are
the morphological inflections and function words that we looked at in Chapter 2. Another
resource is word order or syntax. Word order is very important in English. As you have
already seen, there are only eight inflectional morphemes, so English uses word order to
signal grammatical relations where other languages rely on morphemes. In the chapters
before this one, we have looked at structures that are below the level of the sentence. In later
chapters, we will be examining the structure above the level of the sentence. In this chapter,
we will focus on the middle level—the basic syntax of an English sentence, making explicit its
property of linearity. Then, we will formulate some basic rules of English word order, called
phrase structure rules. They show how a sentence can be broken down into categories and their
constituent parts. The category that we feature in this chapter is the noun phrase. In addition
to the grammatical properties of linearity and categorality, we also introduce the property of
hierarchy. The property of hierarchy accounts for the fact that the categories themselves form
a hierarchy from the level of sentence down to the level of the smallest constituent, which can
not be broken down further. An understanding of these properties of English sentences will
add to your understanding of grammar and to your professional knowledge base as an ESL/
EFL teacher.
Word Order (Linearity)
In English, word order within sentences is less flexible than it is in many other languages, or
than it was in English 1,000 years ago. One reason for this is that English has lost most of
its original Germanic system of inflections. Without recourse to this full range of inflections
to mark subjects (and objects of various kinds), English came to rely on linear word order to
distinguish subjects from objects. English word order is far from fixed, but there is enough
regularity that we can say, on the basis of frequency, that the basic underlying word order for
a declarative written sentence is Subject-Verb-Object. From a comparative typology point of
view, then, we say that English is an S-V-O language, like Spanish, French, and many other
languages. However, a major difference exists between English and French, on the one hand,
and Spanish, on the other: both English and French require that a subject appear in all but a
certain type of sentence, whereas Spanish does not have this requirement for sentences with
pronominal subjects. For example:
I speak English. Je parle français. (Yo) hablo espanol.
(Ί speak French.') (Ί speak Spanish.')
In fact the most frequent version of this Spanish sentence omits the first person subject
pronoun, yo, and therefore, Spanish is typologically a “pro-drop language” because subject
pronouns can be dropped. Spanish speakers can infer the subject due to the inflections on the
verb—in this case, the “o” on the verb hablo signals that the subject is first person singular Yo
(“I”). Spanish speakers can drop pronominal subjects because Spanish has a rich system of
verb inflections that unambiguously indicate the person and number of the subject.1
Most Spanish speakers learning English don’t forget to use the subject with English
sentences, but it is not unusual for beginners to leave off subjects of certain English
sentences when making statements, such as “is raining.” We will have more to say about such
constructions later on (in Chapter 23).
As we have said, there is a certain type of English sentence without an expressed subject,
too. This is the case for imperative sentences, where we understand from the context who is
issuing a command and who is being commanded:
Stop that racket!
Such sentences are said to have an “understood you" as their subjects. In addition, in spoken
language, where one can easily infer the subject, it is sometimes elided, especially when the
subject is “I” or “it” (Nariyama, 2004). Subject ellipsis occurs when the subject is recoverable
in the context:
Amanda: (I) saw Rachel yesterday. I brought her flowers, and we had a chat.
Isabel: (It) clearly did her a lot of good.
Not all English sentences require objects either. Transitive verbs take objects. Sentences with
intransitive verbs, like arrive or sleep, do not:
She arrived while I was sleeping.
If you have studied only languages like English, Spanish, and French, you might assume
that all languages more or less follow S-V-O word order; in fact, several languages unrelated
to these three, such as Cantonese, Bulgarian, Swahili, and colloquial Egyptian Arabic, are also
S-V-O languages.2
However, there are other typologies as well. S-O-V and V-S-O are two common
alternatives to S-V-O. Some major languages that follow the S-O-V pattern are Japanese,
Korean, Turkish, and Farsi (Persian). Some languages that use the V-S-O pattern are Malayo-
Polynesian languages such as Indonesian and Tagalog, the classical versions of Semitic
languages such as Hebrew and Arabic, and Celtic languages like Irish, Welsh, and Breton.
Linguists have also identified a few languages that adhere to the other sequences. Hixkaryana,
a Carib language spoken in Brazil, is said to be ovs, and Kabardian, a language spoken in the
Caucasus, is osv As for a VOS language, Malagasy, spoken in Madagascar, is an example. You
may have observed from this distribution of languages, that it is far more common among
world languages for the ร to precede the o (Greenberg, 1966).
In addition to these sentence-level word order differences, there also are cross-linguistic
differences in word order at the phrasal level, depending on whether the object noun precedes
or follows the verb (Jacobs, 1995, pp. 36 ff.). Jacobs points out that in languages like English,
where the verb precedes the object, auxiliary verbs normally precede verbs, prepositions
precede their objects, and relative clauses follow the nouns they modify. In contrast, in
languages like Japanese and Korean, where objects precede verbs, auxiliary verbs normally
follow main verbs (in the form of inflections), postpositions (as compared with prepositions)
78
The Grammar Book
follow their objects, and relative clauses precede the nouns they modify. Such phrase-level
differences can cause problems for learners; we discuss them further in the following chapters
of this book where relevant.
You may have noticed that certain common languages are not on our lists. This is
because their word order patterns are more varied. For example, in German and Dutch, main
clauses are svo, but in subordinate clauses, the verb is final, and therefore word order in
subordinate clauses is sov. Russian makes a distinction between the word order of transitive
clauses, which is svo, and that of intransitive clauses, which is either SV or vs.
Even in English, the word order is not invariant. You may have also noticed that we
have been somewhat cautious in saying that the main word orders exist for written declarative
sentences that are frequently occurring. Spoken utterances are a different matter. For instance,
object-fronting or topicalization of objects occurs in oral discourse:
Michelle: I have just watched the Super Bowl. (SVO)
Eve: That I would never watch. (OSV)
Topicalization takes place when a speaker puts the topic or focus at the beginning of a
sentence. Usually, topicalization involves a stress or intonation change as well:
I have not seen that.
That I have not seen.
It is also possible to move the object to initial position for emphasis:
Pauline: I love coffee. (SVO)
Jennifer: What about tea?
Pauline: Tea I don't like. (OSV, rather than I don't like tea, SVO)
But when OSV is the syntax used in English, we recognize that it is not typical. Linguists call
such sentences “marked” because they convey an additional nuance of meaning or pragmatic
focus. Throughout this book, we will encounter the distinction between canonical unmarked
structures and marked structures. The point is that grammar is a meaning-making resource,
not a linguistic straitjacket; marked alternatives offer other ways to express meaning.
Phrase Structure
(Categorality and Hierarchy)
For the remainder of this chapter, we will be dealing with unmarked sentences, specifically
their syntax. Before we do so, however, there is one additional matter to take up. Sentences
are not only made up of words in a certain (linear) order. They have other properties as well.
For instance, if you were asked to divide the following sentence into its two main parts, where
would you draw the line?
Emmylou Harris sings country music.
Most people asked this question would draw the line after Emmylou Harris and before sings.
This basic division corresponds to the two major constituents of a sentence: the subject and
the predicate:
Emmylou Harris / sings country music.
The point is that sentences are structured strings of words, and it is not just a matter
of cleaving a sentence in two arbitrarily. We also have the sense that the words on either side
of the line go together. In other words, they form clusters. This illustrates another property of
syntax, which is the property of categorality. Word clusters form categories. Emmylou Harris
Chapter 5: Word Order and the Phrase Structure Rules for the Subject of a Sentence
79
fits the subject category and sings country music is categorized as the predicate of the sentence.
The categories in a sentence are in a hierarchical relationship. The subject and predicate
combine at a lower level to make up a sentence at a higher level.
A way to depict all that we have said so far (i.e., that sentences exhibit linearity,
categorality, and hierarchy) is to write phrase structure rules, which capture these properties.3
The first phrase structure rule illustrates all three of these properties:
ร-»SUBJ PRED
It tells us that a sentence ร is made up of two categories—a subject SUBJ, followed by a
predicate PRED, all capitalized because they are major constituents of a sentence. It also tells
us that there is a hierarchy to a sentence, although the hierarchy may be clearer if we use
another linguistic convention, namely, a tree:
___ร ,
SUBJ	PRED
Some people like grammar trees; others don’t. Needless to say, we find them very useful in
depicting the composition of a sentence. We don’t necessarily recommend that you use trees
with your students, although some teachers do. Still, learning to draw trees will help you to
identify the categories in an English sentence and their hierarchical relationships. Once you
have identified a category, you can use the identification to consult linguistic sources, such as
reference grammars, to learn more. Thus, we use trees to parse sentences—to show you what
they are made up of and what the relationships among the parts are.
We haven’t quite finished with this rule though. It is possible for an English sentence
to be preceded by a sentence modifier (sm) or even more than one, which is indicated with a
superscript “ท’’ in our expanded rule below. For now, we will limit the term sentence modifier
to words like perhaps and surely. These are sentential adverbs—adverbs that modify an entire
sentence. Here is an example of a sentence with a sentence modifier:
Surely, Emmylou Harris sings country music.
One quality that linguists value highly is parsimony—being able to use the fewest possible
rules to account for the most data; here, the structure of grammatical sentences in English. In
order to be parsimonious (what linguists call “elegant”), we can write one rule that will take
care of both of our example sentences so far. This is our first phrase structure rule:
1 ร-» Isrr,nร
ISUBJPRED
Here is what the second sentence looks like as a tree:
The triangles under SUBJ and PRED indicate that we have not yet completed our analysis
of these constituents and must apply additional rules to complete the task. As you may
have noted, phrase structure rule are recursive. This means that they, or parts of them, can
80
The Grammar Book
be used repeatedly. We used the top half of the rule to draw the first ร, and then returned
to the bottom half to draw the second ร. We will also return to the subject of the sentence
in the next rule, in order to define what a subject of an English sentence can be made of. In
other words, we will go to a lower level in our hierarchy.
Another term for what we are doing is immediate constituent analysis. In this sort of analysis,
a sentence is divided into major divisions, or immediate constituents. These constituents are in
turn divided into further immediate constituents, and this process continues until irreducible
constituents are reached; i.e., until each constituent consists of only a word or meaningful
part of a word. When our phrase structure rules are complete, we will be able to account for
each constituent in this way.
Noun Phrases
The second phrase structure rule tells US that the รบBJ is an NP (or noun phrase); in our
example, it’s Emmylou Harris·.
2.	SUBJ -> NP
However, a proper noun, such as Emmylou Harris, is a rather simple NP. NPs can be more
complicated. Rule 3 makes this point clear. It is a much longer rule than the first two rules,
but with it, we should be able to spell out all of the parts of an NP in English:
3 Np_J พ®13) (AP")N hpl) lPrspP)
I Pro
Let us look more closely at this rule.
The first symbol you will see is det, which is an abbreviation for determiner. A determiner
tells you which noun is being talked about. The superscript 3 that follows det simply means
that there can be up to three determiners in an English noun phrase. For instance,
1	determiner—the singer
2	determiners—the other singer
3	determiners—all the other singers
It is also possible for the determiner slot to be filled by a possessive NP, so that the following
sentence has two possessive determiners, their and neighbor’s·.
Their neighbor's house has finally been painted.
We will have much more to say about determiners in Chapter 16.
The next abbreviation is AP, for adjective phrase. Note the superscript ท after AP tells
us that a NP can have more than one adjective phrase, hypothetically many more (to the rath
degree). We will discuss the AP rule a while later, but for now, it is enough to know that an AP
is minimally made up of an adjective, famous, in the following example:
all the other famous
The noun, in our rule represented as N, is the most important part of the NP. We show
that the other elements in the rule are not essential by putting parentheses around them.
Of course, for any given sentence, the elements in parentheses may be present. However,
our goal is to write general rules to be able to describe possible sentences in English. Using
parentheses is a convention for indicating that the elements they enclose are syntactically
optional. Thus, since the noun is the only element in our rule that is not in parentheses, we
know that NP must at least have a noun. An example of an NP with only a noun is a person’s
name (Emmylou Harris, for instance). Another way of saying that a noun is essential to an NP
is to say that the “head” of an NP is a noun.
Chapter 5: Word Order and the Phrase Structure Rules for the Subject of a Sentence
81
Of course, countable nouns can be made plural, which is what the plural marker (-pl) tells
us. If the noun in a given NP is plural, then the determiner also must be marked for plurality.
In other words, as we saw in Chapter 3, there must be agreement between a determiner
and the noun that it modifies. Also, in our rule, the “pl” has a dash before it. The dash is a
convention for showing that -pl needs to be attached to some other word; in other words, it
is a bound morpheme.
all the other famous singers
*all the other famous singer
Of course, we are not claiming that speakers compose or process a sentence from “left to
right.” Nevertheless, it is a fact, as we have seen in Chapter 3 on lexicogrammar, that selection
of one item in a sentence often constrains another. Thus, students can be taught to anticipate
what is to come. For example, if a sentence begins with the, students will learn that a noun
will follow soon thereafter.
The final part of the top row of the rule tells us that a noun can optionally be followed
by a prepositional phrase (PrepP):
all the other famous singers of today
Minimally, then, an NP is an uninflected lexical noun such as rice, book, or Emmy loll. Optionally,
it can be expanded in any number of ways. Here are some examples:
•	As a noun with up to three determiners: all his other memories
•	As a noun with a determiner and an adjective: a clear sky
•	As a noun with a plural inflection: books (the arrow in the tree below shows US that the
plural inflection attaches to the noun that precedes it)
•	As a noun with a determiner and a following prepositional phrase: a man of honor
•	As a noun with various combinations of the above options: the famous city of New York,
all the old books
Here is a tree with a full—very full—NP:
All the other famous singers of today are wealthy.
ร
The curly brackets in rule 3 tells US that there is an alternative form for an NP, which is
that an NP can simply be realized as a pronoun (pro):
all the other famous singers of today = they
the city of New York = it
a man of honor - he
Such examples make US realize that the definition of a pronoun as a noun substitute is false. A
pronoun does not substitute for a noun; it substitutes for a noun phrase:
82
The Grammar Book
They are wealthy.
SUBJ
NP
pro
they
One other point that should be made before we move on is that it is possible for a noun to be
modified by another noun. For example:
a stone wall
the horse stable
We will discuss this double noun structure in our chapter on adjectives. For now, let US take
up two more rules, so that we can completely account for basic noun phrases:
Adjective Phrases
Rule 4 allows us to define any adjective phrase (AP) as minimally containing an adjective
(ADJ), which we abbreviate with capital letters because it is a major part of speech:
4.	AP -> (ADV ๆADJ (PrepP)
The term ADV stands for an adverb, which the parentheses show is an optional part of an
AP, and the superscript ท captures the fact that multiple adverbs can modify an adjective. An
adverb can modify an adjective to indicate any of the following:
manner: his quietly confident demeanor
duration: his permanently sullen expression
degree: an extremely valuable collection
condition: the otherwise preferable course of action
location: his internationally famous daughter
time: their recently aggressive behavior
frequency: her sometimes harsh criticisms
and many others (R. Huddleston, personal communication).
Sometimes the same adverb is repeated, which is referred to as reduplication, and
sometimes different adverbs are selected:
very, very interesting news
ADV ADV ADJ N
really very nice clothes
ADV ADV ADJ N
Rule 3 also allows for multiple APs to occur before head nouns (e.g., the big old yellow bus). The
ordering of these adjectives is discussed in some detail in Chapter 20. Of course, they need
not be single-word adjectives: entire APs can be strung together, too:
very amusing, almost hilarious jokes
Chapter 5: Word Order and the Phrase Structure Rules for the Subject of a Sentence
83
Adverbs don’t only modify adjectives, however. They can also modify other adverbs, as
in the following where almost modifies the adverb always.
very amusing, almost always hilarious jokes
We will have to postpone drawing a tree for such sentences until the next chapter, where we
discuss adverb phrases. There, too, we will take up adverbs in their most well known role (i.e.,
where they modify verbs).
The optional prepositional phrase in rule 4 occurs most often with adjective phrases
generated in the predicate—a category we discuss in the following chapter; however, this type
of expansion does occasionally occur before the head noun in noun phrases and is usually
represented orthographically as a hyphenated complex adjective when it does occur:
My good-for-nothing cousin
det ADJ PrepP N
Word order differences at the phrasal level can cause difficulties, at least for beginners.
For example, in an English NP, the adjective typically comes before the noun, whereas in
Romance languages, it generally follows the noun. Teachers need to be ready to help students
with word order in phrases as well.
Prepositional Phrases
Rule 5 simply expands prepositional phrases as prepositions followed by noun phrases:
5.	PrepP-> prep NP
Since NP (noun phrase) has already been expanded in rule 3, we would recursively go back
and apply our earlier rule for NP expansion whenever we have a prepositional phrase. With
the addition of rules 4 and 5, we can diagram our sentence more fully:
All the other famous singers of today are wealthy.
รบBJ
NP
AP
det det det ADJ
all the other famous singer j prep NP
N -pl PrepP
N
of today
One word of caution, though, is that the optional prepositional phrase in rule 3 accounts
for those prepositional phrases that cannot have a predicate relationship with the head
noun (e.g., a man of honor, the city of Chicago, two pounds of sugar). In other words, we cannot
paraphrase such NP + PrepP combinations with an intervening be copula: *a man is of honor,
*the city is of Chicago. This contrasts with those prepositional phrases that are semantically
predicative, such as the flowers in the vase (= the flowers are in the vase), the books on the table
(= the books are on the table). They have another source, which we discuss later in this book.
84
The Grammar Book
We will also come to see that prepositional phrases, like adverbs, are an important
category in English. Besides following nouns and adjectives, they can occur in several other
places. Prepositions signal relationships, which make up for the loss of English inflections on
nouns, a point that we illustrate throughout this book.
Conclusion
In this chapter, we have taken up several important grammatical concepts: linear word order
or syntax; categorality, or how constituents of sentences go together to form categories; and
hierarchy, or how smaller categories comprise larger categories. We have begun to write rules
that capture these three qualities. We have also introduced grammar trees—effective parsing
devices that make syntactic hierarchies especially clear.
All together, we will introduce fifteen basic phrase structure rules. In this chapter, we
have introduced the first five, which tell US what a sentence, a subject, an NP, an AP, and a
PrepP are comprised of. In the next chapter, we will discuss the remaining ten basic rules
when we examine the structure of the predicate in English.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form. For beginning-level students, it might be useful to do some sentence unscrambling,
especially if their first languages have a different word order typology. Stress the basic
S-V-O word order in English, giving a scrambled sentence, such as the following, to each
pair of students (each major constituent group is on a separate slip of paper, and the items
are paper-clipped together).
a.	pizza a delicious we ate
b.	great had we party a
c.	our English studies class
d.	sells Simon newspapers
e.	a Alex motorcycle rides
Each pair of students unscrambles its sentence and writes it down and then passes
the rescrambled sentence to the next pair until all the students have had practice with
unscrambling each sentence. Then, students can compare their sentences to confirm or
correct their work.
2.	Use. Give students a written version of a conversation that you have made up. Here are two
examples. Have them work in small groups to make the underlined sentences complete, in an
unmarked (i.e., written) order.
A: Watch out. A car is coming.
B: Didn't see it. Thank you.
A: Say do you want to see a movie?
S.'The one that won the Academy Award? No. That I have already seen.
A: I have, too. But it is so good. I want to see it again.
Chapter 5: Word Order and rhe Phrase Structure Rules for the Subject of a Sentence
85
3.	Meaning/Use. Ask your students what word is followed by order another language
they speak. Then, ask them to think about occasions when that word order isn’t followed.
Remember the questions in the pie chart on page 4. What special meaning or use does the
unusual word order convey?
4.	Form. Another grammatical point introduced in this chapter is the agreement required
between certain determiners and the number of the noun that follows them. Thus, the
sequences below on the left are acceptable, while the sequences on the right are not:
this rod	"these rod
these rods "this rods
that rod	"those rod
those rods "that rods
The Cuisenaire rods of various lengths and colors, a tool used in the Silent Way approach
(see Gattegno, 1976), provide an excellent device for teaching these agreement patterns
once all the colors have been learned.
Step 1: The teacher (holding the rods, one in one hand, two in the other) says:
This rod is yellow.These (rods) are red.
N.B. These can either be a determiner, in which case rods is used, or a pronoun, in which
case rods is not used.
Students (picking up the rods, practice using all colors until the agreement pattern is
established) say:
This rod is blue. These (rods) are black. This rod is white.These (rods) are green.
Step 2: The teacher asks:
Teacher: What color is this rod?
Student: It's yellow.
Teacher: Yes, it's a yellow rod.
Students manipulate rods and practice with each other until they learn the question and
the statements with the adjective before noun pattern. The same thing can then be done
for the plural.
Teacher.· What color are these rods?
Student: They're red.
Teacher: Yes, they're red rods.
Step 3: Students manipulate rods and structures (numbers and distance) in any combination
or sequence they wish and communicate with each other in pairs or small groups using
these patterns.	*■ ’
5.	Form. Begin a sentence with “.the.” Ask your students to predict what type of word
comes next and to give an example and to continue in this fashion until a whole sentence
is constructed.
86
The Grammar Book
Exercises
Since we feel that it is often more important for you to provide your students with good
examples than with verbal definitions, we ask you to do exercises like the first one below
throughout the text.
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1.	Provide an original example sentence illustrating each of the following concepts.
Underline the pertinent word(s) in your example:
a.	noun phrase	e.	adjective phrase
b.	prepositional phrase	f.	adverb modifying adjective
c.	subject	g.	singular determiner
d.	predicate	h.	plural determiner
2.	Draw partially specified tree diagrams for the sentence modifiers and subjects in the
following sentences, using the phrase structure rules given in this chapter:
a.	The girls whispered.
b.	Fortunately, his two brothers worked very quickly.
c.	Surely, next Monday is a holiday.
d.	The very young child cried.
e.	The Medal of Freedom is the highest honor.
Test your ability to apply what you know.
3.	If your students produce the following, what rules of Standard English have they not
followed?
a.	*The ink black stained his shirt.
b.	*John ran for shelter because was raining.
c.	"Those woman are striking for peace.
4.	Distinguish between the following pairs by saying which is marked and which is unmarked,
and, with the marked order, say what might be the circumstances in which it is used.
a.	My name is Alison. Alison is my name.
b.	Coffee I drink, but tea, I don’t. I drink coffee, but I don’t drink tea.
c.	I live in a yellow house. I live in a house yellow like the รนท.
5.	Using these three words, illustrate all possible word order typologies. Say which
typology (e.g., SOV) each order illustrates.
chocolate likes everyone
Chapter 5: Word Order and the Phrase Structure Rules for the Subject of a Sentence
87
Bibliography
REFERENCES
Gattegno, c. (1976). The common sense of teaching foreign languages. Newark, NY: Educational
Solutions, Inc.
Greenberg, J. (I960). Some universals of grammar with particular reference to the order of
meaningful elements. In J. Greenberg (Ed.), Universals of language (pp. 73-113). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Jacobs, R. A. (1995). English syntax: A grammar for English language professionals. New Y>rk,NY: Oxford
University Press.
Nariyama, ร. (2004). Subject ellipsis in English. Journal of Pragmatics, 36, 237-264.
Neeleman, A., & Szendrõi, K. (2005). Pro drop and pronouns. In J. Alderete, c. Han, & A. Kochetov
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 24th West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics (pp. 299-307). Somerville, MA:
Cascadilla Proceedings Project.
suggestionsIforTurther^ieadííng^
other versions of the phrase structure rules or trees for English can be found in the following sources:
Burton-Roberts, N. (1997). Analysing sentences: An introduction to English syntax (2nd ed.). Essex, England:
Pearson Education.
Carnie, A. (2002). Syntax: A generative introduction. Oxford, England: Blackwell.
Haegeman, L. (1994). Introduction to government and binding theory (2nd ed.). Oxford, England: Blackwell.
Rutherford, พ. (1998). A workbook in the structure of English. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Thomas, L. (1993). Beginning syntax. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
For more information on word order typologies, consult:
Croft, พ. (1995). Modern syntactic typology. In M. Shibatani & T. Bynon (Eds.), Approaches to language
typology (pp. 85-143). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Dryer, M. (1992). The Greenbergian word order correlations. Language, 68(1), 81-138.
Hawkins, J. (1994). A performance theory of order and constituency. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Mallinson, G., & Blake, B. (1981). Language typology: Cross-linguistic studies in syntax. Amsterdam,
Netherlands: North Holland.
Pullum, G. (1981). Languages with object before subject. Linguistics, 19, 147-55.
Endnotes
1.	Chinese and Japanese are also pro-dropjanguages, but they do not have a rich system of agreement
as Spanish, Italian, and Greek do. Neeleman and Szendrõi (2005) argue that it is the morphological
characteristics of the pronoun that determine whether pro-drop is allowed.
2.	Recall that in the previous chapter, we distinguished subject-prominent languages from topic-prominent
languages. For the purposes of the very gross word-order differences we describe here, subject and topic
can be considered roughly equivalent notions.
3.	At times, we may add more categories than is done in formal linguistics to draw on what our readers
know about traditional grammar. Such is the case with the categories subject and predicate, which
are really grammatical functions more than forms. At other times, we provide less detail than a formal
linguistic grammar might. Our goal, as you will recall, IS to provide the best possible pedagogical
grammar for teachers and students of English.
88
The Grammar Book
More Phrase	j
Structure Rules: The
Predicate of a Sentence
Introduction
The preceding chapter introduced five rules that specified word order in sentences and
subjects in English. In this chapter, we will turn our attention to the ten phrase structure
rules for the form of the predicate. The core elements of the predicate are auxiliary elements
(AUX) and verb phrases (VP). In addition to these, we also consider adverbiais in English. One
pedagogical issue having to do with form related to adverbiais is their sequence when there is
more than one. Not knowing the correct order of adverbiais leads ESL/EFL students to say
and write sentences such as *He drove his daughter yesterday to school. As we said in the previous
chapter, the phrase structure rules deal with form. We will take up the meaning and use of
these structures in Chapters 7-9.
The Auxiliary
The auxiliary in English is especially important. It contains information about tense and the
possible auxiliary verbs that can be used in an English sentence. As we saw in the last chapter,
in svo languages, auxiliary verbs tend to come before main verbs in sentences. To illustrate
this, we need another phrase structure rule, rule 6, which expands the predicate:
6.	PRED —> AUX VP (ADVLn)
ADVL stands for adverbial, and the superscript ท tells us that more than one of them
can occur in a sentence. Remember that the parentheses indicate that an adverbial is optional
in an English sentence. There are several kinds of adverbiais, which we will enumerate later
in this chapter. For now, we will follow our usual course of action and turn to defining the
elements in our rule, moving from left to right. To do so, here is rule 7:
7. AUX —»
พ่ L (pm) (peri) (prog)
-imper
This rule tells US that every English sentence must have either a verb tense (T) or a modal
verb (M), such as can, must, will. A sentence can then optionally have a phrasal modal
(pm) (e.g., be able to, have to, be going to), perfect aspect (perf), and/or progressive aspect
(prog) (see below). Alternatively, the auxiliary can consist only of a marker (-imper) for an
imperative sentence. Imperatives are tenseless in English. They are discussed in Chapter 12,
so we will not say anything more about them at this point.
89
Rule 8 tells US that that there are two tenses in English: present and past. The curly
brackets tell us that for any given sentence, we must choose between the two:
8. T —>
-pres
-past
It may seem odd to say that there are only two tenses because English speakers can certainly
talk about the future. However, we do so by using alternative means, such as modal verbs (e.g.,
I will go tomorrow) and phrasal modals (e.g., He’s going to go the next day). Tense, then, refers
to inflections on the verb. Tense always inflects the next verb in the string, be it an auxiliary
verb or a main verb.
If we exclude the irregular verb be for the moment, the past tense may be realized
through either the regular inflection ed:
We walk + ed to school, (walk)
or other irregular vowel and consonant changes:
We ate lunch, (eat) We bought some books, (buy)
The present tense is explicitly marked only in the case of third person singular subject nouns:
He walk + ร to school.
It is expressed implicitly with a lack of marking for all other subjects:
You	walk 0 to school.
They
We
As we saw in Chapter 4, the verb be is more highly inflected than other verbs in English and can
express the present through three forms: am, is, are, and the past through two forms: was, were.
Skipping over modals and phrasal modals for the moment, we see that English has two
optional structural markers of aspect: the perfect (peri) and the progressive (prog). We will
have much more to say about aspect in the next chapter, but for now, you can think of aspect
as giving information about completion or duration of an event. For example:
with perf: James has taken Linguistics 101. (suggests that the course is completed)
with prog: James is taking Linguistics 101. (suggests that the course is ongoing)
Here are the rules for these aspects:
s. perf -> have...-en
10.	prog —> be...-/ng
What we need to remember about the perfect and progressive aspects is that the auxiliary
verb and the inflection are discontinuous—a verb comes between the have and -en or be and
-ing. This is indicated by the three dots in the phrase structure rules. The inflection attaches
to the verb that follows it. For example:
I have eat -en lunch.
[have...-en (perfect aspect)]
The -en is a symbol for the past participle. Past participles in English are not always formed
with en, as the following examples show:
	Vowel	Look the same as
-en	"ialternations	the past tense form
written	sung	learned
eaten	drunk	read
seen	swum	taught
The Grammar Book
SO
Fortunately, the symbol for the present participle form of the verb, -ing, is used consistently.
In our example, walking is the present participle of the verb to walk·.
I am walk -ing to school.
[be...-ing (progressive aspect)]
Using rules 7-10, let’s describe the auxiliary in the following sentences:
1. John wrote a book.	5. John is going to write a book.
2. John should write a book.	6. Write a book.
3. John has written a book.	7. John will have to write a book.
4.	John is writing a book.	8. John had to have been writing a book.
If we consider the auxiliary (AUX) as everything in the predicate but the verb phrase and
consider the verb phrase in its uninflected base form {write a book), we see that the auxiliary +
the verb phrase in each of the sentences above yields the following forms:
1.	past tense = wrote a book
2.	modal should = should write a book
3.	pres tense + perfect have...-en = has written a book
4.	pres tense + progressive be...-ing = is writing a book
5.	pres tense + phrasal modal be going to = is going to write a book
6.	imper - write a book
7.	modal will + phrasal modal have to - will have to write a book
8.	past tense + phrasal modal have to + perfect have...-en + progressive be...-ing
- had to have been writing a book
It should be clear from these examples that tense is carried by the next verb in the sequence—
either the first auxiliary verb, or if there is no auxiliary verb, then the main verb, as in sentence 1
above.
Here is how sentence 8 looks in tree form:
John had to have been writing a book.
รบBJ
NP
N
John
PRED
Perhaps you can appreciate a bit more why we said that the auxiliary was very important
in English. It indicates tense, modality, aspect, and the morphological complexity of verb
forms. Later, we will see that it also carries mood (the imperative is one example) and voice
(the passive is an example).
Chapter 6: More Phrase Structure Rules: The Predicate of a Sentence
SI
The Verb Phrase
5.	Steve snores.
6.	Judy studies mathematics.
7.	He gave the money to Sally.
8.	He gave Sally the money.
Leaving the auxiliary elements aside for the moment, we also know that English verb phrases
can be complicated. Consider the following sentences:
1.	John is a teacher.
2.	Alice is very intelligent.
3.	Gaby is allergic to cats.
4.	The students are in the room.
A phrase structure rule that would allow US to account for all such structural possibilities
is rule 11, expanding the verb phrase (VP). Cop is an abbreviation for copular verb, which we
discussed in Chapter 4. V represents a main verb other than a copula. The other representations
should seem somewhat familiar to you by now, with the exception ofNP', which we explain below:
11. VP->
	NP	
cop	AP	
	PrepP	
V	(NP2)	PrepP)!
	(NP')	
1.	VP
2.	VP
3.	VP
NP
NP PrepP
NP NP
We apply rule 11 to the eight sentences above as follows:
cop NP	5. VP—>v
cop AP	6. VP —> V
cop AP	7. VP —> V
4. VP-» cop PrepP	8. VP->V
Here is the tree diagram for sentence 3, Gaby is allergic to cats. The noun inflection, the
plural, moves to the left to attach to the noun. The tree helps US to see the hierarchy among
the constituents:
Gaby is allergic to cats.
NP
Gaby
AUX
VP
N
92
The Grammar Book
At this point, we need to discuss one further VP option: an NP'. NP' is our symbol for an NP
in the predicate directly followed by another NP, adjective, or prepositional phrase. Consider
the following examples:
	Direct object	Object predicates/ complements
ไ. We elected	Sam	treasurer.
2. Lola considers	Forrest	inept.
3. Sarah placed	the book	on the table.
The constituents following the direct object in these three sentences are the same constituents
that can follow a copular verb; however, when they directly follow a copul ar verb, they refer
back to the subject NP (e.g., Sam is the treasurer), and they are called subject predicates or
subject complements. When they refer to an object, as they do in sentences 1-3, in traditional
grammar they are called, object predicates or object complements, or, sometimes these days small
clauses, because they predicate something with respect to the object noun phrase, but “small”
because they lack a verb.
1.	Sam (is) treasurer.
2.	Forrest (is) inept.
3.	The book (is) on the table.
These sentences are admittedly not very common, but to account for them, we need one
further rule:
12. NP' -> NP
NP
AP
PrepP
Rule 12 allows US to account for sentences like the three sentences above with object predicates.
Below, we diagram the first such sentence as an example:
We elected Sam treasurer.
PRED
AUX	VP
รบBJ
NP
We have now discussed various NPs that make up an English sentence. We haven’t
given them all names yet. This would be a good time to do so.
The first NP we encountered was the subject:
Subject NP
The hospital is across the street.
Chapter 6: More Phrase Structure Rules: The Predicate of a Sentence
93
The subject NP can be followed by an NP object of a preposition within the subject phrase;
e.g., “The city of New York is called “the Big Apple.”
In contrast to the noun phrases under the subject node1 (SUBJ), which function only as
subjects or as objects of prepositions, under the predicate node (PRED), NPs can function as
objects or predicates. They function as three types of objects:
Object NPs
direct objects (what receives the action of the verb): Jim read a book.
indirect objects (to whom or for whom the action of the verb applies): She gave me a book.
object of prepositions (noun phrases following prepositions): Sam lives in a big house.
They also function as two types of predicates:
Predicate NPs
Noun phrases function as predicates of subjects when they occur after a copular verb. These
are referred to as subject predicates or subject complements:
subject predicate: Mark is a teacher.
And, as we have just seen, they can function as predicates of objects in small clauses, in which
they are called object predicates or object complements:
object predicate: We elected Sam treasurer.
Adverbiais
You may be happy to learn that we are about to discuss the last part of the rule for expanding
the predicate, the adverbial. To do so, we need three more (these are the last for now, we
promise) phrase structure rules:
13. ADVL—>
AdvCI
AdvP
PrepP
Rule 13 provides US with three syntactic possibilities for each sentence-final adverbial: an
adverb clause, an adverb phrase, and a prepositional phrase.
An example of each structural possibility follows:
AdvCI: The boys left before their father could find them.
AdvP: The boys left very quickly.
PrepP: The boys ran out the door.
Remember that the curly brackets indicate that for each adverbial generated, one, but only
one, of the three choices must be selected.
An adverb clause is expanded to include an adverb subordinate (adv sub) followed by
a new sentence (ร):
14. AdvCI -» adv subs
This rule reintroduces ร, a constituent already present in rule 1. To expand the new ร, we
would go back to rule 1 and begin the process all over again. In other words, as we mentioned
earlier, phrase structure rules are recursive and can be applied as often as needed. Let US
consider the tree diagram for a sentence with an adverb clause:
94
The Grammar Book
Perhaps the boys left before their father could find them.
ร,
sm
VP
ADVL
perhaps
รบBJ
NP
-past
AdvCl
leave
adv sub
before รบBJ
NP
det
their
father
PRED
AUX	VP	
M	V	NP
		pro
could	find	them
ร
ร
N
Another possible expansion of the adverbial in rule 13 is an adverb phrase (AdvP), which is
rewritten as follows:
15.	AdvP —» (ADVn)ADV
This rule means that an adverb phrase contains an obligatory adverb, ADV, optionally
preceded by one or more other adverbs. An adverb occurs not only before adjectives as we saw
earlier in rule 4, but also before adverbs. The following sentence and tree diagram illustrate a
case where an optional adverb has been selected to modify an adverb:
Perhaps the boys left very quickly.
ร'
sm
ร
perhaps
รบBJ
NP
det
N -pl
the
boy
AUX	VP	ADVL
T	V	AdvP
		
-past	leave	ADV ADV
		very quickly
The superscript ท allows for more than one adverb to occur. As is also the case with adjective
phrases in rule 4, some adverbs may be repeated, while other series can have different adverbs:
very, very quickly
really very quickly
Finally, an optional adverbial may also be expanded as a prepositional phrase.2 Rule 5, which
was introduced earlier and which is repeated here, would apply in such a case:
5.	PrepP-> prep NP
Chapter 6: More Phrase Structure Rules: The Predicate of a Sentence
95
We are now in a position to more fully specify the tree diagram for the following sentence:
Perhaps they ate lunch in the city.
perhaps รบBJ
NP
pro
they
PRED
the city
There is a difference between PrepPs that come under the adverbial node and PrepPs
that are part of the VP. In the case of the latter, the PrepP is needed to complete the argument
structure of a verb.
She gave the book to Mavis. *She gave the book, (the PrepP is needed, so it is part of the VP)
The same applies to the copular be. The PrepP is essential to completing the VP:
John is in the house.
*John is. (which cannot stand by itself without a context, for example, a preceding
question such as Who is in the house?)
All other cases where the preposition follows the verb are adverbial in origin and come under
the adverbial node (ADVL).
Jack sells auto parts for a living.
Of course, the prepositional phrase contributes meaning to the sentence. The point is,
though, that the PrepP is not syntactically necessary to complete the sentence. The sentence
can stand on its own without the PrepP:
Jack sells auto parts.
Just as there are pronouns for NPs, there can be pro-adverbs for PrepPs. For example:
Joe is a tourist guide in Miami Beach. He likes working there.
Tourists flock to Miami Beach in the winter. Tourists flock there then.
There in both examples is a replacement for the prepositional phrase in/to Miami Beach.
The pro-adverb then replaces in the winter in the second example. Our rules would get
rather complicated if-;we included the pro-adverb option as well, so we have not done so.
Nevertheless, pro-adverbs are usefuhfor eliminating the redundancy of repeating adverbiais.
The Ordering obSentence-Final Adverbiais
The final point to make about sentence-final adverbiais is that when more than one occurs, the
ordering is not random. To understand the order, it is important to first establish that there are
many semantically different types of sentence-final adverbiais (the following list is not exhaustive):
direction adverbial: John ran to the store.
position adverbial: John is at home.
96
The Grammar Book
manner adverbial: John runs quickly.
time adverbial: Judy eats lunch at noon.
frequency adverbial: Judy eats lunch everyday.
purpose adverbial: Harry works to earn money.
reason adverbial: Harry works because he has to pay bills.
Some generalizations about the order of adverbiais seem to apply most of the time when
more than one adverbial occurs:
Adverbiais of Manner, Direction, and Position:
1.	Manner tends to precede or to follow direction and position.
2.	Direction tends to precede position, and they tend to be adjacent.
quickly around the track at the park, [manner -> direction -> position]
around the track at the park quickly, [direction -> position -> manner]
Adverbiais of Time and Frequency:
ไ. Time and frequency tend to follow manner, direction, and position.
2. Time and frequency are variable in order with respect to each other.
She eats lunch quickly (every day at noon/at noon every day).
manner (frequency time/time frequency)
Adverbiais of Purpose and Reason:
1.	Purpose and reason tend to follow all other adverbiais.
2.	Purpose tends to precede reason.
in order to have time to read.
She eats lunch quickly every day ]	~
manner frequency because she likes to have time to read.
reason
He ran
Jane went to Ohio to visit her uncle because she hadn't seen him for years.
purpose	reason
*Jane went to Ohio because she hadn't seen her uncle for years to visit him.
reason	purpose
The ordering of sentence-final adverbiais thus exhibits some variability, yet it is far from
being random, since sequences such as the following are awkward, if not ungrammatical:
?/*Marcia walked this morning to the shopping center.
?/*Jane fixes dinner every day quickly.
?/*Harry goes jogging in order to stay fit at noon.
We will come back to the topic of adverbial ordering in Chapter 25. For now, perhaps we
should just adopt a rule of thumb that looks like this:
direction + position θ manner + time θ frequency + purpose + reason
One other error that ESL/EFL students make frequently does not have to do with the
order of sentence-final adverbiais, but rather has to do with the placement of an adverb of
manner within a sentence. By following the sequence permitted in their LI, they incorrectly
place an adverb of manner inside the VP, before the verb in English sentences:
*Heather plays beautifully the flute.
Chapter 6: More Phrase Structure Rules: The Predicate of a Sentence
97
98
Summary of the Phrase Structure Rules
At this point, we think it would be useful to list all the phrase structure rules we have
introduced and discussed in this chapter and the preceding one:
1. ร-» โร๓'’ร 1
[SUBJpred]
2. SUBJ -> NP
3 NP J(det3) (Apn)N l p') (PrepP)
[pro
4. AP ->(ADV")ADJ (PrepP)
5. PrepP ->prep NP
6. PRED -> AUX VP (ADVL")
7. AUX —>	j M	(pm) (perf) (prog)
	-imper	
I-pres
8" [-past
9. perf —> have.. .-en
10. prog —»de...-MA
11. VP->
	NP	
cop	AP PrepP	
V	(NP2) (NP')	(PrepP) 1
NP
AP
PrepP
12. NP' —> NP
AdvCI
AdvP
PrepP
14. AdvCI -» adv sub ร
13. ADVL
15. AdvP —»(ADV") ADV
Conclusion
This concludes our presentation of the basic phrase structure rules of English grammar.
Additional rules and further expansions of the rules will be added from time to time in
subsequent chapters as needed.
Don’t worry if you are having a difficult time grasping the phrase structure rules and
drawing trees. Learning grammar 1รู in some ways like learning a new language. In the case
of grammar; it is learning a new metalanguage—a language about language. It is well known
that learning a new language takes practice. We intend to provide you with the necessary
practice as you work your way through the remainder of this book. After this chapter,
however, we will give you a break from drawing trees, picking them up again in Chapter 10
and subsequent chapters.
The Grammar Book
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form. The important thing to stress with the progressive and perfect aspects is that both are
formed with two constituents that are not next to each other in the sentence:
Perfect—a form of the auxiliary have plus the past participle (-en) attached to the
following verb
Progressive—a form of the auxiliary be plus the present participle (-Ing) attached to the
main verb
A common error committed by ESL/EFL students is to omit one of the two necessary
constituents when forming one of the aspects (i.e., the auxiliary verb or the participial
inflection). To help your students better understand this fact, ask them to memorize
three sentences that you give them. Make sure that the sentences contain perfect and
progressive aspects. Ask the students to close their eyes. While they are not looking,
erase certain words or inflections. When the students open their eyes again, they have
to guess what is missing. Repeat this procedure several times with different sentences
(maybe some of the students can suggest example sentences).
2.	Form. Another problem arises when the ESL/EFL student has to learn to deal with
all the irregular past tense and past participle forms. The regular past participle forms,
like the regular past tense, cause no undue hardship. This is because both are formed
with the addition of the -ed inflectional affix for all persons and numbers:
I walked	we walked	I have walked	we have walked
you walked	you have walked
he, she, it walked	they walked	he, she, it has walked they have walked
However, many different irregular forms of past tense verbs and past participles will
have to be presented as separate vocabulary items, a few introduced at a time in a
ten-minute portion of a class hour.
A good way of organizing such a lesson is to introduce together those past tense
verbs and past participles that conform to the same phonological pattern. For example:
Verbs that pattern like blow, blew, blown (also, grow, know, throw)
pres past past participle
These can all be presented together. The following is one way that this could be
accomplished:
a.	The teacher gives the students the following paragraph and then reads it out loud:
Yesterday the wind blew very hard. It had never blown that hard before. I knew when
it first began that it would be bad for my garden. The plants that grew out in the open
were hurt badly. Only a few which had already grown strong survived the windstorm. If
I had only known, I would have planted them closer to my house.
b.	The teacher has students read the paragraph once out loud and discusses with the class
any new vocabulary. The teacher calls particular attention to the past tense and past
participle forms of the underlined verbs:
blow	blew	blown
grow	grew	grown
know	knew	known
Chapter 6: More Phrase Structure Rules: The Predicate of a Sentence
99
c.	The teacher gives students an exercise where students have to supply the correct form
of a given infinitive verb for a number of sentences. For example:
(to grow) I have never_______________tulips before.
(to throw) After waiting a moment, the pitcher____________the ball to the catcher.
z. Form. Olson and Shalek (1981) suggest that game-type activities be used to practice
past participles. One of their ideas is to use a tree with many branches as a visual prop
for a verb conjugation game. Each tree branch has several pockets for cards, and on each
branch the pocket closest to the trunk has been filled with a card that gives one example
of the verb conjugation pattern that the branch represents. The class (or a group) is then
given a stack of cards that must be put into the remaining pockets in the tree branches.
Sample cards are as follows (note that all three verb forms should be visible even when
the card is placed in the pocket):
blow
blew
blown
break
broke
broken
sing
sang
sung
keep
kept
kept
buy
bought
bought
become
became
become
4. Form. One rule that you would probably want to teach in a lesson is the rule governing the
usual order of sentence-final adverbiais. The following is one way in which this might be
accomplished (an idea suggested by Robin Abramson):
Step 1: The teacher makes a statement containing one or two adverbiais about himself
or herself and asks a question of a student that will elicit the same type of statement.
a.	Teacher: I drove to school today. How did you get here?
Student: I took the bus (here).
b.	Teacher: I come to English class every day. How often do you come (to class)?
Student: I come (to English class) every day.
c.	Teacher: Do you know why I come here at 8:00 every morning? I come here at 8:00
every morning because I want to teach English. Why do you come here?
Student: I come at 8:00 because I want to learn English.
Step 2: The teacher gives the students following sentence:
12	3	4
Aza takes the bus to school at 8:00 every day because she wants to learn English.
100
The Grammar Book
Step 3: The teacher tells students that each part she or he has numbered is called
an adverbial. The teacher then asks students:
a.	What does number 1 describe? (where—direction)
b.	What does number 2 describe? (when—time)
c.	What does number 3 describe? (how often—frequency)
d.	What does number 4 describe? (why—reason)
Step 4: The teacher divides the class into groups. The teacher then passes out a handout.
Each handout contains sentences with scrambled adverbiais. Each group is to work on
one set of sentences and correct any improper order of adverbiais. Students may refer to
the model they have been given. (If more than one order is acceptable, both orders should
be given as answers.) For the purposes of this exercise, only postverbal ordering of the type
illustrated in the example in Step 2 should be discussed. Later (in Chapters 25, 27, and
30) we show that some adverbiais occur sentence-initially for information management or
emphasis (e.g., Because of the bad weather, we stayed at homed).
Step 5: When the groups are finished, students in each group give their answers, and
the class or the teacher corrects where necessary.
ร. Form. With regard to verbs that take an obligatory abverbial of direction or position
in the VP, V. Sandoval (personal communication) suggests having students complete
sentences using visual aids such as the following:
Ann put the flowers ...
Roy hung his coat...
Exercises
Test your knowledge of the structures introduced.
1.	Provide an original example sentence illustrating each of the following terms.
Underline the pertinent word(s) in your example.
a.	imperative	e. phrasal modal
b.	modal	k. perfect aspect
c.	verb with two objects	g. progressive aspect
d.	adverb clause	h. adverb phrase
Chapter 6: More Phrase Structure Rules: The Predicate of a Sentence
101
2.	Draw tree diagrams for the following sentences using the phrase structure rules
introduced so far in this book:
a.	The quiet girls talked after the
teachers left.
b.	Occasionally, John exercises on
Sunday.
c.	The baby cried because she was
hungry.
d.	Ian is going to take that class
in the future.
e.	Anne could have been doing her
homework.
f.	Fortunately, his brothers work very
quietly.
g.	Perhaps Mary has been studying in
the library.
h.	We gave some candy to the children.
i.	Ralph put the chairs in the hallway.
Test your ability to apply what you know.
3.	Perhaps the most ubiquitous constituent that we have introduced in our phrase
structure rules is the prepositional phrase. Prepositional phrases can be parts of noun
phrases, adjective phrases, adverbiais, verb phrases, or object predicates:
a.	PrepP in NP: a man of honor, an ounce of vodka
b.	PrepP in AP: fond of cats
c.	PrepP in ADVL: do laundry on Saturday
d.	PrepP in VP: be in the house, give the book to Mavis, lay in the crib
e.	PrepP in object predicate: put the flowers on the table
Try to think of one additional example for each of these.
4.	If your students produce the following, what norms of Standard English have they not
followed?
a.	"She can swims very fast.	d. "Sarah put the books.
b.	"The man been to Chicago twice.	e. "Lou speaks fluently French.
c.	"Jane is jump rope.	f. "Megan cans speak Arabic.
5.	Although phrase structure rules should not be presented to ESL/EFL students in the
form given in this chapter, they do yield important insights into English structure.
One of the insights that should be emphasized has to do with the composition of
the progressive aspect. In light of the following errors by different ESL/EFL learners
attempting to form the progressive aspect, what should be emphasized for each of them?
a.	"She running now.	b. "She is run now.
6.	One of your students asks you why a grammar text claims that English has no future
tense. This student believes that English does have a future tense. How would you
answer this question?
7.	English speakers have been known to slip and say things like “I've already boughten
the bread.” Why do you think that they make such a slip?
102
The Grammar Book
8.	What are the similarities and differences in the structure of the time adverbiais in
these sentences?
a.	We’ll eat at 10 o’clock.	c. I’ve studied English for ten years.
b.	I’m going to Dallas next week.	d. I’ve studied English ten years.
9.	A student asks you why it’s okay to say, “I went to school, ” “I went to church, ” or “I
went to work, ” but not okay to say “I went to home." How will you answer this question?
Bibliography
REFERENCES	2
Olson, c., & Shalek, ร. (1981). Games and activities based on grammatical areas which are problems for the
intermediate ESL student. Unpublished manuscript, School for International Training, Brattleboro, VT.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING;
For useful lists of verbs with irregular past tense and past participles, see:
Clark, R., Burrows, A., & Moran, p. (2010). The ESL miscellany (4th ed.). Brattleboro, VT: Pro Lingua
Associates.
For a list of phonologically similar irregular verbs, see:
Celce-Murcia, M., Brinton, D., & Goodwin, J. (with Griner, B.). (2010). Teaching pronunciation: A course book
and reference guide (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
End notes
1.	Each labeled part of a tree is called a node. For example, the ร node has two "branches": the SUBJ and
PRED. เท turn, the PRED node has two branches: AUX and VP, and a possible third branch, ADVL.
2.	Note that in sentence-final adverbiais, prepositions can combine with nouns to convey temporal (time)
or locative (place) meaning. As a general rule, nouns do not function on their own as adverbs in English.
For example, take the following sentences, where the nouns Monday and home become adverbial with
the help of the preceding prepositions:
Max will stay until Monday.	Mr. Green works at home.
prep N	prep N
However, in some sentences, such as the following, prepositions are optionally deletable:
I've lived in New York (for) many years. I'll get the book (on) Thursday.
And in some sentences, for a variety of reasons, prepositions simply do not occur in English before
certain nouns that function adverbially:
Jack went home. He will return tomorrow.
Chapter 6: More Phrase Structure Rules: The Predicate of a Sentence
103
The Tense-Aspect
System
Introduction
In this chapter, we explore the English tense-aspect system. Tense is a grammatical device
for situating events, states, or actions in time. As you can imagine, how humans divide
time and represent it is different for speakers of different languages. For instance, French has
rhe passe' compose, which is similar in form to the English present perfect in that both are made
up of two morphemes. However, while the passe compose is sometimes used where an English
speaker would use the present perfect, the two do not always correspond. Consequently,
French learners may overgeneralize the English present perfect and use it where English
speakers would use the simple past. Here is a writing sample from a French learner describing
a movie, where the overgeneralizations are underlined.
The movie has started with this woman. She was on the sidewalk and looked into a
window with foods inside. She stole a loaf of bread... and she tried to escape, but a
man has catched her. (Collins, 2007, p. 295)
Collins’s research also shows that Japanese learners do not overgeneralize the present
perfect to the same degree as French learners, presumably because Japanese has only one past
tense form, similar in construction to the past tense in English. Some languages, such as Chinese,
Thai, Yoruba, and Indonesian, have no tense markers on verbs at all. Of course, speakers of
these languages can situate events, states, and actions in time; they just use other means to do so
(e.g., lexical means), such as using their equivalent of yesterday to indicate the past.
In the same vein, as we mentioned in Chapter 6, English has no future tense; i.e., no
explicit marking on the verb to convey futurity, as do the Romance and Slavic languages.
Indeed, as Bergs (2010) notes, one of the central problems in describing and discussing
expressions of futurity in contemporary English is the fact that there is no single “future”
morpheme, as there was in Latin or as there is in Turkish (-eceg-) today. Instead, futurity in
English is signaled by combinations of different forms and contextual factors.
Furthermore, as we have already seen, language teachers need to deal with meaning and
use as well as form. It is not enough to say to ESL/EFL students, “English does not have a
future tense,” and be done with the matter. Therefore, in this chapter, we start by inventorying
the forms that English does use to deal with the three time periods: a time before, a present time,
and a time after. We also discuss perfect and progressive aspects, leaving most of the discussion
of modals and phrasal modals to the next chapter. Since the exact mapping of form, meaning,
and use varies considerably from language to language, mastering the English tense-aspect
system requires considerable effort on the part of ESL/EFL students. Because of its importance
ใ 05
and its challenge, we devote two chapters to the subject. In this first chapter, we explore the
form, meaning, and use of the English tense-aspect system at the sentence level. Sentence-level
use is perhaps the way most teachers first introduce the forms. Ίο really understand how the
system functions, however, it is necessary to appreciate its application at the suprasentential,
or discourse, level. Without this perspective, it is impossible to explain the various patterns of
tense-aspect-modal combinations that occur, which we do in Chapter 9.
One point that we wish to underscore here is that even at the sentence level, a system is
operating. We have sometimes seen teachers introduce a tense yet fail to show students how
that tense contrasts with others, let alone how it fits into the system as a whole. In order to see
how the system operates, we first describe its form. Next, we propose a core meaning for each
of the tenses and aspects of the system, and we illustrate how the core meaning applies when
tenses are used by themselves and when they are combined with one or both aspects. Finally,
we contrast the uses of some of the most commonly confused combinations.
The Formal Characteristics of the
Tense-Aspect System
Over the years, the important distinction between tense and aspect has become blurred. For
this reason, sometimes English is said to have 12 “tenses,” as follows:
1. Simple present	It breaks.
2. Simple past	It broke.
3. Simple future	It will break.
4. Present perfect	It has broken.
5. Past perfect	It had broken.
6. Future perfect	It will have broken.
7. Present progressive	It is breaking.
8. Past progressive	It was breaking.
9. Future progressive	It will be breaking.
10. Present perfect progressive	It has been breaking.
11. Past perfect progressive	It had been breaking.
12. Future perfect progressive	It will have been breaking.
We have tried to be careful in the preceding discussion to talk about the tense-aspect
system and tense-aspect combinations. Me feel that if the natural division between tense, which
relates to time, and aspect, which has to do with the internal structure of the action occurring
at a given time, are dealt with separately at first, the system that results from their subsequent
combination is much easier to see and, therefore, easier to learn. We do this in the following
chart by listing the two tenses, present and past, along the vertical axis. We include the future
on this chart of tenses as well, for although there is no verb inflection for future time, any
description of the English tense-aspect system needs to account for what form-meaning
combinations do exist that relate to a time after the present. The aspects—simple (sometimes
106
The Grammar Book
called zero aspect), perfect, progressive, and their combination, perfect progressive—are
arrayed along the horizontal axis, following the order of the AUX elements in Phrase
Structure Rule #7, minus the modal and phrasal modal categories. We illustrate the tense-
aspect combinations with the irregular verb write and the regular verb walk.
THE TENSE-ASPECT COMBINATIONS IN ENGLISH
Aspect -> Tense Ϊ	Simple	Perfect	Progressive	Perfect Progressive
	0	have + -en	be + -ing	have + -en be + -ing
Present	write/writes walk/walks	has/have written has/have walked	am/is/are writing am/is/are walking	has/have been writing has/have been walking
Past	wrote walked	had written had walked	was/were writing was/were walking	had been writing had been walking
Future	will write will walk	will have written will have walked	will be writing will be walking	will have been writing will have been walking
You can see in the chart that the traditional 12 “tenses” are actually 12 combinations
of tense and aspect. They are named by combining a tense with an aspect or aspects, such as
present perfect or past perfect progressive. Only the forms in the first column receive their
names by first specifying the aspect—simple—and then the tense, such as simple present. In
the other cases, the tense is mentioned first, followed by the aspect (e.g., present perfect).1
The simple present remains in its base form (write, walk) with one exception—the third
person singular form, which is made by adding an -s to the verb (writes, walks). The present
perfect is formed with the verb have (has for third person singular) and the past participle,
here symbolized by -en. It is important to remember that -en is only a symbol. Sometimes
the past participle does indeed end in -en, as does our example irregular verb, written. Other
times, the past participle is identical to the past tense form of the verb, as you can see in
our other example, where the regular verb walk has the past participle walked. The present
progressive form (sometimes called the present continuous) combines a form of the be verb
(am, is, are), depending on the person and number of the subject, with the present participle,
an -ing form. Finally, the present perfect progressive can be seen to be a combination of the
perfect form with have + -en and the progressive form with be + -ing. In this case, the be verb
of the progressive carries the -en perfect ending; in other words, it is in its past participle
form, been.
Reading across the second row, you can see that the various combinations with past tense
and aspect form a similar pattern to the present tense. The past tense in its simple form in
English is formed by using its past irregular form (as in the irregular verb in our chart, wrote),
or with a regular verb such as walk (by adding -ed to give US walked). One difference from the
simple present is that the form of the simple past remains invariant for all persons and numbers.
The past perfect form is made with the past form of the have verb (i.e., had) followed by the
past participle of the main verb. The past progressive form combines the past form of the be
verb, here in two forms—first and third person singular form was and all the other persons and
numbers with were—followed by the present participle. The past perfect progressive is formed
Chapter 7: The Tense-Aspect System
107
with the past form of the have verb (i.e., had) followed by the past participle of the be verb
(i.e., been) and the present participle of the main verb, here writing or walking.
For the future line in our matrix, we use the modal will, since there is no future tense
that appears as a marking on the verb in English. The future adheres to the same patterns as
the present and past in terms of its combination of aspect markers: will with the base form for
the simple future, will + have + -en for the future perfect, will with be + -ing for the future
progressive, and will + have + -en + be + -ing for the future perfect progressive.
Since the perfect and progressive aspect markers contribute consistent meanings
regardless of tense, in effect, ESL/EFL students have to learn only the form and meaning
of the three tenses (in their simple form) and the two aspects (perfect and progressive) to
develop a basic understanding of the tense-aspect system of English. This is why we say that
by viewing the tenses and aspects as a system, the learning burden is lessened.
If we think of the Tense-Aspect Combinations chart as a map of the territory that the
tense-aspect system of English covers, we can make some further observations that have
pedagogical import. For example, the traffic on our map is focused more in the northwest
(including the present progressive) than in other areas. In other words, the frequency with
which “northwest” tense-aspect combinations are used is greater than in other regions of our
map. Such observations can help teachers to decide where to put the limited time they have
to best advantage. The southeast, for example, receives very little traffic and consequently
should probably not receive as much attention as those combinations in the northwest.
Another point worth making is that it is the borders between the various regions of the
map that prove to be especially challenging for students. Where, for example, does the territory
of the past tense end and the present perfect begin? If you were to draw circles on the map to
indicate those areas with troublesome boundaries, you would find that there are a few that prove
particularly challenging to learn. You may try to do this now; however, we will revisit these
difficult distinctions in a later section of this chapter, on the use of the tense-aspect system.
What we have described so far are the full forms of the tense-aspect system. It is also
possible to contract the auxiliary verbs have, be, and will as well as be as a copula:
They've already met their goal.
Elizabeth's a comedian.
The contractions with pronouns are as follows:
CONTRACTED FORM OF AUXILIARY VERBS AND COPULA BE
	be (cop or aux)	have	had	will
1st person, singular	I'm	I've	I'd	III
2nd person, singular/plural	you're	you've	you'd	you'll
3rd person, singular	he's/she's/it's	he's/she's/it's	he'd/she'd/it'd	he'll/she'll/it'll
1st person, plural	we're	we've	we'd	we'll
3rd person, plural	they're	they've	they'd	they'll
Notice that the forms for the third person singular be and have are the same, as are the
forms for contracted had and the modal would, making for potential ambiguity in writing
108
The Grammar Book
[e.g., He’d read about it (He had read about it or He would read about it)}, but in reality, the
context would most often disambiguate them. Also worth mentioning is the fact that negative
contractions are possible (e.g., He isn’t)·, and we will take up this topic fully in Chapter 10.
Meaning in the English
Tense-Aspect System
Meaning is an exceedingly important dimension in helping students manage the tense-aspect
system. If students are able to develop a feel for the meanings conveyed by components of
the system, they will have a tremendous advantage in learning to cope with the boundary
problems. In this section, therefore, we attempt to capture the semantic core of each of the
components of the system—the three tenses with simple aspect and the two other aspect
markers used singly and in tandem.
There are three qualifications to our discussion of core meanings which we should make
at the outset.
1.	One meaning can have many forms.
We know that even though we might try to assign a core meaning to each construction,
in fact, no simple one-to-one correspondence exists. For instance, Torres Cacoullos and
Walker (2009), drawing on a corpus of spoken Canadian English from the Quebec English
Project, provide these examples of how future time is conveyed with different constructions:
a.	Simple present: I finish on the twenty-seventh of June and I start the summer camp
on the eighth of July. (Q009:405)
b.	Present progressive: In fact, I'm leaving on September the first for Belfast for a
couple of weeks. (M019:223)
c.	Modal will: And he'll probably live 'til a hundred. (Q029:1480)
d.	Phrasal modal be going to: My doctor tells me I'm going to live 'til a hundred. (0029:341)
English is not alone in having more than one form to express the future. As we will see, these
forms were introduced into English at different times in its history, so that older forms coexist
with newer ones.3 We will discuss the differences among these four constructions later in this
chapter, but clearly, it is not a simple core meaning of futurity that differentiates them. On the
other hand, Bergs (2010) notes these expressions of futurity can be regarded from a construction
grammar perspective as comprising a construction family; in other words, they are related.
2.	The meaning of a tense or aspect depends to a certain extent on the meaning of the verb.
We will also discuss the issue of the semantics of the verb later in this chapter, but for now,
let us illustrate this second qualification by calling attention to the fact that English verbs divide
into two basic aspectual classes: perfective and imperfective. Perfective verbs represent actions
that are “temporally bounded," meaning that they have an endpoint (e.g., They built the house
next door), whereas imperfective verbs construe events and processes as having no endpoint
(e.g., They knew the neighbors). As the cognitive linguist Langacker (2001) puts it, “Perfectives
resist the simple present but take the progressive, while imperfectives do the opposite” (p. 255):
*He builds a house.	He is building a house, [perfective]
He knows the truth. *He is knowing the truth, [imperfective]
Chapter 7: The Tense-Aspect System
109
This is because the function of the progressive is “to convert a perfective process into
an imperfective one” (Langacker, 2008, p. 155). The point is that based on whether a verb is
perfective or imperfective, it will interact differently with different aspects.
3.	One form can have many meanings.
The mirror opposite of the first qualification can be illustrated with the -ed marker. It marks
past tense (e.g., Our plane arrived late yesterday I), but it also has a presence in the following:
a.	If I walked home after school today, it would take me all afternoon.
b.	They said that they loved grammar.
c.	Host to guest: Did you want something to eat before the game?
d.	Sales clerk to customer: What is it that you wanted!
In sentence a, a conditional, the action is hypothetical and hasn’t taken place, so obviously
the -ed is not signifying past time. In sentence b, an example of reported or indirect speech, the
verb in the embedded clause is in past tense, but the expression of their affection for grammar
could well still apply—that is, it may not be over and done with. In sentence c, the irregular form
of the past tense of the verb do is used in a present offer; in sentence d, the past tense is used in a
question pertaining to the present. We could cite other examples, but the point is that in order
to understand the meaning of the tenses, we must go to a deeper level of abstraction than that
of temporal meaning. By so doing, we will see what core meaning underlies the use of the past
tense in the preceding example sentences and in all other sentences in which it occurs. The core
meaning of a particular form is the meaning that is most central, primary, or invariant (Hatch &
Brown, 1995). We begin by analyzing the core meanings of the tenses with simple aspect.
SIMPLE ASPECT ____________________________________________________
Hirtle (1967) explains that the term simple aspect refers to events that are conceptualized
as complete wholes. The events are not presented as allowing further development. This
aspect stands in contrast to progressive aspect, which is incomplete or imperfective—where
the event or state is viewed as some portion of a whole and where there is room for further
development or change. We can see this difference by comparing examples with the simple
present tense and present progressive:
Susan and Carl live in Newark.
Susan and Carl are living in Newark.
The simple present in the first sentence presents the fact that Susan and Carl live in
Newark as a whole event, not allowing for further development and with no suggestion of
change. The present progressive in the second sentence suggests that their living in Newark
may be temporary, thus allowing for the possibility of change. In the second sentence, Susan and
Carl’s living in Newark is some portion .of the whole in the sense that we understand that they
may have lived elsewhere before moving to Newark and will perhaps in the future move again.
With this explanation of the core meaning of simple aspect as a backdrop, let us consider
what core meaning each of the tenses adds.
Simple Present Tense
The present tense conveys immediate factuality (Lewis, 1986):
I skim the New York Times at breakfast.
The Earth rotates around the รนท.
My mother loves daisies.
It is a beautiful day.
110
The Grammar Book
Let US now show how the core meanings of the simple present, its complete or
unchanging nature, and its immediate factuality apply:
a.	Habitual actions in the present:
He walks to school every day.
b.	General timeless truths, such as physical laws or customs:
Water freezes at 0 degrees centigrade.
Spaniards eat dinner late.
c.	With be and other stative verbs to indicate states:
There is a large house on the corner.
I know Mr. Jackson.
The car belongs to Bill.
or even the inception of states:
Now I understand.
d.	เท the subordinate clauses of time or condition when the main clause contains a
future-time verb:4
After he finishes work, he'll do the errands.
If Cindy passes the bar exam, she'll be able to practice law.
e.	Future expression (when a scheduled event is involved, usually with a future-time
adverbial):
I have a meeting next Wednesday at that time.
f.	Present event/action (usually in sporting events ordemonstrations/procedures of
some sort):
Here comes the pitch; Ortiz swings and misses.
Now I add three eggs to the mixture.
g.	Present speech acts (where the action is accomplished in the speaking of it):
I resign from the commission.
h.	Conversational historical present (used to refer to certain past events in narration):
"So he stands up in the boat and waves his arms to catch our attention."
It can be seen, then, how each event being reported on in the simple present is complete;
we can infer that there will be no change. Further, each use is an immediate factual report.
Next, let US consider the simple past tense. The same general semantic character for simple
aspect holds for the simple past as well. Simple past describes events as wholes, ones not
conducive to change or development.
Simple Past Tense
The simple past also states facts. What the core meaning of the past tense adds is a sense of
remoteness (Knowles, 1979). The event can be remote in time:
The Boston Red Sox won the World Series in 2013.
Even if the event is a recent one, such as
I finished my term paper!
the “remoteness” comes in the feeling that the event is over and done with. As we saw earlier,
the feeling of remoteness can apply even to notions other than time:
If I walked home from school, it would take all afternoon.
Here, the remoteness is due to the conditional, hypothetical nature of this statement.
In fact, this is an imaginary conditional (see Chapter 27), and remote from reality.5 In the
Chapter 7: The Tense-Aspect System
example sentence given earlier, “They said that they loved grammar,” the remoteness comes
from the fact that this is a report of what some other people originally said. It is indirect,
not their actual expression of affection (see Chapter 33). In the host’s offer “Did you want
something to eat before the game?” the use of the past-tense form of the do verb makes the
offer more indirect than it would be if the present-tense form do were used. Here, indirectness
can be a sign of politeness. This same interpretation explains why the clerk used the past tense
in his question to the customer about what she had in mind.
Let us now examine uses of the past tense to see how these notions of completeness and
remoteness apply:
a.	A definite single completed event/action in the past:
I attended a meeting of that committee last week.
b.	Habitual or repeated action/event in the past:
It snowed almost every weekend last winter.
c.	An event with duration that applied in the past with the implication that it no longer
applies in the present:
Professor Nelson taught at Yale for 30 years.
d.	With states in the past:
He appeared to be a creative genius.
He owed me a lot of money.
e.	Imaginative conditional in the subordinate clause (referring to present time, as
discussed in Chapter 27):
If he took better care of himself, he wouldn't be absent so often.
f.	Social distancing:
Did you want to sit down and stay a while?
So, as we can see, the simple past is used when the speaker conceptualizes a complete
event factually, but as remote in some way.
Simple Future Tense with Will (or the Contracted 11)
The picture that we have been painting for simple aspect holds for the simple future as
well. In other words, simple future is used when the event is conceptualized as a whole. One
difference in its core meaning is that events in the future cannot be factually knowable in the
same way as those in the past or present can. Nevertheless, Salkie (2010) argues that will really
is for the most part a marker of future tense in English.
We will cover the first half of the book this term.
We will never know what cures tropical plants possess if we don't become serious
about preserving the forests in which they grow.
Will has other meanings as well, and these are dealt with in the next chapter on modals.
Let us now see how its core meaning applies:
a.	An action to take place at some definite future time:
Joel will take the bar exam next month.
b.	A future habitual action or state:
After October, Marlena will take the 7:30 train to Chicago every day.
And even for present habits, about which are expected to continue into the future:
Erik is so funny. He'll wake up, and before coming downstairs, he'll start playing
with his trains, (example from Lori Gray, speaking about her son)
112
The Grammar Book
c.	A situation that may obtain in the present and will obtain in the future but with some
future termination in sight (notice here it is not the will that suggests the limitation on
the event, but the subordinate clause):
Nora will live in Caracas until she improves her Spanish.
d.	เท the main (result) clause of future conditionals:
If you go, you'll be sorry.
Here again, we should be able to see that the simple tense allows US to talk about events as
wholes. Before moving on, then, let US summarize. Simple aspect allows US to talk about events
as not open to development or change and to make factual statements or strong predictions
about them. This is true despite the tense and is true for both specific facts and general ones.
Time	Specific	General
Present	Joe misses Susie.	Leap year comes every four years.
Past	You slept till noon!	Dinosaurs roamed the Earth for millions of years.
Future	I'll be home by 6 P.M.	Oil will float on water.
PERFECT ASPECT ~
The core meaning of the perfect is “prior,” and it is used in relation to some other point in
time. For instance, present perfect is used retrospectively to refer to a time prior to now:
Have you done your homework?
The past perfect offers a retrospective point of view on some past time:
He had left before I arrived.
The future perfect offers a retrospective point of view on some future time:
Mark will have finished all his chores by the time we get there.
Next, we examine in detail the combination of the perfect with the three tenses to see
how this core meaning applies.
Present Perfect
a.	A situation that began at a prior point in time and continues into the present:
I have been a teacher since 1967.
b.	An action occurring or not occurring at an unspecified prior time that has current
relevance:
I have already seen that movie.
c.	A very recently completed action (often with just):
Don has just finished his homework.
d.	An action that occurred over a prior time period and that is completed at the moment of
speaking:
The value of the Johnsons' house has doubled in the last four years.
e.	With verbs in subordinate clauses of time or condition:
She won't be satisfied until she has finished another chapter.6
If you have done your homework, you can watch TV.
Chapter 7: The Tense-Aspect System
113
Past Perfect
a.	An action completed in the past, prior to some other past event or time:
He had already left before I could offer him a ride.
She had worked at the post office before 1992.
b.	Imaginative conditional in the subordinate clause (referring to past time):
If Sally had studied harder, she would have passed the exam.
Future Perfect
a.	A future action that will be completed prior to a specific future time:
I will have finished all this work by 5 P.M.
b.	A state or accomplishment that will be completed in the future, prior to some other
future time or event:
At the end of the summer, the Slakes will have been married for 10 years.
Thus, you can see that when it interacts with each of the three tenses, perfect aspect
allows us a retrospective point of view from a particular point in time: present, past, or future.
PROGRESSIVE ASPEcF^^^
We have already made the case for the core meaning of progressive aspect as being imperfective,
meaning that it portrays an event in a way that allows for it to be incomplete, or somehow
limited. You saw how this core aspectual meaning was manifest in the contrast between an
event of a temporary nature, in contrast with an ongoing state:
Susan and Carl are living in Newark.
Susan and Carl live in Newark.
However, the progressive also offers another example where one form has more than one
meaning. While the imperfective aspectual meaning of the progressive is its default in Modern
English, in Middle English, the progressive was also used to highlight particularly remarkable
situations (Kranich, 2013). Kranich suggests that its length added to its effectiveness for
attracting attention. Consequently, this latter, “subjective” meaning has remained, although it is
not as frequent as its aspectual one. In Kranich’s study of 783 progressives used in British English
(1950-1999), 86 percent were aspectual and 14 percent were subjective. Entertaining a historical
perspective on meaning is informative; at the same time, we need to account for contemporary
options in order to help our students interpret the language they hear and read.
Here are uses of the tense-progressive aspect combinations so that you can see how the
core meanings of the progressive hold for all the tenses:
Present Progressive
Activity in progress:
He is attending a meeting now.
a.	Extended present (action will end and therefore lacks the permanence of the simple
present tense):
I'm studying geology at théUniversity of Colorado.
b.	A temporary situation:
Chelsea is living with her parents.
c.	Repetition or iteration in a series of similar ongoing actions:
Henry is kicking the soccer ball around the backyard.
14
The Grammar Book
d.	Expresses future (when an event is planned; usually with a future-time adverbial). A
planned event may be conceptualized as in progress (Leech, Hundt, Mair, & Smith, 2009,
p. 133):
She's coming tomorrow.
e.	A change in progress:
She's becoming more and more like her mother.
And here is an example of its subjective meaning:
f.	Emotional comment on present habit (often co-occurring with frequency adverbs
always or forever):
He's always delivering in a clutch situation, (approving)
He's forever acting up at these affairs, (disapproving)
Past Progressive
a.	An action in progress ata specific point of time in the past:
He was walking to school at 8:30 this morning.
b.	Past action simultaneous with some other event that is usually stated in the simple past.
The past progressive provides the background, the simple past the foreground (Carter &
McCarthy, 2006, p. 611):
Karen was washing her hair when the phone rang.
While Alex was traveling in Europe, he ran into an old friend.
c.	Repetition or iteration of some ongoing past action:
Jake was coughing all night long.
d.	Social distancing (which comes from the past tense and the tentativeness of the
progressive aspect):
I was hoping you could lend me $10.
Future Progressive
Although this form is more commonly used in British English than in American English, its
use has expanded in this century in both dialects (Celle & Smith, 2010).
a.	An action that will be in progress at a specific time in the future:
A driver will be waiting for you when you arrive.
b.	Duration of some specific future action:
Mavis will be working on her thesis for the next three years.
PERFECT PROGRESSivEASPEC^^
As its name implies, this aspect combines the “prior” sense of the perfect with the meaning of
“incompleteness” inherent in the progressive aspect:
They have been working hard on a special project.
We understand that the event being reported here has begun prior to now and that their
hard work is limited—that is, it will not continue indefinitely. Next, we examine how these
two core meanings work in tandem for each of the tenses.
Present Perfect Progressive
a. A situation or habit that began เท the past (recent or distant) and that continues up to
the present (and possibly into the future):
Bart has been going out with Alicia.
Chapter 7: The Tense-Aspect System
115
b.	An action in progress that is not yet completed:
I have been reading that book.
c.	A state that changes over time:
The students have been getting better and better each week.
d.	A subjective, evaluative comment on something observed over time triggered by
current evidence:
You've been drinking again!
Past Perfect Progressive
a.	An action or habit taking place over a period of time in the past, prior to some other
past event or time:
Karen had been working hard, so her doctor told her to take a vacation. She had
been trying to finish her degree that year.
b.	A past action in progress that was interrupted by a more recent past action:
We had been planning to vacation in Maine, but changed our minds after receiving
the brochure on Nova Scotia.
c.	An ongoing past action or state that becomes satisfied by some other event:
I had been hoping to see that play, so I was pleased when I won the tickets.
Future Perfect Progressive
Durative or habitual action that is taking place in the present and that will continue into the
future, up until or through a specific future time:
On Christmas Eve, we will have been living in the same house for 20 years.
He will have been keeping a journal for 10 years next month.
_____________________________________________________________
< Prior___________________________________________
Incomplete (event is subject to change)---------
Complete----------------------------------------
(event is conceived of as a whole); remoteness
Prior-------------------------------------------___________________________________________
-------Incomplete --------------------------------------
Complete; immediate factuality------------------
Prior-------:-----------------------------------
-------Incomplete---------------------------------------
Complete; strong prediction---------------------
INTERIM SUMMARY
We can sum up our observations so far concerning the core meanings of the English
tense-aspect system with this diagram:
Past perfect
______________	Past progressive____________
_____________________________________
Simple past
Present perfect
______________	Present progressive____________________________________
___________________
Simple present
Future perfect
______________	Future progressive____________________________________
_____________________
Simple future
116
The Grammar Book
While this approach accounts for much of the core semantics of the system, it does need
some refinement at a more local level. For one thing, the second qualification that we made
earlier reminds US that the meaning of the grammatical tense and aspect can be affected by
the lexical meaning of the verb since verbs have their own inherent aspect.
THE LEXICAL ASPÊcFÕFVERBS
As you saw in Chapter 3, verbs not only have grammatical aspect, but they have lexical
aspect as well. Verbs can be divided into four categories based on their inherent lexical aspect
(Vendler, 1967):
Activity	Accomplishment	Achievement (punctual)	State7
run	paint (a picture)	recognize (something)	have
walk	make (a chair)	realize (something)	contain
รพเทา	build (a house)	lose (something)	seem
live	write (a novel)	find (something)	want
study	grow up	win the race	like
Activities, accomplishments, and achievements all involve changes of state. Activity
verbs are durative and describe an ongoing action. They each have an undefined beginning
and end point. Accomplishment verbs, on the other hand, share with activity verbs their
durativity, but each has a well-defined end point, when the particular action described in
the verb phrase is—or is not—completed. Achievement verbs also each have a well-defined
end point; however, they have no duration. They are punctual. Stative verbs do not involve
change. They depict a stable situation that is assumed to last more or less indefinitely. Often
stative verbs are broken down into the following subcategories, with several verbs appearing
in more than one category depending on their meaning:
Sensory perception: smell, see, hear, taste, feel
Mental perception: know, believe, think, understand, mean, doubt
Possession: possess, have, own, belong
Emotions, attitudes, and opinions: like, love, hate, dislike, want, desire, need, prefer,
appreciate, doubt, feel, wish
Measurement: equal, measure, weigh, cost
Relationship: contain, entail, consist of
Description: be, resemble, sound, appear, seem, look
How these four main categories of verbs—activity, accomplishment, achievement, and
state—interact with the aspects that we have just considered is as follows:
With Simple Aspect
The simple tenses can express either specific or general facts, events, habits, and states with
all four verb types.
With Perfect Aspect
Activity verbs are not as commonly used with perfect aspect as some of the other categories
of verbs. When they are used with perfect aspect, they describe a prior experience or activity:
I have run a marathon before.
Chapter 7: The Tense-Aspect System
Accomplishment and achievement verbs go easily with perfect aspect and signal prior
events that are completed:
John Updike has written many novels.
The true meaning of that holiday has been lost.
Stative verbs with perfect aspect signal a state that may or may not have ended at the
time of speech:
I have owned a VW
before,
since 2007.
118
With Progressive Aspect
Activity verbs readily take the progressive, which reinforces the fact that the action has
duration:
Meg is washing the windows.
Accomplishment verbs also take the progressive, but in this case, the progressive focuses
on progress toward a particular end that has not yet been completed:
The contractors are building the new civic center.
With achievement verbs, because they are punctual, the progressive gives the meaning
of iteration:
He is nodding his head in agreement.
or inception of an event:
Joe is realizing his mistake.
Alternatively, by stretching out the moment, the speaker can place emphasis on the
action associated with the achievement:
The plane is landing right on schedule.
It has been said that stative verbs do not normally take the progressive because of a
fundamental semantic conflict between a grammatical aspect, which denotes a limited duration
or incompletion; and a lexical aspect, which expresses a stable state:
*1 am knowing the answer.
However, such an unqualified generalization discounts the frequently made observation
that the progressive can occur with stative verbs to achieve certain effects (see Kesner Bland,
1988, for discussion) and that stative verbs regularly occur with the progressive in Indian English.
The progressive turns states into events. As such, “progressive statives” can be used to
a.	intensify the emotion expressed by the verb:
I'm hating this assignment.
I hate this assignment.
b.	indicate current behavior as opposed to general description:
He's being rude.
He's rude.
c.	introduce change in states by focusing on differences in degree across time:
I'm understanding less and less about life, the older I get.
Other uses of progressive statives were found by Gavis (1997) to
d.	show limited duration:
Are you understanding this now?
e.	emphasize conscious involvement:
What we are seeing is a red dwarf star.
f.	show vividness:
One night in the middle of the night, I'm hearing dripping.
The Grammar Book
g.	show personal involvement:
Are you liking it? (cf. Do you like it?)
h.	mitigate criticism:
I like the first piano notes, but I'm not liking it where the strings come in. (cf„.. but I
do not like it...)
i.	avoid imposition:
I was just wanting to invite you to a gathering... (message on answering machine)
The other difficulty that we run into in claiming that stative verbs do not take the
progressive aspect is that many stative verbs, even the classic verb of state, the copula be, have
nonstative counterparts that are active in meaning and that may occur with the progressive:
State (subject is not the agent)	Action (subject is the agent)
The steak weighs ใ 2 ounces.	The butcher is weighing the steak.
You are a fool.	You're being a fool.
I taste cinnamon in these rolls.	We'll be tasting wine at the vineyard.
All this means that we have to think in terms of stative “meanings” rather than stative
“verbs” to correctly understand and explain restrictions on the use of the progressive aspect
in English.
With Perfect Progressive Aspect
With activity verbs, perfect progressive aspect implies that the action began in the past and
has duration at the present time:
Mike has been exercising for two hours.
or is iterative and/or habitual:
Mike has been exercising for years.
With accomplishment verbs, the perfect progressive indicates that the action has been
going on for some time and is not yet complete:
They have been repairing that bridge for months.
With achievement verbs, perfect progressive aspect is a bit strange if only one action is
intended, due to the fact that achievement verbs are punctual:
?Lisa has been winning that race for hours.
but not if the achievement is iterative:
Lisa has been winning that race for years.
With stative verbs, perfect progressive aspect often appears to be more compatible than
progressive aspect alone:
?I am wanting to see you.
I have been wanting to see you.
Here, the perfect adds the notion of inception prior to present time and thus signals that
the state has history, or duration.
Besides the obvious implication that lexical aspect interacts with grammatical aspect
to affect meaning, another point that we should make is that lexical aspect influences the
acquisition of the simple tenses as well. Researchers in second language acquisition have
discovered that the acquisition of past tense is not a unitary phenomenon, but rather proceeds
in stages. Learners begin by associating tense-aspect forms with categories of verbs where the
forms and meanings correspond best, the “aspect hypothesis” (Andersen & Shirai, 1994). For
Chapter 7: The Tense-Aspect System
IS
example, learners first use the past tense with achievement and accomplishment verbs, verbs
that have obvious completion (e.g., He found the winning ticket.). Similarly, they use progressive
aspect initially with activity verbs without a defined endpoint (e.g., They are studying Arabic.).
Another trend is for learners not to use past tense with adverbs of frequency, such as never
and always (Bardovi-Harlig & Reynolds, 1995), perhaps because they associate past tense with
completed actions that don’t recur. Collins’s (2007) research supports the aspect hypothesis.
For instance, one of her Japanese learners of English wrote the following (pp. 299-300):
...He swam a kilometer, ran 5 kilometers and then rode his bicycle 10 kilometers.
The same learner later wrote,
...After that, the weather was nice so my mother was swimming in the ocean and my
father was riding his bicycle along the beach. Sometimes my mother was running
along the beach beside him.
In other words, it appears that when the learner was construing the actions as
accomplishments, she used the simple past, and when she thought of them as activities, she
used past progressive whereas English speakers would use simple past for both. This construal
offers the learner a good starting point, and it is clear that she knew the form of the tense-
aspect combinations, but, as Collins (2007) observes, she may not have been able to use them
to express the meanings that she intended.
ADVERBS OF TENSEANDTIME
To conclude our discussion of the meanings associated with the verb tense-aspect system in
English, we should point out that because of the semantics of the tense-aspect combinations,
certain adverbs of indefinite time (still, yet, soon, already, anymore, and just) often co-occur with
particular combinations. Consider how they all could be used as different answers to the
following question:
Has Chris finished her M.A. thesis?
1.	Yes, she has just finished it.
2.	Yes, she has already filed it.
3.	No, she hasn't finished it yet.
4.	No, but she'll finish it soon.
5.	No, she's still working on it.
6.	No, she's not working on it anymore.
In answer I, just signals recent completion, while in 2, already is used to signal a result that
occurred previously—perhaps earlier than anticipated. In 3, the adverb yet indicates noncompletion.
All three occur with the present perfect, although American English, unlike Standard British
English, also permits simple past tense to occur with these three adverbs. For example:
1.	Yes, she just finished it.
2.	Yes, she already finished it.
3.	No, she didn't finish it yet.
Like 3, answer 4 also signals noncompletion; however, future completion is implied in
soon, whereas it is less certain in yet. The present progressive with still in 5 signals a state of
affairs that is somehow persisting in the present—perhaps longer than anticipated—while
answer 6 indicates noncompletion, and one is led to believe that the task has been abandoned.
120
The Grammar Book
Consider also the following situation. A parent may ask his or her child:
Have you done your homework already?
Have you done your homework yet?
The question with already suggests that the parent expects a positive answer but perhaps is
surprised because he or she did not expect completion that early. The question with yet is
more neutral, or it may be used to signal that the parent does not expect the homework to be
finished but wants to make the child feel as though it should be.
Note also that just and soon appear to be complementary retrospective and future markers—
signaling recent completion and expected completion in the immediate future, respectively:
Joe has just finished his assignment, and I will finish mine soon.
A final point is that anymore)8 which negates the past, can be viewed as complementary
to still)9 which affirms continuation of the past in the present:
Helen's still living in Omaha, but she doesn't go to school anymore.
The semantically incomplete connotations of yet) anymore) and still and the semantically
complete (or about to be completed) nature of just) soon) and already—as well as the tenses with
which these forms co-occur most frequently—are facts about English that your student might
find helpful as something tangible to guide their tense usage. Of course, some of these adverbs
have other nontemporal meanings as well, which we discuss in Chapter 25 and elsewhere. We
leave the meaning dimension of the tense-aspect system now and turn to the use dimension.
The Use of the Tense-Aspect System
In ways that are not true for other structures, the meaning/use distinction in the tense-aspect
system is difficult to discern. What we have attempted to do, therefore, is to anticipate the
troublesome boundaries for ESL/EFL students, to which we alluded earlier, and to elucidate
the differences by calling upon both semantic and pragmatic resources. Chapter 9 in its
entirety is devoted further to issues of use.
1.	Simple Present versus Present Progressive
The present progressive is used for limited action in progress, while the simple present is
more compatible with states. Thus, this distinction is manifest in the following ways:
ล. Action happening at the moment of speaking versus a habit:
Why are you wearing glasses? (moment of speech—i.e., right now)
Why do you wear glasses? (habitual)
b.	Temporary event versus permanent situation:
Linda is living with her parents, (temporary—until she gets a better job)
Linda lives with her parents, (permanent or no end in sight—because it costs her too
much to live alone)
c.	Specific event versus general situation:
What are you doing for Thanksgiving? (one specific Thanksgiving holiday—the
forthcoming one)
What do you do for Thanksgiving? (the holiday each year)
Chapter 7: The Tense-Aspect System
121
ci. Activity versus state (two different lexical entries required):
I am thinking about the answer, (mental activity)
I think it is 144. (mental state/report)
2.	Present Perfect versus Present Perfect Progressive
The present perfect progressive emphasizes activity as compared with achievement with the
present perfect. Thus, the following distinctions may occur:
a.	Specific and possibly still ongoing activity versus prior event:
I have been visiting my great-grandmother, (possibly still ongoing)
I have visited my great-grandmother, [prior event(s)]
b.	Strong implication of continuation versus continuation being only a possibility:
I have been teaching for 25 years, (and I can't imagine doing anything else)
I have taught for 25 years, (so now it's time to think about doing something else)
Notice, in fact, that with this pair, the present perfect progressive implies continuation
unless it is contradicted by another clause:
I have been teaching for 25 years, but now I want to do something else.
c.	A specific accomplishment, incomplete, versus a completed one:
Gail has been remodeling her home, (incomplete)
Gail has remodeled her home, (complete)
3.	Simple Past versus Present Perfect
This distinction is extremely difficult for many ESL/EFL students to make (see, for example,
Lim, 2007). You could call their attention to some sentence-level contrasts, but this distinction
is often best sorted out at the level of discourse (see Chapter 9). One thing is certain: Even
though one is a present tense and the other a past, the choice does not depend upon the time
at which the event took place. As Inoue (1979) has pointed out, the truth value of the present
perfect is identical to the past. For example, in the following pair of sentences, the time at
which Sheila joined is not different:
Sheila has joined the Sierra Club.
Sheila joined the Sierra Club.
If the time of her joining is the same, what accounts for the difference? We might
say that the use of the present perfect has more to do with our present perspective on the
event rather than on the actual time at which it took place. This concept is difficult to get
across to ESL/EFL students. Therefore, some additional sentence-level ways to help students
determine whether to use the present perfect or the simple past tense are the following:
a.	The simple past often occurs with specific past-time adverbiais. Recall that the core
meaning of the past tense is remoteness. The use of specific past-time adverbiais
(e.g., yesterday,‘last year, 2008) makes the past tense obligatory. The use of certain more
general temporal adverbiais is commonly associated with the perfect (e.g., already, since
+ date, for + time span, yet).
However, some languages associate these general temporal adverbiais with different
tenses than does English. For example, German speakers use since and for with the simple
present rather than the present perfect. As a result, German learners of English might say
*1 live in Munich since 2000. (cf. I have lived in Munich since 2000.)
b.	Even if a past-time adverbial isn't explicit, the remoteness may be defined elsewhere in
the context or simply implied:
John Lennon was a creative genius.
122
The Grammar Book
c.	The past tense is used for a completed historical period versus an incomplete one:
My father lived here all his life, (complete—implies the father has left or is no longer alive)
My father has lived here all his life, (incomplete—the father still lives there)
d.	The present perfect is used for an indefinite versus a definite query:
Have you ever gone to Phoenix?
Did you go to Phoenix? (You said that you traveled to the Southwest last summer.)
In fact, you would almost have to have some shared knowledge with your listener to use the
specific past tense in such situations. Use of the present perfect in such a context does not
presume shared knowledge.
e.	Citing Joos (1968), Knowles (1976) gives us another way to view the differences between
the simple past and present perfect. According to Knowles, the function of the present
perfect is to change the nature of the relationship between the subject and predicate—
the present perfect emphasizes the predicated event's result on the grammatical
subject. เท the following example,
I've been to Japan twice already, but I still don't speak much Japanese.
the speaker is not so much talking about the trips as characterizing their effect on him-
or herself ("I") at the time of the discourse. To learn anything further about the trips
requires additional questions and answers.
f.	Nishiyama and Koenig (2010) give US one other angle to consider with the perfect. They
also take issue with a temporal reading of the perfect, เท part because of the difficulty
of distinguishing it from the past based on the time at which an event took place. They
also point out that the argument concerning the incompatibility of past-time adverbiais
with English present perfects (which argues in favor of the present perfect having a
temporal function) is flawed. เท fact, it is possible to have past time adverbiais with the
present perfect, which apparently occur more commonly เท Australian English than เท
other dialects (Engel & Ritz, 2000):
We have already discussed this affair at some length last night. (McCoard, ใ 978,
p. 128 เท Nishiyama & Koenig, 2010, p. 641)
Such arguments lead Nishiyama and Koenig (2010) to claim that the perfect is a
stativizer; i.e., it introduces a state, the nature of which is inferable from the context. An
example they give is
..., he has been a member of her household ever since.
The state to be inferred from this sentence is his membership in her household.
The fact that the state is inferable means that a semantic account is inadequate and that
the reason for the use of the perfect must be inferred pragmatically from the context. In
their corpus of 605 examples, they found that most English present perfects receive entailed
resultative or continuative interpretations:
1.	I can't come to your party tonight. I've caught the flu. (resultative perfect—example
from McCawley, 1971) (The state IS that I have the flu.)
Sentence 1 is "an example of the resultative perfect reading where the direct resultant
state of a past event still continues” (Nishiyama & Koenig, 2010, p. 612).
2.	I've known Max since 1960. (continuative perfect—example from McCawley, 1971)
(The state is that I know Max.)
Sentence 2 "illustrates the continuative perfect reading, in which the state denoted by
the verb and its arguments holds at some interval stretching from the past into the present.
(Nishiyama & Koenig, 2010, p. 612).
They note that a further function of the perfect is to provide discourse coherence,
a point to which we return in Chapter 9.
Chapter 7: The Tense-Aspect System
123
4.	Simple Past versus Past Progressive
a.	The past progressive indicates incomplete versus complete action:
He was drowning in the lake, so the lifeguard raced into the water, (incomplete)
He drowned in the lake, (complete)
b.	Simple past sees the event as a totality with no room for change; past progressive
indicates that an event has already begun and extends the event in time and thus allows
for a change or its interruption:
He left when I came in.
He was leaving when I came in. (and so may have changed his mind and stayed)
c.	Permanent versus temporary state:
They lived in Baltimore all their lives, (past permanent)
They were living in Baltimore during the nineties, (past temporary)
5.	Simple Past versus Past Perfect
a.	The past perfect is used to mark the completion of some event before a past time period:
By the end of the 1920s, women in the United States had won the right to vote.
or before another past event that is in the simple past:
Pat had blamed them for the problem before he considered all the evidence.
However, it is possible to report this same sequence with two events using just the
simple past tense for both since the time adverbial before makes clear the sequence
(cf. endnote 6):
Pat blamed them for the problem before he considered all the evidence.
Even without a time adverbial, the simple past tense can be used with both clauses if
the sequence of the clauses follows the sequence of events:
Marion worked in an insurance company for 20 years and retired in 2007.
Only when the clauses report two events out of sequence or there are no time
adverbiais that indicate the actual order is the past perfect necessary:
When Marion became a photographer, she had finished her degree in fine arts.
b.	Sometimes the past perfect appears to mark the later rather than the earlier of the two
events in a two-clause sequence (G. Stevens, personal communication):
I answered before she had asked.
She collected it before I had finished.
Notice here, though, the event in the subordinate clause was not actually completed. เท
this case, it appears that the past perfect is a kind of implied counterfactual, suggesting
that the event in the subordinate clause was not completed or did not occur. Here again,
a simple past tense will often do without a change in meaning:
I answered before she asked. *
6.	Simple Future (พ!!!) versus Other Ways of Indicating Futurity
a.	Simple future with will is used for the following:
Future predictions:
Belinda will be 40 next year.
Spontaneous decision when the person has control over the action:
I'll get the phone.
b.	Be going to is used for the following:
Future predictions (more informal than will}:
Belinda's going to be 40 next year.
124
The Grammar Book
Future intentions (based on prior decision):
Randy and Joyce are going to get married in October.
Future certainty based on current condition or present evidence:
Pauline's going to have a baby.
It's going to rain today.
c.	Present progressive is used for the following:
Future plans that have already been made:
I'm marching in the parade next week.
d.	Simple present is used for the following:
Fixed scheduled events:
We get paid next Friday.
They return home tomorrow, (especially with verbs of direction)
Subordinate clauses of time (i.e., those beginning with when, after, before, etc.) or
condition (i.e., provided that, if, so long as, etc.):
If the train arrives on time, we'll beat rush hour getting home.
Some of these uses are very close, and difficulties may arise accordingly. Here are three
observations that may help to distinguish some uses:
1.	The distinction between future scheduled events and future plans is sometimes
indiscernible, and the same event can be referred to either way—simple present or
present progressive. However, the simple present is more formal and impersonal and is
not very common except with travel arrangements and fixed timetables:
Aunt Jeanne arrives today.
Aunt Jeanne is arriving today.
2.	The present progressive is very common and sometimes overlaps with be going to. The
present progressive, however, emphasizes that the arrangements have already been
made, whereas be going to focuses more on the speaker’ร plans or intentions:
I'm staying at the Marriott.
I'm going to stay at the Marriott.
Of course, the present progressive is not likely to be used to express the future with
stative verbs or where the subject is inanimate:
*The red car is belonging to me tomorrow.
The red car is going to belong to me tomorrow.
*That tree is falling tomorrow.
That tree is going to fall tomorrow.
or any time when no planning or preparation can guarantee the outcome:
*We are winning the tennis match next weekend.
3.	Will and be going to are sometimes interchangeable when be going to expresses the
speaker’s certainty and 'พill is used to make a strong prediction. However, since be going
to is a present-tense form, it is used especially when there is evidence in the present to
support the prediction; this is not necessarily the case with will.
Mark is going to be tall like his dad.
?Mark will be tall like his dad.
And they also differ in that will is used for quick, “on-the-spot” decisions, whereas be
going to is used with more premeditated ones:
What can I give Jill for her birthday? Oh, I know. I'll get her that new novel.
Oh, I know. ?l'm going to get her that new novel.
Chapter 7: The Tense-Aspect System
125
In their corpus of Canadian English, Torres Cacoullos and Walker (2009) discovered that
will and be going to were dominant among morphosyntactic markers of future. Interestingly,
the reduced form gonna was almost twice as frequent as be going to. They conclude that the
difference among the four forms (simple present, present progressive, will, and be going to)
cannot be attributed to temporal distance or certainty. Instead, after each of the four was
introduced into the language, it occupied a lexical or pragmatic “niche.” For instance, simple
present for future time occurred most often with motion verbs, especially go, and for scheduled
events. They also found that particular lexical collocations favored certain forms (พhat’s gonna
happen? X’ll never X). They offer an explanation for the “layering” (Hopper, 1991) over time of
this area of the tense-aspect system, a layering that is typical with the future in many different
languages. Given that the future is used for an event that has not yet transpired, they suggest
that speakers are well served by having different options in order to reflect their attitudes about
the future. “When more than one construction develops within the same grammatical domain,
there remain niches in which one or the other is more likely to be conventionalized... [thus] the
variation [among the constructions] is largely sustained and shaped by particular constructions...
bearing different nuances of meaning... ” (Torres Cacoullos & Walker, 2009, p. 349).
7.	Simple Future versus Future Progressive
a. The future progressive allows for the possibility of change with regard to some future event:
We'll go to Everglades National Park on our vacation, (definite plan)
We'll be going to Everglades National Park on our vacation, (less definite in that it allows
fora change in plans; i.e., We'll be going to Everglades National Park unless we run out of time.)
We will offer that class next semester, (more definite)
We will be offering that class next semester.10 (more tentative in that it allows for
change—i.e., its cancellation if not enough students enroll in it)
In Nesselhauf and Romer’s (2007) analysis, 1,117 instances of the progressive with
future time reference were analyzed from the British National Corpus, spoken corpus. The
researchers found a wide variety of verbs used, though not surprisingly, these verbs were ones
depicting “conscious human agency” (Leech, 2004), e.g., going, coming, doing, getting, etc.
8.	Simple Future versus Future Perfect
a.	As do the other perfect aspects, the future perfect marks an event/activity that is com-
plete prior to some other time (in this case, the future), or complete prior to some other
future event:
By the year 2030, the information superhighway will have become accessible to all.
Megan will have decided on a career by the time she completes her studies.
b.	Simple future alone suggests that the event/activity begins with the time mentioned:
The information superhighway will become accessible to all by the year 2030.
Megan will decide on a career when she completes her studies.
SOME ADDITICHI^^
In the next, chapter, we deal comprehensively with the modal system of English. However, it is
worth calling attention at this point to some modals and phrasal modals whose functions relate
to the uses of the tense and aspect markers. We would like to make three observations here.
First, although we have already shown a number of ways to talk about future events and
states, many modals, in addition to will, and phrasal modals, in addition to be going to, can be
used for this purpose as well. Here are just a few of them:
126
The Grammar Book
may, could, might	It may/could/might rain tomorrow, (less certain than will)
beta	1 am to leave at 7 A.M. tomorrow morning.
be about to	Look out! You're about to step in a puddle.
be supposed to	พร're supposed to go on a field trip tomorrow, but the weather forecast doesn't look good.
Second, meanings differ among these, and we explore them in the next chapter on modals, as
we will the phrasal modal used to and the modal would to express past habits:
When we were children, we used to swing for hours. We would stop only when we
were called for dinner.
Third, we note that past form of the phrasal modal be going to can be used to talk about failed
future plans from a past perspective:
Pam was going to play tennis this weekend, but she sprained her ankle.
Conclusion
This ends our analysis of the form, meaning, and use of the verb tense-aspect system as it
operates at the sentence level. We hope that this treatment has helped demonstrate some of
the systematicity underlying what might seem at first to be disparate facts. Much more of the
systematic nature of English tense-aspect is revealed when we examine the use of the tense-
aspect system at the discourse level in Chapter 9.
From our perspective, the long-term challenge of learning the English tense-aspect system
centers around what we have termed “the boundary problem.” In this regard, it is important that as
new tense-aspect combinations are introduced, they are contrasted with what has been presented
previously. We have spent time examining the core meanings of the aspects and tenses because
we feel that some of the difficulty of discerning the differences between pairs of tense-aspect
combinations can be mitigated if students can first be taught to associate the core meanings with
the forms; then, they can be helped to understand the more peripheral uses that are not as easily
explicable from a core-meaning perspective. Furthermore, while it is tempting to introduce the
present progressive by teaching students to associate it with events that are happening this very
minute (because its meaning can be so easily demonstrated through actions this way), this is only
part of the story of the present progressive and may be confusing to students in the long run. It
may be more important for you to help your students gain an understanding of the core meanings
of the tenses and aspects before going on to work on the wider application of these forms.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form. An inductive approach to teaching the form of English tense-aspect combinations
is to provide students with naturalistic data in which has somehow been enhanced
(Sharwood Smith, 1993) in order to make the verb endings more salient. You might try, for
example, giving your students short reading passages with certain verb endings boldfaced
or italicized. You could do this for a period of time before ever formally drawing students’
attention to any particular tense-aspect combination.
2.	Form. ESL/EFL students will need to learn the irregular past tense and past participle
forms. One suggestion for practicing these is to play the game of Concentration. Each
Chapter 7: The Tense-Aspect System
127
group of four or five students will need a set of 30 cards. On 15 of them, write the base
form of the verb; on the other 15, write the past tense or past participle.
Shuffle the cards and place them face down, forming a grid of 6 cards down and 5
across. Students take turns turning over 2 cards at a time. If the cards match—that is, if the
base form and past tense or past participle are of the same verb—the student keeps the pair
of cards. They should then use the past tense or past participle in a sentence to see if they
can use it correctly. If they do not match, the cards must be replaced, face down, in their
original spots. When all the pairs have been matched, the student with the most cards wins.
This game can be replayed from time to time as new verbs are introduced.
3.	Meaning. To teach meaning, we want students to associate a form and its meaning. For
example, you might bring in a color wheel, or draw one on the board, for practicing the
unchanging fact/state core meaning of the simple present tense. Have students make
statements about how to form other colors from the primary ones and other combinations:
Teacher: What do red and blue make?
Student: Red and blue make purple.
readier: What do black and white make?
Student: Black and white make gray.
Teacher: What do all the colors together make?
Student: All the colors together make black.
Teacher: Now make as many sentences as you can with the English words for colors.
4.	Meaning. One way of getting students to associate forms and meanings is to teach them
certain adverbiais that frequently occur with particular tenses. For example, give students
a list of three adverbiais that commonly go together with the present tense-aspect
combinations:
Simple Present	Present Perfect	Present Progressive
every (day)	for X days	this day; these days
once a week	up until now	at the moment
on (Wednesday)	since (Monday)	today
Next, give them a blank monthly calendar for the current month. Read to them a
paragraph, such as the following, with Jill’s activities and appointments for the month.
Ask the students to pencil them in.
During the month of, Jill is very busy. She goes to class every weekday and
studies on the weekends too. She has tests once a week on Fridays. These days she is also
working. She works on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday evenings after school. She is not
working this evening (Wednesday), though, because she is not feeling well. She has been
sick since Monday. She has missed school and work for two days...
Finally, give students new blank calendars and have them work in pairs to write down
their partner’s monthly activities.
ร. Meaning. To teach students to~associate meaning with verb forms, you can use a real
or imaginary biography that details the events in someone’s life. This can be effectively
presented in the form of a scroll, which you can slowly unwind as you ask students
questions. For example, you might ask questions such as the following, which help
students understand the meaning of the perfect progressives:
a.	Present perfect progressive: It's 1990. (For) how long has Diana been living in Chicago1
b.	Past perfect progressive: เท 1996, (for) how long had Diana been attending the University
of Illinois?
128
The Grammar Book
c. Future perfect progressive: เท 2007, (for) how many years will Diana have been working
on her Ph.D.?
Students can create scrolls of their own lives and ask and answer each other’s questions.
UFE
°F DIANA
1994-1998
1994
1976
ODD DDO DDD
DODlmlDDD
ODD
1998-2000
Serve เท U.S.
Peace Corps
(Thailand)
2000-2002
Do an M.A.
■เท TESL
at UCLA
Attend
Univ, of Illinois
at Chicago
Ωι·ί<Ιι iota
2003
2009
2004
2005
Get married	Return to UCLA
Have a son for a Ph D
Become a
professor
at Harvard
Get a Ph.D.
in Ed.

6.	Use. To have students see the difference between the simple past and the past progressive,
have them think of a famous historical event that took place during their lifetimes. Ask a
student to say what his/her event was, where she/he was, and then ask other students to
tell what they were doing at the time. Have them use the following frames:
When I heard about X, I was Y. (e.g., in college)
When I heard about X, I was___-ing...(e.g., driving in my car)
7.	Use. Another problem students commonly wrestle with is choosing between ivill and be
going to in context. Dalglish, Joshee, and Holzer (personal communication) recommend
that the teacher write the following two sentences on the board:
She is going to dive into the water.
She will dive into the water.
Chapter 7: The Tense-Aspect System
ไ29
Show students a picture of a woman perched on the end of a diving board and leaning
forward, and ask students which sentence correctly describes the picture. The students
may intuitively know that the use of will in this context is not appropriate. Help them to
see that be going to here is more appropriate because the woman’s posture and position at
the end of the diving board indicates a preplanned activity for which there is evidence.
Will, on the other hand, expresses intention at the immediate moment of decision when
the person has control over the action. Next ask students to create appropriate contexts
for each sentence of each pair below:
a.	I'll sell my car.	I'm going to sell my car.
b.	I'll buy her a necklace.	I'm going to buy her a necklace.
c.	I'll have an omelet and a salad.	I'm gonna have an omelet and a salad.
8.	Use. To help students practice one difference in usage between the simple past and the
present perfect, G. Parulis and F. Cook (personal communication) suggest that students
role-play a job interview.
A: Have you ever
used Photoshop
done any computer programming ■?
published anything
Í No, I haven't, but I have edited a newsletter. I worked...
' [ Yes, I have. 1 worked ...
For students who are less advanced, you could work on the same use difference between
present perfect and past by asking each student to think up one question to ask another
student in the class, using the frame Have you ever... ? If the student to whom the question
is asked answers affirmatively, then the first student asks a follow-up question. For example:
A: Have you ever eaten couscous?
B: Yes, I have.
A: Really? When did you eat it?
B: I ate some last week at a Moroccan restaurant downtown.
9.	Use. Collins (2007) suggests giving students three sentences and three contexts. The
students are asked to pick the correct sentence for each context. Afterward, they discuss
the reasons for their choices.
Sentence a: Somebody was in the apartment.
Sentence b: Somebody has been in the apartment.
Sentence c: Somebody is in the apartment.
Context 1 ะ Two people living in the sqme apartment wake up at 3 A.M.:
Wake up! The dog just barked and I bear footsteps downstairs.. There's a light__________
on, too. I'm going to call the police.
Context 2: Two people arrive hoffie from a two-week vacation:
Look at this! My dresser drawer is open and the shoes in my closet are scattered all over
the floor.. I'm going to call the police.__________
Context 3: A person arrives horns from a two-week vacation and goes back to work. She
is talking to a co-worker:
It's good to be home. Florence is a lovely city, and we'd love to go back. The only problem
is that now we have to replace all the locks on the doors to our apartment. We didn't have
anything stolen, but we know that.The police think changing the locks is a__________
good idea.
130
The Grammar Book
10.	Use. In this activity from Collins (2 007), students create their own contexts to distinguish
sentences with stative verbs in the simple past and present:
She liked horror films.
She likes horror films.
and simple and progressive forms in the present:
The dog digs holes in the neighbor's garden.
The dog is digging holes in the neighbor's garden!
Collins makes the point that in creating contexts, students get to make choices about
tense and aspect to convey meanings that they want to express. Any feedback from the
teacher will thus be focused on messages the students have created themselves. A further
advantage is that in sharing their contexts with the class, everyone is exposed to several
examples of the target forms in appropriate contexts.
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1.	Provide original example sentences to illustrate the following terms. Underline the
pertinent word(s) in your examples:
a.	simple future	e. stative verb
b.	present perfect	f. simple present
c.	past progressive	g. accomplishment verb
d.	past perfect	h. present perfect progressive
2.	Do the following sentences differ at all with regard to the ordering of events?
a.	I had finished my homework before I practiced the piano.
b.	I finished my homework before I practiced the piano.
Give a reason for your answer.
3.	The word since does not usually occur with the simple past tense. Why do you think
this is so?
4.	Compare and contrast the following pairs of sentences:
a.	I have read the book.	I have been reading the book.
b.	Stan sells vacuum cleaners.	Stan is selling vacuum cleaners.
c.	Did you go to Yankee Stadium?	Have you gone to Yankee Stadium?
Test your ability to apply what you know.
5.	ESL/EFL students have produced the following. How have they deviated from
Standard English?
a.	*William has bought it last Saturday.
b.	*I’m believing you.
c.	*Help! I will fall.
d.	*When Larry will come, I will go.
e.	*Phyllis was lived with her parents for 20 years.
Chapter 7: The Tense-Aspect System
131
6.	ESL/EFL teachers often associate “now" with the present progressive, but consider
the following:
He goes to the store now.	Now you've done it!
What interpretation can you give to these sentences that will explain the tense use?
7.	Consider the following verbs of internal sensation: hurt, ache, feel, itch. Although
sometimes these are considered a subcategory of stative verbs, we have not included
them because of their special nature with regard to progressive aspect. Explain.
8.	Apart from the British and American English difference mentioned in the section
“Adverbs of Tense and Time," earlier in this chapter, just and already can occur with
the present perfect and the simple past. Is there a difference? Would the following
sentences occur in different contexts?
a.	Did you just hear the news about the flooding in Georgia?
b.	Have you just heard the news about the flooding in Georgia?
9.	In American English, sometimes the past participle gotten appears to be used the
same way as got.
Has he gotten/got over his illness?
Other times, they appear to have different meanings:
He has got the following ingredients.
He has gotten the following ingredients.
Can you explain the difference?
10.	If a student asks you what the difference between the following two sentences is,
how would you answer?
a.	I have been hearing that melody over and over again.
b.	I have been listening to that melody over and over again.
Bibliography
REFERENCES
Andersen, R., & Shirai, Y. (1994). Discourse motivation for some cognitive acquisition principles. Studies in
Second Language Acquisition, 16(2), 133-156.
Badalamenti, V, & Henner-Stanchina, c. (2Q07). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 1 (4th ed.).
Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Bardovi-Harlig, K., & Reynolds. D. (1995)AThe role of lexical aspect in the acquisition of tense and aspect.
TESOL Quarterly, 29(1), 107-131.
Bergs, A. (2010). Expressions of futurity in contemporary English. A construction grammar perspective.
English Language and Linguistics, 14(2), 217-238.
Carter, R., & McCarthy, M. (2006). Cambridge grammar of English. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Celle, A., & Smith, N. (2010). Beyond aspect: will be -ing and shall be -ing. English Language and Linguistics,
14(2), 239-269.
Collins, L. (2007). LI differences and L2 similarities: Teaching verb tenses in English. ELT Journal, 67(4),
295-303.
132
The Grammar Book
Dowty, D. (1979). Word meaning and Montague grammar. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Reidel.
Engel, D. M., & Ritz, Μ. E. A. (2000). The use of the present perfect in Australian English. Australian
Journal of Linguistics, 20, 119-140.
Gavis, พ. (1997, March 10). What factors influence the use ofstative verbs in the progressive form? Paper
presented at the American Association of Applied Linguistics Meeting, Orlando, FL.
Hatch, E., & Brown, c. (1995). Vocabulary, semantics, and language education. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Hirtle, พ. (1967). The simple and progressive forms: An analytical approach. Quebec, Canada: Laval University
Press.
Hopper, p. J. (1991). On some principles of grammaticization. In E. c. Traugott & B. Heine (Eds.),
Approaches to grammaticalization (Vol. 1, pp. 17-35). Amsterdam, Netherlands/Philadelphia. PA:
John Benjamins.
Inoue, K. (1979). An analysis of the English present perfect. Linguistics, 17, 561-589.
Joos, M. (1968). The English verb: Form and meanings. Madison, พ!: University of Wisconsin Press.
Kesner Bland, ร. (1988). The present progressive in discourse: Grammar versus usage revisited. TESOL
Quarterly, 22(1), 53-68.
Knowles, p. L. (1976). A different approach to the English verb. Cross Currents, 4(1), 112-128.
Knowles, p. L. (1979). Predicate markers: A new look at the English predicate system. Cross Currents, 6(2),
21-36.
Kranich, ร. (2013). Functional layering and the English progressive. Linguistics, 57(1), 1-32.
Langacker, R. พ. (2001).The English present tense. English Language and Linguistics, 5(2), 251-272.
Langacker, R. พ. (2008). Cognitive grammar: A basic introduction. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Leech, G. (2004). Meaning and the English verb (3rd ed.). London, England/New York, NY: Longman.
Leech, G., Hundt, M., Mair, c., & Smith, N. (2009). Change in contemporary English: A grammatical study.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Lewis, M. (1986). The English verb. Hove, England: Language Teaching Publications.
Lim, J. M-H. (2007). Crosslinguistic influence versus intralingual interference: A pedagogically motivated
investigation into the acquisition of the present perfect. System, 55, 368-387.
McCawley, J. D. (1971). Tense and time reference in English. In c. J. Fillmore & D. T Langendoen (Eds.),
Studies in linguistic semantics (pp. 96-113). New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
McCoard, R. (1978). The English perfect: Tense choice and pragmatic inferences. Amsterdam, Netherlands:
North Holland Publishing Company.
Nesselhauf, N., & Romer, บ. (2007). Lexical-grammatical patterns in spoken English. The case of the
progressive with future time reference. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 12(3), 297-333.
Nishiyama, A., & Koenig, J. p. (2010). What is a perfect state? Language, 86(3), 611-646.
Salkie, R. (2010). Will: Tense or modal or both? English Language and Linguistics, 14(2), 187-215.
Sharwood Smith, M. (1993). Input enhancement in instructed SLA: Theoretical bases. Studies in Second
Language Acquisition, 18(2), 165-179.
Torres Cacoullos, R., & Walker, J. A. (2009). The present of the English future: Grammatical variation and
collocations in discourse. Language, 85(2), 321-354.
Vendler, z. (1967). Linguistics and philosophy. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
SUGGESTI
____________________________________________________________________________
For a discussion of aspect, see:
Comrie, B. (1976). Aspect: An introduction to the study of verbal aspect and related problems. New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press.
McCoard, R. พ. (1978). The English perfect tense choice and pragmatic inferences. Amsterdam, Netherlands:
North Holland Publishing Company.
Chapter 7: The Tense-Aspect System
133
Scheffer, J. (1975). The progressive in English. Amsterdam, Netherlands: North Holland Publishing Company.
Smith, c. (1983). A theory of aspectual choice. Language, 59(3), 479-501.
For a corpus study of progressive aspect, see:
Kranich, ร. (2010). The progressive in Modern English. A corpus-based study of grammaticalization and related
changes. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Rodopi.
For descriptions of the English tense-aspect system, consult the following sources:
Comrie, B. (1985). Tense. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Declerck, R. (1991). Tense in English: Its structure and use in discourse. London, England/New York,
NY: Routledge.
Joos, M. (1968). The English verb: Form and meanings. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.
Leech, G. (2004). Meaning and the English verb (3rd ed.). London, England/New York, NY: Longman.
Lewis, M. (1986). The English verb. Hove, England: Language Teaching Publications.
Palmer, F. R. (1974). The English verb. London, England: Longman.
For a discussion of expressions of future time reference, see:
Binnick, R. (1971). Will and be going to. Chicago Linguistic Society, 7,40-53.
Declerck, R. (2010). Future time reference expressed by be to in present-day English. English Language and
Linguistics, 14(2), 271-291.
Depraetere, L, & Williams, c. (Eds.). (2010). Future time reference in English [Special issue]. English
Language and Linguistics, 14(2).
Haegeman, L. (1989). Be going to and will·. A pragmatic account. Journal of Linguistics, 25, 291-317.
Szmrecsanyi, B. (2003). Be going to versus will/shall·. Does syntax matter? Journal of English Linguistics, 31,
295-323.
For an in-depth study of stative progressives, see:
Gavis, พ. (1998). Stative verbs in the progressive aspect: A study of semantic, pragmatic, syntactic and discourse
patterns (Unpublished Ed.D. dissertation). Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, NY.
For helpful pedagogical analyses, see:
Feigenbaum, I. (1981). The use of the English perfect. Language Learning, 31(2), 393-408.
Richards, J. (1981). Introducing the progressive. TESOL Quarterly, 15(4), 391-402.
Riddle, E. (1986). The meaning and discourse function of the past tense in English. TESOL Quarterly,
20(2), 267-286.
Romer, บ. (2005). Progressives, patterns, pedagogy: A corpus driven approach to English progressive forms, functions
and didactics. Amsterdam, Netherlands/Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
For pedagogical suggestions, take a look at:
Badalamenti, V, & Henner-Stanchina, c. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 1 (4th ed.).
Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Carlisi, K. (2008). Grammar connection: Structure through content 3. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Houck, N., & Hilles, ร. (2009). Grammar connection: Structure through content 4. Boston, MA: Heinle,
Cengage Learning.
Koustoff, L. (1993). Teaching perfective foTms using Cuisenaire rods. The Language Teacher, 17(12), 23-27.
Thewlis, ร. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 3 (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle,
Cengage Learning.
Wisniewska, I., Riggenbach, H., & Samuda, V (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 2 (4th ed.).
Boston,-MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
134
The Grammar Book
Endnotes
1.	เท some British English grammars, though, the pattern is preserved by referring to tense first and then
aspect; i.e., "present simple."
2.	For a list of the spelling rules that apply to forming the present participle, see Badalamenti and Henner-
Stanchina (2007).
3.	According to Torres Cacoullos and Walker (2009), the earliest future form was the simple present,
followed by the development of the progressive in early Modern English; will later developed out of a
verb of desire (the Old English equivalent of want), and the phrasal modal construction, be going to, arose
from a verb of motion in a purpose-clause construction beginning in the 15th to 16th centuries (p. 323).
4.	Even though the whole sentence expresses future, the present tense is used in the subordinate clause.
This follows a general principle of historical linguistics that holds that historically older inflectional/
grammatical forms and word orders are preserved in subordinate clauses longer than in independent
clauses. Since Old English had only two tenses (present and past) and used the present tense to express
future time, this principle seems to apply here.
5.	Here and with the host's offer and sales clerk's question on page 110, the past-tense marker has taken
over the subjunctive function in English.
6.	Notice, though, that the simple present (finishes) could also work here (L. Gray, personal communication).
This is in keeping with the fact that the use of perfect aspect is sometimes optional when its notion
of prior can be made explicit by other means—such as, the use of until here. You will encounter the
optionality of the perfect again when we contrast the use of the simple past with that of the past perfect.
7.	This chart has been somewhat altered from the one that appeared in Andersen and Shirai (1994). Also,
Dowty (1979) has shown that there is overlap between the accomplishment and activity categories with
certain verbs such as draw in sentences such as the following:
He drew the picture in an hour, (accomplishment)
He drew the picture for an hour, (activity)
For this reason, Dowty argues that classification should occur with the whole verb phrase. While we would not
quarrel with his assessment, for our purposes this categorization of verbs is sufficient.
8.	There is a dialect of North American English, spoken mainly in the South, that uses anymore to mean
lately or these days (J. Scanlon, personal communication).
I don't have time to read the newspaper. I only read books for school anymore.
9.	Although it affirms the persistence of the past in the present, st/// often implies a negative evaluation:
Is Harold still writing his thesis? (He shouldn't be; he should have finished it long ago.)
10.	Example from N. Gross, personal communication.
Chapter 7: The Tense-Aspect System
135
Modal Auxiliaries
and Related Phrasal
Forms
Introduction
In this chapter, we conclude our discussion of AUX by addressing the modal auxiliary (M)
and phrasal modal (pm) forms. Modal auxiliaries and phrasal modals express modality, a
semantic concept that centers on beliefs and attitudes regarding potentiality or possibility
rather than on purported fact. We see potential in assessments of likelihood, social directives,
and statements of ability:
The exam may be difficult.
(There exists the potential that the exam will be challenging.)
You should be studying harder.
(You have the potential to follow this advice and put more effort into your current studies.)
I can study all night during the semester.
(I have the potential to study rather than go to bed at night during the semester.)
Without the modal auxiliaries, the sentences above become straightforward statements:
The exam is difficult.
You are studying harder.
I study all night during the semester.
Of course, there are other ways to express modality in the form of adverbs, adjectives, verbs,
and nouns:
The exam is potentially difficult.
It is possible that the exam is difficult.
I imagine that the exam is difficult.
There is a possibility that the exam is difficult.
This chapter limits itself to the consideration of modal auxiliary verbs (or simply modals) and
phrasal modals. To be sure, modals and phrasal modals pose learning challenges to ESL/
EFL learners. These challenges exist, as we shall see, in each of the three dimensions: form,
meaning, and use.
Modal auxiliaries are among the more difficult structures ESL/EFL teachers have to
deal with. One of the reasons for this is the form of modals. Some of your students, who have
been told time and time again that present-tense verbs with third person singular subjects
require an -s ending, overgeneralize this rule to modals—for example, *He cans play tennis.
In English modal auxiliaries (can, may, shall, will, etc.) are distinguished from other auxiliary
verbs (be, have, do), as well as from ordinary verbs by their lack of tense and their resultant lack
of subject-verb agreement; that is, modals do not inflect.
137
In English, modals are derived from verbs that did carry tense and take agreement markers
during a much earlier stage of the language. Other languages, such as German, French, and
Spanish, still carry out tense-marking and/or agreement operations on their equivalents of
English modal verbs. It is thus important to emphasize to learners that English no longer
inflects modals for tense and number.
Another formal property of modals that may cause your students some trouble is that
modals directly precede a verb without the intervening infinitive to that is usually required
(the exception being “serial verb constructions,” such as come get and go see, which are limited
in number) when two ordinary verbs follow each other in sequence:
Modal + Verb Verb + Verb
I can go.	I plan to go.
*1 can to go. *1 plan go.
Many of your students will treat modals like ordinary verbs and produce errors by using a
superfluous infinitive to: *Jack must to study harder; *We should to return the book.
Another source of difficulty with the form of modals, of course, may be your students’
native languages). Not all languages have modal auxiliaries; in those that do not, regular
verbs or adjectives/adverbs are used to express the meanings and functions that modals have
in English. Students speaking such a first language may feel the need to inflect English modals
as if they were ordinary verbs.
While the formal properties may seem rather complicated, an additional problem is how
to convey to ESL/EFL students the exact meanings of modals, phrasal modals, and modal-
like forms. Paraphrases are often too wordy for students at beginning levels. Furthermore,
each modal exhibits a range of different meanings. For instance, would you offer the same
definition of may in the following sentences?
The exam may be difficult.
You may start the exam now.
You may not use a dictionary on the exam.
Keeping track of modal meanings and forms can be an overwhelming task for learners,
especially as some textbooks present modal forms along with their different meanings in
lengthy, decontextualized lists. Textbooks may also group modals with a speech act, such as
persuading, without exploring the subtle meaning differences between modal choices within
persuasion. This can give the impression that modals are idiosyncratic (Tyler, 2012) and leave
learners with a fragmented view of the modals.
Such presentation also poses challenges for ESL/EFL students’ efforts to master the use
of modals. Failure to choose context-appropriate modals may leave L2 speakers of English
sounding overly direct (even rude) or excessively polite. Cross-linguistic differences in modal
use have been found in both speech (e.g., Lin, 2009) and writing (e.g., Hinkel, 1995).
The Form of Mõdals
MODALS ARE tInSELEsF"
In this grammar, we describe modals formally as tenseless auxiliaries that take no subject-
verb agreement and no infinitive to before the following verb. That said, we do acknowledge
that modals derive historically from ordinary verb forms inflected for either present or past
tense because this historically-based relationship still has some semantic implications (see our
discussion of meanings of modals):
138
The Grammar Book
Historical	Historical
Present Tense	Past Tense
can	could
will	would
may	might
shall	should
0				 must, (had to)1
It could be argued that the present to past tense shift does occur in reported speech, e.g.,
May: I will go to New Orleans.
Stan: May said that she would go to New Orleans.
However, as we demonstrate in Chapter 33, shifting of tenses in reported speech is often
not followed by English speakers. The only other time that a present and past relationship is
maintained is between can and could, where could is used for remote past.
I can't speak French now, but I could when I was a child.
However the different time references do not hold for the other modal pairs. In fact, it is
the case today that so-called present tense modals may refer to (present) reasoning about
events in the past, and that so-called past tense modals may refer to present or future
time:
Jim may have been late last night, (past event)
That could be Sara, (present meaning)
You should see a doctor, (future meaning)
Given the fact that the “present tense” modals would be the only present tense verb
auxiliaries in English that do not take the third person singular inflection, there are few valid
syntactic reasons for maintaining the historical description and ascribing past or present
tense to modals.
MODALS AND THEIR PHRASAL MODAL COUNTERPARTS
Functioning semantically like modals, phrasal modals (also called periphrastic modals, pseudo-modals,
or quasi-modals) are multiword forms ending in infinitive to. Every modal seems to have at
least one phrasal counterpart, and some modals have several:
Modal can, could will, shall must should	Phrasal Modal be able to be going to, be about to, be to2 have to, have got to, need to be supposed to
would (for past habit) used to
may, might	be allowed to, be permitted to
To the above list, we can add ought to3 and had better/best as modal forms that lie somewhere
between true modal and phrasal modal.
Notice that the phrasal modals do not exhibit the same formal properties as the true modals
in that the subject-verb agreement rule must be applied (except for used to, which is an inflected
past tense4) and that all phrasal modals require that a to infinitive precede the main verb; that
is, the phrasal forms behave syntactically much more like ordinary verbs than they do like true
modals.
Chapter 8: Modal Auxiliaries and Related Phrasal Forms
139
She
is going to
is allowed to
has to
is supposed to
is able to
go to Fresno tomorrow.
In fact, phrasal forms developed in part because the original class of modals lost their
connection to time, and the phrasal forms gave English users a way to mark tense and express
modality on the same verb form. In Chapter 6, we saw examples of phrasal modals marked
for tense.5 Phrasal modals, however, differ from lexical verbs in speech in that some have
assimilated with to, which is often pronounced as if it were part of a single word with the verb:
gotta6, gonna, hasta, bafta, and so on. Also, it is much more difficult to put an adverb between
the verb and the to of a phrasal modal than between a regular verb and an infinitive to:
?l have often to study at night.
I try often to study at night.
Another point should be made regarding the formal properties of modals and their
phrasal equivalents: The order of these constituents with respect to each other is fixed.
Orderings of modal + modal7 and of phrasal modal + modal cannot occur:
*We can should study hard.
*1 am able to must do the job.
We do, however, see orderings of modal + phrasal modal:
He will have to improve his work.8
I might be able to go there.
We also see phrasal modal + phrasal modal:
He is going to have to improve his grades.
Sequences of three phrasal modals seem to be the upper limit (ร. Weigle, personal
communication) ะ
I'm gonna have to be able to do that by Saturday.
Another point to make about the form of phrasal modals is that they occasionally appear
to take perfect or progressive aspect (B. Strodt, personal communication):
Lately, he's been able to run the mile in five minutes.
I'm having to work harder to lose weight now.
Our current phrase structure rule does not account for such an order of constituents. When
they occur with the aspectual markers, we must treat them syntactically as ordinary verbs taking
infinitives rather than as phrasal modals. Many phrasal modals seem to be hovering somewhere
between a regular verb and a true phrasal modal.
Phrasal modals have a variety ôf internal structures. Some of them look like another
construction that consists of be + adjective + preposition + verb [gerund] ะ
I am able to go there, (pm + verb [infinitive])
I am used to going there, (be + adj + prep + verb [gerund])
with the result that some learners overgeneralize the pattern with the phrasal modal:
*1 am used to go there.
140
The Grammar Book
Before going on to the meaning of modals, let US draw a tree for one sentence:
I might be able to finish the work by Friday.
SUBJ
PRED
NP
AUX
VP
ADVL
pro
pm
NP
PrepP
might
be able to finish
det
prep
NP
the
work
by
M
V
I
N
N
Friday
The Meanings of Modals
Modals are used for several reasons: to give a proposition a degree of probability, to make
predictions and inferences, to express possibilities and impossibilities, to state abilities, and to
perform various social functions, such as expressing politeness or indirectness when making
requests, giving advice, or granting permission.
_________________________________________________________________________________
THE POLYSEMY 0F LOGICAL PROBABILITY^ s0ClAL INTERACTION,
AND ABILITY MODALS_______________________________________________________________________
Many linguists and semanticists (Hofmann, 1966; Palmer, 1990; among others) have discussed
modals as having at least two distinctly different functions: (1) an epistemic meaning expressing
logical probability and (2) a deontic function expressing a use related to social interaction. We
will use the terms logical probability and social interaction here. Consider the following examples:
It may rain tomorrow, (may expresses a degree of logical probability that is weak rather
than strong)
You may leave the room, (may expresses granting of permission and thus accomplishes a
social interaction)
Like may, other modals can express both logical probability and social interaction. Such
polysemy (e.g., may used to express permission in one context and logical probability in another)
can cause confusion for ESL/EFL learners.
Complicating matters further, a third meaning exists for modals. Notice how can below
expresses neither permission nor probability:
Usain Bolt can run very fast, (can expresses an ability)
We will use the term ability/tendency to describe this type of meaning. Given that can may at
other times be used to grant permission (You can leave the room) or to deny probability (It can’t
be raining now; the รนท is out), we again see polysemy.
Chapter 8: Modal Auxiliaries and Related Phrasal Forms
141
The different types of modality and the issue of polysemy present a major challenge
to ESL/EFL learners. Consider the range of modals used in the three basic types of modal
meaning that we have so far identified:
social interaction: can, could, may, might, must, shall, should, will, would
ability/tendency: can, could, would (for past habit)
logical probability: can (in negation and questions only), could, may, might, must,
should, will, would
Notice this list includes true modals only. Adding the phrasal modals makes it even more
complicated.
CORE MEANINGS OFCOMMON MODALS AND PHRASALMODALS
Work in cognitive linguistics (e.g., Sweetser, 1990; Talmy, 2000) has attempted to provide a
unified account of the modal system. It is argued that, at its most basic level, the meaning of
each modal reflects a dynamic relationship of forces. The forces are extended metaphorically
to the different modal meanings. Consider the following examples of must used for social
interaction and for logical probability from Radden and Dirven (2007, p. 244):
You must go home.
This must be right.
Must, in both sentences, conveys a strong force. In the first sentence, the force is in the
authority of the speaker; in the second sentence, the force is in the power of evidence.
The core meanings presented below are based on Sweetser (1990) and Tyler (2012). We
include some of the more frequent phrasal modals in this list:
(PHRASAL) MODAL	CORE MEANING
can	potential force
ability/tendency social interaction logical probability	1 hear that you can play the guitar. You can play the guitar right now (if you'd like). You can't have played the guitar just now (because there's no instrument here).
could	weakened potential force
ability/tendency social interaction logical probability	Last year, you could run a 5-minute mile. You could try running for exercise. Running could be good for you.
may	potential external barrier to force removed
social interaction logical probability	You may use the pool. (1 exercise my power to give you access to the pool.) The pool may be open. (It's possible that the barrier to entering the pool has been removed.)
might	weakened potential barrier to force removed
social interaction logical probability	You might try swimming for exercise. Swimming might be good exercise.
must	irresistible force
social interaction logical probability	You must return the library books. The books must be overdue by now.
142
The Grammar Book
ought to	force of social obligation
social interaction logical probability	You ought to return the library books (because it is your responsibility as a member of the library to return books on time). This ought to be right.
have to	external force imposing obligation
social interaction logical probability	You have to return the library books (because of the library's rules). This has to be right.
need to	internal force imposing obligation
social interaction	You need to return the library books (because you don't want to break the library's rules).
should	weakened obliging force
social interaction logical probability	You should go to the library. That should be the librarian, (upon seeing someone behind the counter)
will	force of commitment
social interaction logical probability	1 will go to the library. That will be the librarian, (upon seeing someone behind the counter)
would	weakened force of commitment
ability/tendency social interaction logical probability	1 would go to the library regularly (when 1 was young). 1 would go to the library (if 1 were not in this traffic jam). That would be the librarian, (upon seeing someone behind the counter)
The extension of physical and social meanings for modals to logical probability meanings is possible because, as Sweetser (1990) points out, “we generally use the language of the external world to apply to the internal world, which is metaphorically structured as parallel to the external world. Thus we view our reasoning processes as being subject to compulsions, obligations, and other modalities, just as our real-world actions are subject to modalities of the same sort”(p. 50). As we interact socially, we are influenced by the people and physical contexts around US. As we make predictions and draw conclusions, we are influenced by the forces of evidence and counterevidence before US.	
The list above is meant to illustrate the semantic connection across the modal areas
of social interaction, ability/tendency, and logical probability. In the section in this chapter
on the use of modals, we will explore how to choose one modal form over others within
each area.
MODALS AND NEGATION	-
Modals and phrasal forms interact with not in interesting ways. Usually the negation of a
modal and the negative of the corresponding phrasal modal have parallel semantic effects:
They may not smoke here. / They are not allowed to smoke here.
I cannot do it. / I'm not able to do it.
He will not do it. / He's not going to do it.
You should not lie. / You're not supposed to lie.
However, the following are clearly distinct:
You must not go. / You don't have to go.10
Chapter 8: Modal Auxiliaries and Related Phrasal Forms
143
In this immediately preceding pair, the modal expresses prohibition, while the phrasal form
offers the addressee a choice (i.e., you can go, but it’s not necessary). We see a difference
here in the scope of negation: not has narrower scope in the first example than in the
second. That is, we can paraphrase the sentences as It is necessary that you not go and It is
not necessary that you go, respectively. Must not imposes an obligation to refrain from doing
something, whereas don’t have to removes an obligation of restraint, thereby granting the
choice to do or not do something (Radden & Dirven, 2007). See Chapter 10 for more on
negation and scope.
The Use of Models and Phrasal Models
Given that each modal form conveys a range of meanings, and given that different modal forms
often convey similar meanings, it is no surprise that the dimension of use poses significant
challenges for ESL/EFL learners. Choosing appropriate modals requires the consideration
of a variety of factors.
SOCIAL FUNCTIONS OF MODALS
Giving Advice
One major system in the social interactional use of modals involves the giving of advice.
Notice that the systematicity lies in the fact that we can order the modals and phrasal modals
according to the speaker’s degree of authority or the urgency of the advice. For example:
You (must/have to/have got to/need to) see a doctor.
You (should/ought to/had better/had best) see a doctor.
You (might/could) see a doctor.
A (Speaker's authority or urgency
of the message increases, not
necessarily in equal increments.)
Might/Could. There does not seem to be much difference between the choice of might or could.
Both signal that the speaker is making a tentative suggestion. It is worth noting that may and can
are absent from this list, as their prime use is for permission within social interactions (see below).
Should/Ought Το/Had Better/Had Best. Advice becomes stronger with the use of should,
ought to, or had better/had best. The modals in the second sentence below may suggest the
possibility of unpleasant consequences, whereas the first two are much more neutral:
You had
You should /ought to return that book to the library.
bet*er r return that book to the library,
best J
The use of had better/had best, however, does not always imply negative consequences; this
is especially true if the utterance is self-directed: rd better do the dusting before the vacuuming.
Should/OughtTo/Be Supposed To. As for the choice between should and ought to, Bouscaren,
Chuquet, and Danon-Boileau (1992) argue that ought to reflects a judgment based on external
rules (social conventions, institutions) and should reflects a speaker’s judgment based on
personal criteria (p. 68):
I felt that I ought to be showing these people where to find food. But should I? If I
were to lead them ... [(J. Wyndham, The Day of the Triffids) context: humanity has become
blind except for the narrator who is a witness to the disaster]
144
The Grammar Book
In contexts where we would expect to find should, we at times find be supposed to. Gaskill
(1978), citing transcribed oral data, argues that the difference between should and be supposed to
is that should invokes internal authority or a higher authority, whereas be supposed to invokes a
very special type of impersonal external authority, an appeal to some predetermined schedule,
plan, or perspective:
Well, if you'll notice, most teachers say you should, uh, take an interest in your subject—
you should apply it to life. And you try to, but somehow it doesn't work in most cases.
Physics is, they say, formula plugging—whenever you say that it's formula plugging the
teachers always get mad at you and say you're not supposed to look at it like that.
(Carterette and Jones, 1974, p. 406; punctuation added)
It seems both Bouscaren et al. and Gaskill argue that should expresses someone’s internal
moral judgment or a higher moral authority; the difference between the external force of
ought to and be supposed to is that ought to is a marker of some general external moral or social
standard, whereas use of be supposed to refers to explicit, externally agreed-upon standards,
schedules, or expectations that may be restricted to a certain group.
Must/Have Το/Have Got To/Need To. We find a range of modal forms for offering strong
advice. There appears to be a major distinction between must and the alternative forms. Must
clearly signals the speaker’s authority.
You must go home.
A pragmatically weakened from of must exists in situations where an offer or invitation initially
refused is recast as urgent advice to make it more emphatic:
You must have another piece of pie!
The other modal choices for strong advice allow the speaker to keep his/her authority off
stage. In choosing have to, have got to, or need to, an impression is given that the advice is
more objective than subjective. Comparing the frequency of must, have to, and have got to
relative to one another in current spoken American English, Radden and Dirven (2007)
report the following percentages of use: must (8 percent), have to (39 percent), and (have)
got to (53 percent) (p. 249). Some (Hoye, 2005; Leech, 2003; Smith, 2003) have raised the
possibility that such numbers reflect a democratization process, whereby speech participants
display more equality toward one another. The most colloquial option among these forms is
have got to, when pronounced as assimilated and elided gotta:
You gotta go home.
Of course, at the highest level of speaker authority and urgency are commands. While the
imperative form (see Chapter 12) is typically used to issue these, it is sometimes possible to
use future-oriented modal forms:
You are to see the doctor tomorrow.
You WILL see the doctor tomorrow, (where will is stressed)
You are going to see the doctor tomorrow.
If these sentences are followed by I don’t care what you say, they are clearly being used as
commands rather than simply to report a future event.
Perfect Aspect to Show Past. Use of the perfect aspect allows speakers to make suggestions
about the past (i.e., to comment on what did not happen as if it was a possibility at the time
that something else happened):
You should have gone to the doctor.
You ought to have gone to the doctor.
Chapter 8: Modal Auxiliaries and Related Phrasal Forms
145
You could have gone to the doctor.
You might have gone to the doctor.
Notice that it is not possible to use modals at the top of the authority/urgency scale (must,
have to/have got to/need to) to express this meaning, perhaps, because events in the past can no
longer be urgent.
Negative Advice. Advice can, of course, be negative as well as positive. Less formal and
weaker expressions of negative advice often involve should or its phrasal counterparts with not,
although other forms are possible:
You must not say things like that.	Stronger negative advice
You can't say things like that.	ท
You had better/ had best not say things like that.
You ought not (to) say things like that, (rare)
You shouldn't say things like that.
You're not supposed to say things like that.
You don't \ havθ [ to say things like that.	Weaker negative advice
[need]
While the modal forms in the first two sentences above are used for strong negative advice,
they may also be used for outright prohibition:
You must not watch TV now.
You can't watch TV now.
Again, each choice conveys a slightly different position taken by the speaker. According to
Radden and Dirven (2007), must not suggests that the speaker has a strong personal reason
to prohibit television, and can’t implies that the speaker is basing the prohibition on factors
outside of him/herself.
From our experience, introducing modals in this relative fashion to ESL/EFL students
is far more enlightening than simply introducing each form individually and ascribing a
number of distinctive meanings and functions to it.
Making Requests
The other major system in the social use of modals entails making requests. These can be
requests of a general nature,
Will/Would]___	______ ____,___,1___
■ _ ’'1 Tr you help me with this math problem?
Can/Could J
or specific requests for permission:
May/Might
Can/Could
leave the room now?
Responding to Requests. Although both historical present and past forms of these modals can
be used in making requests, only the historical present tense forms are likely to be used in
responses to requests:
To general requests: Yes, I can/*could; No, I can't/*couldn't.
Yes, I will/*would; No, I won't/*wouldn't.
To requests for permission: Yes, you may/*might; No, you may not/*might not.
Yes, you can/*could; No, you can't/*couldn't.
146
The Grammar Book
The reasons for this distinction is that the historical past forms of modals are considered more
polite and less presumptuous than the historical present forms, and thus the person making the
request will often use the historical past tense forms to “soften” the request; however, the person
being addressed is expected to respond directly and thus uses the less deferential historical present
forms. Also, the person responding to a request usually does not want to make the response
sound conditional, which is a possible result if the historical past form of the modal is used:
A: (Can/Could) you help me with this math problem?
B: Yes, I could (if you would wait a few minutes while I finish this work).
If ESL/EFL students learned to soften requests by employing the historical past tense
forms of the modals, they might find their requests being better received. For example,
Could (instead of Can) I talk to you for a minute?
Would (instead of Will) you open the door?
Requests for Permission. When asking for permission, the selection of may or can is socially
significant:
Can/May I talk to you for a minute?
May clearly signals the authority of the person granting permission. Thus, the greater the
addressee’s degree of formal authority (as perceived by the speaker or projected by the addressee)
and the greater the formality of the situation, the more likely the use of may. ESL/EFL learners,
however, should be made aware that can is used much more frequently than may for permission
(Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad, & Finegan, 1999). Perhaps this is the result of speakers
seeking to equalize the relationship part of the above-mentioned democratization process.
Note that while modals can be used in making requests, phrasal modals are generally
used not to make requests, but to ask literal questions:
Will/Would you open the door? (possible request)
Are you going to open the door? (literal question)
There is, however, a modal-like phrase that can be used to make a polite request:
Would11 you mind turning down the volume on that radio?
The interesting thing here is that do serves as an informal, more direct, and less polite
substitute for would in this phrase, whereas will is ungrammatical:
Do you mind turning down the volume on that radio?
"Will you mind turning down the volume on that radio?
As Ney (1978) points out, all request modals show differences in meaning when the negative not
is contracted to the modal, as opposed to when it is uncontracted and precedes the main verb:
Won't you please get into the pool? (Please do get in.)
Will you please not get into the pool? (Please do not get in.)
Couldn't I please go to the party? (I want to go; please let me.)
Could I please not go to the party? (I don't want to; please don't force me.)
When the negative is contracted with the modal, it serves to amplify or strengthen the request
that something should be done; however, if the negative is uncontracted and precedes the
verb, the request has the opposite meaning: that something not be done.
Shall. One modal that we have not discussed is shall. Since it is used infrequently in North
American English, we prefer to teach this form to most of our students for reception rather
than production. For advanced students, we point out that when shall does occur, it is usually
Chapter 8: Modal Auxiliaries and Related Phrasal Forms
147

found in requests for a decision or for advice from the addressee, in tags with let's, or in
statements establishing new topics:
Shall I call her? (should can also be used here)
Let's go, shall we?
Next, we shall discuss the difference between Xand Y.
Shall does occur in some frozen formulas where it signifies an invitation or a suggestion. In
such cases, should cannot be substituted for shall without a change of meaning:
Shall we dance? k- would you like to dance? i.e., an invitation)
Should we dance? (= is it advisable? i.e., a question)
In formal commands—both affirmative and negative—one occasionally encounters shall:
You shall report promptly at 0500 hours.
You shall not talk of such matters.
Certainly the old prescriptive rule—i.e., use shall to express future time with I and we; use will
elsewhere—no longer holds true for North American English.
MODALS TO DESCRIBE AB I LI TY/P 0 TE NT IAL/ TENDENCY
We use modals and phrasal modals to talk about the ability of animate subjects:
I can speak Indonesian.
Superman is able to leap tall buildings with a single bound.
In order to talk about past abilities, we use could or apply past tense to the phrasal modal:
I could speak Indonesian when I was young.
The Beatles were able to record many hits.
For inanimate subjects, we use the same modals to talk about possibility (or potential) rather
than ability:
The bicycle's tires can lose air over the course of the day's ride.
The car is able to go faster with this fuel.
We can, of course, talk about possibility with animate subjects as well:
Today I can go to Disney World.
Today I am able to go to Disney World.
Could, may, and might are also used to express possibility or potential. Compared with can
and be able to, however, they seem to suggest that there is less likelihood that the possibility
will be realized. This sense of weakened possibility aligns with the core senses for these
modals, which include weakened potential force for could and reference to barriers for may
and might.
When we wish to express possibility in the past, could + the perfect aspect have (have + -eri)
conveys a sense of unrealized potential:
The bicycle's tires could have lost air over the course of the day's ride.
(The tires did not lose air.)12
Yesterday I could have gone to Disney World.
(I did not go to Disney World.)
On the other hand, the past form of be able to signals that any potential was actualized:
This car was able to go faster with this fuel.
(The car did go faster.)
148
The Grammar Book
Yesterday I was able to go to Disney World.
(I did go to Disney World.)
The Use of Can to Show Affect. There are times when can is used more for pragmatic reasons
than for semantic ones. Instead of clearly expressing ability, it signals affect between speech
participants. Kjellmer (2003) outlines four pragmatic functions for can when used with
performative verbs (e.g., confirm, assure) and verbs of perception and cognition:
shock absorber: I can confirm that your candidate lost the race.
empathizer: I can feel your pain.
emphasizer: I can assure you that this is an amazing car.
qualifier: I can understand your point, but I disagree.
Removal of can from each of the above sentences would not change the basic meaning.
According to Kjellmer, use of can allows the speaker to lessen the shock of bad news (as in
the first sentence), to empathize with the listener (as in the second), to emphasize his/her
assurance (as in the third), and to prepare the listener for an objection (as in the fourth).
Indeed, Park (1993) found that lack of can and use of the present tense is preferred in
contexts that are factual, direct, and sometimes abrupt or even argumentative:
"I understand your point. Anything else?"
Sometimes the negative form of can with these types of verbs expresses surprise at a fact
rather than conveying any literal negation of ability or possibility (Park, 1993):
"It's your birthday? I can't believe it!"
The use of I don’t believe it, which can also express surprise, is preferred in contexts that are
more factually oriented, where the speaker is being direct; it would be used rather than can't
in those cases where the speaker does not accept the statement as true (Park, 1993).
Can for Hedging. Although can is used to bridge social distance in conversations, it is also
used (in a more formal manner) to establish distance between a speaker and what he/she says.
Radden and Dirven (2007) observe that can with the passive voice is particularly frequent in
academic writing as a form of hedging. They note such phrases as It can be said/noted/observed/
argued/claimed/concluded and point out that these expressions enable authors to “remain non-
committal” and to appear “objective” (p. 256). See Chapter 18 for discussion of the passive voice.
Past Tendency/. Turning from ability and potential to past tendency, we see the following
modals used:
I used to play a lot of soccer.
I would spend every Saturday on the soccer field.
In Chapter 9 we discuss choosing between used to and would in discourse. For now, it is worth
pointing out that students sometimes confuse used to with be used to and get used to. While used
to suggests a factual report of past habit, be/get used to expresses the idea of being or growing
accustomed to something. Compare the following sentences:
I used to eat hot food when I was เท Thailand, (factual report of past habit)
I got used to eating hot food when I was in Thailand, (change of habit or circumstance in past)
I am used to eating hot food, (current circumstance or habit)
Note that while used to expresses only past habit, be used to and get used to can refer to any time
frame by changing the tense of be or get. Note also that used to is followed by bare infinitives,
while get used to and be used to are followed by gerunds.
Chapter 8: Modal Auxiliaries and Related Phrasal Forms
149
MODALS TO EXPRESS LOGICAL PROBABILITY
When modals are used to express logical meanings, the speaker is typically making an inference
or prediction. For example:
Wilbur: Someone's knocking at the door.
Gertrude: It may be Sydney.
Inference
The relevant factor for choosing modals in this domain of reasoning is the speaker’s degree of
certainty regarding the inference:
Wilbur: Someone's knocking.
Gertrude:That must/has to/has got to be Sydney.	High certainty
That will/would/is going to be Sydney.	1เ
That should/ought to be Sydney.
That may be Sydney.
That could/might13 be Sydney.	Low certainty
Notice that adjectives and adverbs can often be used to paraphrase the logical uses, but
only rarely the social uses, of modal forms:
must/has to/has got to—necessarily, very certain(ly)	High certainty
will/would/is going to—fairly certain(ly)	À
should/ought to—probable, probably, likely	T
may—perhaps, maybe, quite possible/ly	V
could/might—possible, possibly	Low certainty
Negative Inference. Present inference can also be stated in negative terms, but this is much
less frequent, and the selection and order of forms is somewhat different:
Wilbur: Someone's knocking at the door. I believe it's Sidney.
Gertrude: That might not be Sydney.	Low possibility
That may not be Sydney.	A
That won't/wouldn't be Sydney.	Y
That can't/couldn't be Sydney.	Impossibility
Inferences about Past Situations. To express inferences about past situations, modals are
combined with the perfect aspect:
Wilbur: Someone was asking for you.
Gertrude:That must have been Sydney.
That will/would have been Sydney.
That should have been Sydney.
That may have been Sydney.
That could/might have been Sydney.
High certainty
Low certainty
Again, the same modal forms used to express negative present inference are used to express
negative past inference:
Wilbur: Someone was asking for you. I believe it was Sydney.
Gertrude:That might not have been Sydney.	Low possibility
That may not have been Sydney.	A
That won't/wouldn't have been Sydney.	Y
That can't/couldn't have been Sydney.	Impossibility
150
The Grammar Book
Prediction
A more restricted set of modal forms are used for prediction (than for inference):
Question: What do you think the weather will be like tomorrow?
Degree of probability
Response: It will/is going to rain tomorrow.	High
It should rain tomorrow.	A
It may rain tomorrow.	V
It could/might rain tomorrow.	Low
The absence of must may be because must historically was a past tense verb and is thus not
well suited for prediction or to the fact that predictions are less strong than inferences. The
latter explanation works equally well for the absence of have to and have got to in predictions.
Again, paraphrases with adverbs or adjectives are available (note that the modal auxiliary
in the that clause is will in all four cases):
It is certain that it will rain tomorrow.
It is probable/likely that it will rain tomorrow.
It is quite possible that it will rain tomorrow.
It is possible that it will rain tomorrow.
In the above that clauses, will seems to be a future tense as much as a logical modal. Also, the
use of an adverb with a modal can reinforce or weaken the meaning of the modal; for example,
It probably/possibly will rain.
Negative Prediction. On the negative predication scale, the forms occur in reverse order,
but could drops out. Apparently, couldn't is more strongly associated with past time frames or
present negative inference rather than negative prediction, which has a future time frame:
A: The weatherman said it will rain tomorrow. Do you agree?
B: fNo), it might not rain tomorrow	Low possibility
it may not14 rain tomorrow
it shouldn't rain tomorrow
it won't/is not going to rain tomorrow	1'
it can't rain tomorrow	Impossibility
because this new weather pattern is moving in.
Will/Be Going To. The choice between will and be going to to make predictions or simply to
talk about the future depends on a number of factors. First of all, be going to is more informal
and interpersonal than will, which is more formal and neutral as an expression of future time.
Thus, one of two friends at a restaurant says to the other friend, “I’m gonna have the salmon.”
However, several minutes later, the same speaker says to the waiter, “I’ll have the salmon.”
This analysis is supported in the data of Biber et al. (1999), which show be going to as much
more frequent in conversation compared with academic prose.
Second, be going to is closely tied to action already begun in the present or immediately
imminent, given evidence available in the present but over which the speaker has no control
(or has lost control). Thus English speakers say things like:
"Help! Our boat is going to roll over."
"Look, it's gonna rain soon."
The equivalents with will would sound strange in such statements. Huddleston and Pullum
(2002) explain this effect by contending that the present tense in be going to spotlights
Chapter 8: Modal Auxiliaries and Related Phrasal Forms
151
the present situation, whereas 'พill puts more focus on the future. The form will occurs in
conditions and other statements where future outcome is contingent on some other result, is
more distant, or involves speaker control:
"If you put your pawn there, he'll win the game."
"Go to the cafe at 9 P.M., and I'll meet you there."
In the immediately preceding example, will (’ll) conveys a sense of promise or commitment in
the statement, but use of be going to would convey a plan or intention instead.
Finally, Szmrecsanyi (2003) identified the surrounding syntax as a relevant factor. He
asserts that there is a tendency in spoken English to choose be going to over will for more
syntactically complex contexts. Be going to was found to be a frequent choice in longer sentences,
in subordinate clauses, and in negated contexts. He suggests that favoring be going to in such
contexts is an aid to processing because it is morphologically and phonologically richer. For
further discussion on choosing between will and be going to in discourse, see Chapter 9.
Conclusion
This concludes our overview of the modal auxiliaries in English. We freely admit that it is far
from complete. For example, we have not fully discussed archaic or shifting modals such as dare.
We have not discussed the hypothetical use of the modals would, should, could, and might since this
is discussed later in Chapter 27, which deals with conditional sentences. We wish to emphasize
again that very few languages have modal auxiliaries in the extreme form that English does—that
is, as a separate verbal class that has very different syntactic properties from those of normal verbs.
We have also not discussed in any detail the dialect differences that modals display. For
example, must is used much more frequently for social uses in British English than in North
American English:
You must come over for dinner soon.
We must correct that problem as soon as possible.
In North American English, have to is generally used in such environments, while must is
reserved for logical inference in the spoken language:
This must be the correct answer.
He must have heard the news.
Sometimes phrasal modals also exhibit dialect differences. For example, the Southern บ.ร.
form be fixing to indicates a much more immediate future than he going to:
(speaker with pen and paper in hand): I'm fixing to write a letter.
Although we have a fairly good understanding of the form and meaning of modals and their
phrasal forms, we are very far from understanding all there is to know about their uses. English
speakers use modals in extremely subtle ways to try to advise or control others, to express
affect (positive and negative), to mark, attitude or stance, to show or downplay authority, and
for other purposes. We now need further research on the interactional uses of modals in a
variety of different social and institutional settings to make progress in this area.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form. To accustom students to the fact that modal auxiliary verbs are followed directly by
the lexical verb without io, an adaptation of a technique suggested by Ur (1988) can be used.
152
The Grammar Book
The teacher can describe an object, animal, or person with sentences using modals, and the
students have to guess what it is. This allows them to hear the correct form repeatedly.
An example in Ur (1988), focusing on can and can’t, is the following (where the subject
to be guessed is “koala bear”) (p. 172):
It can climb trees.
It can carry its baby.
You can't buy one in a shop.
Sentences using other modal verbs could also be used. After this pattern has been
established, the technique could be carried out in the way Ur suggests, in which only
one student is not told what the chosen subject is and all the other students participate in
giving clues, using modal verbs to do so.
Students could also write their own descriptions, following the same pattern, and the
teacher or other students could guess the subjects.
2.	Form/Meaning. The communication activity “Find someone who . . .” can be used for
practice in the production of modal verbs in questions (Fen & Badalamenti, 1993). Each
sentence should use a modal verb. For example:
Find someone who can play tennis.
Find someone who might go to Europe one day.
Find someone who thinks they should do more exercise.
Each student has a worksheet with a list like the one above and moves around the
classroom asking questions of their classmates and writing down the name of the person
who fits the description in each sentence. To add more interest, this can also be done
using a grid, with a sentence in each square. The game is then played like bingo—the
first student to get a straight line of squares with a different name in each is the winner.
3.	Use. Teach the modal verbs in systems so that the relationship between them is clear.
a. One of the uses of the logical probability modals is to predict something such as the
chance of rain tomorrow. Show your students what degree of prediction is expressed
by each modal (or combination of modal and adverbs[s]):
(possibly)
(perhaps)
(probably)
(very likely)
(certainly)
weak, outside chance
stronger chance
even stronger chance
very strong chance
certainty
It could/might rain tomorrow.
It may rain tomorrow.
It may very well rain tomorrow.
It will very likely rain tomorrow.
It will rain tomorrow.
For oral practice, have students express (using a modal) situations such as the following
with the degree of prediction suggested by the context:
There's a 30 percent chance of rain tomorrow.
There's an 80 percent chance of rain later today.
The probability of good weather this coming weekend
The probability of man landing on Mars within the next 20 years
For written practice, have students read a paragraph or essay using modals predictively.
Get them to describe in their own words the degree of each prediction. Have them
write their own essay on a parallel topic.
Chapter 8: Modal Auxiliaries and Related Phrasal Forms
153
b. The other main use of the logical modals is to make inferences (guesses) about current
or past states/situations. Give your students a modal paradigm for the present or the
past. Example (for the present):
My phone is ringing.
weak inference: That could/might be Mary.
stronger inference: That may be Mary.
strong inference: That should/ought to be Mary.
very strong inference: That must/has to/has got to be Mary.
For oral practice, have students react (using a modal) to situations such as the following:
Student X is not in class today.
Student Y is falling asleep/is thinking of something else.
The local football star has not been playing as well as usual.
4.	Meaning. Students can be asked to relate the core meanings of modals to various uses of
modals. For example, provide instances of the same modal used for social interaction, ability,
and logical probability:
You can play the guitar right now (if you'd like).
I hear that you can play the guitar.
You can't have played the guitar just now (because there's no instrument here).
Ask students to create their own paraphrases for these different uses of can. Can they
relate the core meaning {potentialforce) to each of these sentences? To add a visual element
to this activity, consider using Tyler’s (2012) diagrams that represent core meanings for
modals (pp. 110-114).
5.	Use. Asking students to solve mysteries gives them the opportunity to use modals to
make inferences about the past. Wisniewska, Riggenbach, and Samuda (2007) present a
police report (p. 80) and Thewlis (2007) describes the scene of a crime (p. 256). In each
case, students try to figure out what happened. As in Thewlis (2007), they can work in
pairs to come up with multiple explanations and then determine the likelihood of each
explanation. Alternatively, as in Wisniewska et al. (2007), students can be asked to turn
the police report into a newspaper article in which they insert their own opinion on what
happened.
6.	Use. Newspaper advice columns, such as “Dear Abby,” provide an excellent source for social
uses of modals. Wisniewska et al. (2007) recommend bringing a variety of such columns to
class. The problem letters can be presented to students without the columnists’ responses.
Groups prepare responses to the letter writers and then compare their advice with that of the
columnists. As a follow-up, students can write their own problem letters and practice giving
advice to one another (p. 162).
7.	Use. For the usc of modals in offers, p. Hidalgo (personal communication) suggests a card
game that uses a set of cards containing pairs of problematic situations and suitable solutions
that could be offered; for example, a picture of a thirsty person would be matched with one
of a glass of water.
Students play in groups of three or four, and each student receives a number of cards,
the remainder to be left in a stack. One player calls out a problematic situation for which he
or she holds the card (e.g., “I’m thirsty!”), and another player who has the card for a suitable
solution is required to make a polite offer (e.g., “Would you like a glass of water? ”).The pair
of matching cards is then discarded. If the offer is not made politely, play passes to another
player to call out a situation. If no student has the card for the solution, each of the players
(except the one with the problem) picks up a card from the stack until someone gets the
154
The Grammar Book
solution card. If a player holds both the problem and the solution cards, they immediately
discard them.
The winner is the first one to get rid of all their cards. While luck is involved, the
students’ correct production of polite offers also affects their chances of winning, and this
motivates the students to monitor one another’s performance. If the offer is not politely
made, it is in their interest to point this out so that they have a better chance of winning.
8.	Use. To teach the different usages of mil and be going to, give your students situations
such as the following, which were taken from a paper by Stafford (1975), and ask them
to choose (1) or (2). Discuss their choices with them, and they should begin to become
sensitive to the differences.
a.	You are on a tour of Disneyland with your friends. As you step off one of the rides, you
suddenly lose your balance and shout,
(1)	"Help! I will fall!"
(2)	"Help! I'm going to (gonna) fall!"
Difference: Be going to is the preferred form, since it is used with actions or events
beyond the control of the subject that are just about to happen.
b.	An army officer is talking to a superior officer. He says,
"Well, sir, if our strategies continue to be successful, the war
(1)	is going to soon be over."
(2)	will soon be over."
Difference: Will is the preferred form when a more formal register is called for.
c.	A shy 17-year-old boy calls up a girl he's been admiring all year. He says,
(1)	"Will you meet me at the show this Friday?"
(2)	"Are you going to meet me at the show this Friday?"
Difference: Will is used for requests/invitations; be going to is inappropriate in such
contexts.
9.	Use. Ίο practice the use of modals in writing with more advanced students, collect excerpts
from academic journal articles. Create worksheets that include both the excerpts with all
modals removed and the original excerpts. Ask students to compare original texts with edited
texts and to discuss the following questions:
a.	Do the original and edited texts create different impressions on the audience?
b.	If yes, how are these impressions different?
c.	For each modal, why do you think the author chose to use it? What effect was s/he
hoping to have on the reader?
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1.	Provide original example sentences that illustrate the following concepts. Underline
the relevant word(s) in your examples.
a.	phrasal modal	c. logical probability meaning of a
b.	social use of a modal	modal
Chapter 8: Modal Auxiliaries and Related Phrasal Forms
155
d.	a combination of more than one
modal or phrasal modal
e.	polite form of a request
f.	literal question with a phrasal modal
2.	Explain the ambiguity of the following sentence:
His mother says he may go.
3.	Explain the semantic difference between the two sentences in each of the following
pairs:
a.	It must be nighttime.
b.	Will you help me with this problem?
c.	I was able to go to the library last night.
d.	The ground is wet. It may have rained
last night.
e.	You should do your homework.
It must have been nighttime.
Would you help me with this problem?
I could have gone to the library last
night.
The ground is wet. It must have
rained last night.
You had better do your homework.
4.	The meaning of the affirmative sentences in the following pairs is similar. Explain the
semantic difference between the negative sentences:
a.	That might be important. -> That might not be important.
b.	That could be important. -»That couldn’t be important.
Test your ability to apply what you know.
5.	If your students produce the following, what would you tell them?
a.	*You will can go there.
b.	"May you cash this check, please?
c.	*We should study a lot for that class
last term.
d.	"They could be easily to reach the
goal.
e.	*1 must to speak English.
f.	"This action will good for workers.
g.	?Excuse me, Mr. Smith, you gotta
give us our homework back.
b.	A: Would you please close the window?
B: "Of course I would.
6.	What is the difference in meaning in each of the following pairs of sentences? There
may be differences in the presuppositions of the speaker.
a. Could you tell me how to get to the bus stop?	Would you tell me how to get the bus stop?
b. The principal said Joe may go.	The principal said Joe may have gone.
c. Sam should introduce the guest speaker.	1,;	Sam is supposed to introduce the guest speaker.
7.	Sometimes, when referring to ability in the past, one can use the phrasal modal but
not the true modal:
I was able to pick up the tickets last night. *1 could pick up the tickets last night.
At other times, both the phrasal modal and the true modal are acceptable:
I could read at an early age.	I was able to read at an early age.
Furthermore, even the ungrammatical sentence above is acceptable when it is negated:
I couldn't pick up the tickets last night.
Can you think of a generalization that would account for these restrictions on the use
of could?
156
The Grammar Book
Bibliography
REFERENCES
Biber, D., Johansson, ร., Leech, G., Conrad, ร., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and
written English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ltd.
Bouscaren, J., & Chuquet, J. (with Danon-Boileau, L.). (1992). Introduction to a linguistic grammar of
English: An utterer-centered approach. (R. Flintham & J. Bouscaren, Trans.). Paris, France: Orphys.
Carterette, E., & Jones, M. (1974). Informal speech. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Declerck, R. (2010). Future time reference expressed by "be to” in present-day English. English Language
and Linguistics, 74(2), 271-291.
Een, J., & Badalamenti, V. (1993). Workshop in teaching grammar thematically (TL4174) conducted from
Columbia Teachers College, New York, NY.
Gaskill, พ. (1978). Should versus be supposed to (Unpublished English 215 paper). University of Calfornia,
Los Angeles, CA.
Hinkel, E. (1995). The use of modal verbs as a reflection of cultural values. TESOL Quarterly, 29(2),
325-343.
Hofmann, T. R. (1966). Past tense replacement and the modal system. Computational Laboratory, Harvard
University, NSF Report 17.
Hoye, L. E (2005). You may think that; I couldn’t possibly comment! Modality studies: Contemporary
research and future directions. Part Π. Journal of Pragmatics, 57(9), 1481-1506.
Huddleston, Ri, & Pullum, G. K. (2002). The Cambridge grammar of the English language. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Kjellmer, G. (2003). A modal shock absorber, empathiser/emphasiser, and qualifier. International Journal
of Corpus Linguistics, 8(2), 145-168.
Leech, G. (2003). Modality on the move: The English modal auxiliaries 1961-1992. In R. Facchinetti,
M. Krup, & F. Palmer (Eds.), Modality in contemporary English (pp. 223-240). Berlin, Germany/New York:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Lin, Y-H. (2009). Query preparatory modals: Cross-linguistic and cross-situational variations in
request modification. Journal of Pragmatics, 47(8), 1636-1656.
Nagle, ร. J. (1994).The English double modal conspiracy. Diachronica, 77(2), 199-212.
Ney, J.พ (1978). Practical suggestions for teaching the English modals. Cross Currents, 5(2), 65-72.
Palmer, E (1990). Modality and the English modals (2nd ed.). London, England: Longman.
Park, YY (1993). A discourse analysis of can versus its absence with verbs of perception and cognition in spoken
English (Unpublished master’s thesis). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Radden, G., & Dirven, R. (2007). Cognitive English grammar. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins.
Smith, N. (2003). Changes in the modals and semi-modals of strong obligation and epistemic necessity
in recent British English. In R. Facchinetti, M. Krup, & E Palmer (Eds.), Modality in contemporary
English (pp. 241-266). Berlin, Germany/New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Stafford, c. (197 5). Expressing the future: W1\\ vs. be going to (Unpublished English 215 paper). University of
California, Los Angeles, CA.
Sweetser, E. (1990). From etymology to pragmatics: Metaphorical and cultural aspects of semantic structure.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Szmrecsanyi, B. (2003). Be going to versus will/shall·. Does syntax matter? Journal of English Linguistics,
57(4), 295-323.
Talmy, L. (2000). Concept structuring systems: Toward a cognitive semantics (Vol. 1). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Thewlis, ร. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 5 (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle,
Cengage Learning.
Chapter 8: Modal Auxiliaries and Related Phrasal Forms
157
Tyler, A. (2012). Cognitive linguistics and second language learning: Theoretical basics and experimental evidence.
New Y?rk, NY: Routledge.
บ!', p. (1988). Grammar practice activities: A practical guide for teachers. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge
University Press.
Wisniewska, I., Riggenbach, H., & Samuda, V (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form--, meaning, and use
2 (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle. Cengage Learning.
SUGGESTIONS^——-
For more on models and modality in addition to the references above, see:
Bybee, J. L., & Fleischman, ร. (Eds.). (1995). Modality in grammar and discourse. Amsterdam, Netherlands:
John Benjamins.
Coates, J. (1983). The semantics of modal auxiliaries. London, England: Croom Helm.
Ehrman, M. (1972). The meaning of the modals in present-day American English. The Hague, Netherlands:
Mouton.
Facchinetti, R., Krug, M., & Palmer, F. (Eds.). (2003). Modality in contemporary English. Berlin, Germany:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Hoye, L. E (1997). Adverbs and modality in English. London, England: Longman.
Narrog, H. (2005). Modality, mood, and change of modal meanings: A new perspective. Cognitive
Linguistics, 16(A), 677-731.
Nuyts,J. (2001). Epistemic modality, language, and conceptualization. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John
Benjamins.
Palmer, F. R. (2001). Mood and modality (2nd ed.). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
รalkie, R., Busuttil, p., & van der Auwera, J. (Eds.). (2009). Modality in English. Theory and description. Berlin,
Germany/New York, NY: Mouton de Gruyter.
For corpus linguistics work on modals, consult:
Collins, p (2009). Modals and quasi-modals in English. Amsterdam, Netherlands/New York: Rodopi.
Leech, G. (2011). The modals are declining. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 16(A), 547-564.
Millar, N. (2009). Modal verbs in Time. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 14(2), 191-220.
For good suggestions on the teaching of modal auxiliaries, consult:
Ackles, N. A. (2003). The grammar guide: Developing language skills for academic success. Ann Arbor, MI:
University of Michigan Press.
Badalamenti, V, & Henner-Stanchina, c. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 1 (4th ed.).
Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Bowen, J. D., & McCreary, C. F. (1977). Teaching the English modal perfects. TESOL Quarterly, 11(3),
283-301.
Cake, c. D. (2009). Grammar connection: Structure through content 5. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage
Learning.
Firsten, R. (2008). Grammar connection: Structure through content 2. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Thewlis, ร. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 3 (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle,
Cengage Learning.
Ur, p. (2009).. Grammar practice activities: A practical guide for teachers (2nd ed.). Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Wisniewska, L, Riggenbach, H., & Samuda, V. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use
2 (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
158
The Grammar Book
Endnotes
1.	Note that must; originally the past tense of Anglo-Saxon motan, has no historically related present
form. What happened in Modern English is that must became largely "present" เท terms of its meaning
potential; as a result explicit marking of past necessity is often expressed with the phrasal had to, past
tense of have to. Had to was the first phrasal modal to develop in English, and it arose at a time when
must and should had lost their connection to past time and no longer took direct objects.
2.	We identify be to as a phrasal equivalent of will:
They will have a big wedding. = They are to have a big wedding.
However, it can also be used as a phrasal equivalent of must and should:
You must report here at 6 A.M. = You are to report here at 6 A.M.
What should I do? = What am I to do?
Foran interesting examination of the various uses of be to, see Declerck (2010).
3.	The form ought to is intermediate between a true modal (it doesn't inflect) and a phrasal form (it takes
to); one can classify it either way. Historically, ought is a past form of owe; in current usage, ought may
lose its to in negative sentences and look more like a true modal, but this does not work for all speakers
of North American English:
You oughtn't (to) do that. We ought not (to) stay longer.
This reduction seems to be occurring with had better/best as well. We are seeing better without the had
more frequently in print. This may be due to the fact that it is not very salient in its contracted form, 'd.
4.	There is some dialectal variation here เท that native speakers represent questions and negatives with
used to differently. Some write the prescriptively favored "Did you use to?" "You didn't use to." while
others write "Did you used to?""You didn't used to." For the second group, used to is-on its way to
becoming more of an intermediate frozen form like ought to, whereas the first group still views used
to as a normally inflected past-tense form. The second group is probably indicating a future change.
5.	For the phrasal modals, it should be noted that used to cannot be marked with present, have got to
cannot be marked with past, and although had better/best takes a past inflection, it always expresses a
future orientation.
6.	Beyond assimilation, we often see elision with this phrasal modal: l/You/We/They gotta think about it.
Note that elision is less dramatic with 3rd person singular forms (e.g., She's gotta be right), where the
contracted form 'ร is maintained.
7.	There are Southern dialects of North American English where certain modal-plus-modal sequences are
possible:
We might could do that.
See Nagle (1994) for further discussion.
8.	เท fact, Biber et al. (1999) found this pattern of modal + have to to be the most commonly occurring
modal + phrasal modal pattern.
9.	Three also seems to be the limit on multiple modal sequences in those Southern dialects that allow
them ‘.might should ought to (ร. Nagle, personal communication).
10.	Another possible, though less frequent, equivalent for You don't have to go is You needn't go. A form that
is sometimes like a modal in questions and negatives and more often like a regular verb in affirmatives is
dare: Dare we ask? We don't dare ask/ He dared to be brave.
11.	Would appears in a number of other modal-like constructions, the functions of which are not exactly
requests:
Desire—would like (to) (normally takes a statement form):
Sarah would like to travel around the world.
Ralph would like an apple.
Chapter 8: Modal Auxiliaries and Related Phrasal Forms
159
Offer/invitation—would you like (to) (normally takes a question form):
Would you like something to drink?
Would you like to dance?
Preference—would rather/sooner (X than Y), would prefer to:
Brad would rather study languages than mathematics.
Joe would prefer to go to school instead of working.
One could argue that would like (to) and would prefer (to) are simply sequences describable as: modal + verb +
infinitive. For pedagogical purposes, however, we advise teaching these as formulaic, modal-like lexical chunks
to emphasize the unchanging nature of would \r\ these expressions to avoid ESL/EFL errors such as:
*1 will prefer to stay here. "Will you like some cake?
12.	It is also possible that the could have here is used to speculate as to why the tires lost air, e.g., in answer
to the question, Why are they flat?
13.	An anonymous reviewer of the second edition of this book indicated to us that for him/her might is the
equivalent of muy rather than could. We recognize that such differences are dialectally and idiolectally
possible, especially with more rarefy used modals such as might.
14.	It is worth pointing out that may not has a different scope of negation when used for prediction than
when used to deny permission:
It may not rain tomorrow. - It is possible that it does not rain tomorrow, (narrow scope)
You may not watch TV. = It is not possible (allowable) that you watch TV. (wide scope)
160
The Grammar Book
The Tense-Aspect-
Modality System
in Discourse
A
Introduction
There are patterns of tense, aspect, and modality (TAM) at the sentence-level that are useful
for students to know. In addition to the ones that we have already discussed in Chapter 8,
consider the following sentence:
I'm going to buy a bicycle, so I can do errands and exercise at the same time.
Here, the use of be going to in the first clause and can in the second create a plan+outcome
pattern that students can learn and which they then can use to express their own plans and
expected outcomes.
However, TAM analyses based on example sentences such as this one—even if well
contextualized—are limited, in that such accounts fail to capture the TAM combinations that
occur above the level of the sentence. In this chapter, we will focus on the patterns that TAM
forms exhibit in English discourse, and we will attempt to explain why they occur.
To help us understand the uses of the English tense-aspect-modality system in
discourse, the work of the linguist William Bull (1960) is an important and insightful
starting point. The chapter also reports on a number of data-based studies that examine
the functions of the TAM system in English discourse, both spoken and written. Such
an examination of TAM is important because “tense-aspect-modality is one of the major
devices coding the connectedness/coherence of sentences in their wider discourse context”
(Givón, 1984, p. 269).
Learners of English are often challenged in their use of tense and aspect in discourse,
and there are several possible reasons for this:
•	Most teachers present tense as if it were related solely to time, which is not the case,
as we shall demonstrate at a number of places in this chapter.
•	Teaching tense and aspect only at the sentence level means that learners are never
exposed to and never get to practice common discourse-level patterns.
•	The learners’ LI can be a powerful influence. Not all languages mark tense and aspect,
and even languages that do (e.g., German, Spanish, and Russian) have systems that differ
from English in terms of what gets marked on verbs and when and why tense or aspect
is used.
161
In preparation for our discussion of the English tense-aspect system at the discourse
level, let’s consider the two following constructed narratives:
a.	?l have a splitting headache. I had it for two hours. I will take some aspirin.
b.	I have a splitting headache. I've had it for two hours. I'm going to take some aspirin.
In the first example, there is unmotivated tense-switching from present to past to future,
which results in a choppiness. In the second example, however, we find the. present tense in the
first clause, the present perfect in the second clause, and be going to with a present tense be in the
final clause; that is, all the tense-aspect forms have an orientation to the present throughout
the sequence.
Similar observations can be made about the following texts concerning events reported
in past time. Consider the following constructed examples:
c.	?The little girl cries her heart out. She lost her teddy bear and is convinced she will
never find him.
This narrative is comprehensible and not completely incoherent, but it comes out
sounding somewhat disjointed and awkward when compared with the (d) version:
d.	The little girl cried her heart out. She had lost her teddy bear and was convinced
she would never find him.
The second version of the past narrative has the first clause in the simple past and the
second clause in the past perfect. The third clause has was, and the fourth has the historical
past form of will (i.e., would), i.e., a past orientation is maintained throughout the narrative.
One does not normally jump from present tense to past tense to future tense in a short piece
of discourse. Yet this is precisely what many learners of English do when they speak and write
in English. One reason for this may be that they have learned the English tense-aspect system
one combination at a time, at the sentence level, without ever learning how the combinations
interact in longer pieces of discourse. This chapter directly addresses this learning challenge.
The Bull Framework
Most accounts of English tense and aspect assume one timeline and try to illustrate all tense-
aspect forms in terms of this single line:
.__future .______________________1
past	simple	โ โ -โ โ โsimple
perfect	past	1---L--------1 future
past <-----G------------O--------------X-----------G--------------------> future
present
perfect
<-------- sinople present ----->
(moment of speech)
The Bull Framework forces US- to make a conceptual shift and to think in terms of
viewing the tense-aspect system as a resource for taking different temporal perspectives on
actions, events, and states of affairs. For example, if asked the question:
Would you like something to eat?
one can answer either (a) or (b) in American English:
a.	No, thanks. I've already eaten.
b.	No, thanks. I already ate.
162
The Grammar Book
The time of the speaker’ร meal does not necessarily differ in (a) and (b). Both responses
report past events, but the choice allows the speaker to add his/her perspective on the current
relevance of the response; this perspective is what conditions the choice rather than any
real linear sense of time: (a) is not necessarily more recent within real time than (b). What
(a) signals is the current relevance that the response is believed to have, whereas (b) does not
signal any assumption of current relevance. In fact, (b) puts the speaker’s last meal squarely
in the past rather than the present. Another example that suggests that Bull is correct to take
us away from a linear perspective on tense and aspect is to consider the future perfect, which
asks the listener to step into the future and look back. It is quite possible, as the following
example shows, for an event/action described with a future perfect (a) to have occurred before
one described with the simple past (b):
a.	John will have finished all that work months ago.
b.	I saw John at the market yesterday.
Furthermore, the typical time line also does not explain why English speakers can use
the simple present tense with a future time expression to indicate future time:
I travel to Mexico next Friday.
Nor does it explain why it is not always necessary to use the past perfect for a past event prior
to another past event if time expressions are present to make the sequence clear (i.e., the past
perfect is possible on return but not necessary):
We (had) returned from our vacation before Jack went on his trip.
Each axis in Bull’s framework has a neutral or basic time slot in the middle and two possible
marked slots—one on the left signaling a time before the basic time of the axis, and the other
on the right signaling a time after the basic time of that axis. Based on this semantic framework,
each “tense” of any language can be placed in the appropriate slot on the appropriate axis. It is
quite likely, however, that any given language will not fill each possible slot with a unique form
and that any given language might turn out to have some overlap of forms across slots.
See the table below for our interpretation of Bull’s axes applied to English and their
corresponding verb tense forms [with input from Houts Smith (1993)]:
THE BULL FRAMEWORK
Axis of orientation i	A time before the basic axis time	A basic axis time corresponding to the moment of reference	A time after the basic axis time
Present	He has played golf since 1960. (present perfect)	He plays golf. (simple present)	He is going to play golf next Sunday, (future of the present)
Past	When he left to play golf, he had finished all his chores, (past perfect)	He played golf on Saturday afternoon, (simple past)	Having finished his golf game, he went out to dinner with his golf buddies, (no distinct form— use simple past)
Future	By 5:00, he will have finished all the chores, (future perfect)	He will eat dinner at 5:00. (simple future)	Upon completion of his dinner, he will watch TV. (no distinct form— use simple future)
Chapter 9: The Tense-Aspect-Modality System in Discourse
163
This framework helps US understand quite explicitly why some of the preceding
narratives were smoother or more coherent than their alternatives: In the preferred discourse
examples, the author stayed within one axis of orientation—that is, present or past—and
made “before” and “after” time references that were appropriate to that axis; the author did
not jump from one axis to the other.
Here are some other discourse samples adapted from Larsen-Freeman, Kuehn, and
Haccius (2002) using the verb sing, which were created to teach students about the Bull
Framework (p. 5):
Present Axis:
Joe sings in the church choir. He has sung in the choir for years. He is going to sing in
it as long as he can carry a tune.
Past Axis:
Joe even sang in the church choir when he was a teenager. เท fact, he had sung in his
school choir before that. He sang every chance he got.
Future Axis:
Joe will sing in the holiday concert next week. He will have sung in that event
20 times. He will likely sing in it for 20 more.
Again, each sample begins with a statement anchored in the basic axis of orientation
time. It then moves to talk about a time before the basic axis time, using perfect aspect. It
finishes using the tense corresponding to a time after the basic axis time. For instance, in the
future axis example, the tense sequence moves from future to future perfect, and the text once
again ends with future. English has no unique “after future” form. Also, some may ask why
be going to is part of the present axis and will is part of the future axis because these forms
occasionally seem interchangeable. The ability of be going to to inflect for present tense and
the greater ease of combining will with perfect aspect suggests that the assignment of will
to the future axis and of be going to to the present axis is indeed valid despite their areas of
semantic overlap (see Chapter 8 for discussion of their similarities and differences).
Another unique feature of Bull’s framework is that the so-called perfect aspect in English
is shown to be much more closely associated with tense than is the progressive aspect. The
perfect aspect signals the “before time” in each axis, (called “prior” time in Chapter 7), whereas
the progressive aspect is a truly independent aspectual form that can express notions such as
duration, noncompletion, or iteration in combination with all the tense-aspect-modality forms.
By including the be going to form, we now have 14 distinct tense-aspect combinations in English
instead of the traditional 12 “tenses” presented in Chapter 7. We use the verb talk to illustrate this:
Bull System Forms	Bull Forms plus Progressive Aspect
V	-pres (talk(s))	be -pres V -ing (is/are/am talking)
have V + -en (have/has talked)	have been V -ing (has/has been talking)
be -pres going to V (is/am/are	,	be -pres going to be V -ing (is/am/are
going to talk)	going to be talking)1
V	-past (talked)	be -past V -ing (was/were talking)
had V + -en (had talked)	had been V -ing (had been talking)
will V (will talk)	will be V -ing (will be talking)
will have V + -en (will have talked)	will have been V -ing (will have been talking)
You might wonder whether the Bull Framework differs substantively from previous analyses of
the English tense-aspect system, and if so, how. We feel that the Bull Framework permits an
analysis that is like traditional accounts such as Jespersen’s (1964), in that meaning has priority
over form and that it retains much of the traditional grammatical terminology for describing the
tenses. Bull’s system, however, is considerably more complex, in that not just one but the three
164
The Grammar Book
parallel time lines (i.e., the three axes of orientation) are used to illustrate and explicate the tense
system. Bull’s system begins to account for tense sequences in discourse, as well as accounting for
tense in isolated sentences, and teachers can refer to the axes to show students how tenses should
relate to each other in discourse; that is, students should perhaps learn and review the tenses one
axis at a time rather than one form at a time. Bull’s framework is also more sophisticated and subtle
than the usual structural account of the English tense-aspect system, in that it shows clearly how
the so-called perfect aspect consistently functions as a marker of “a time before”2 with respect to
the basic English tense in each of the three axes, with the result that the progressive appears to be
a more flexible and genuine marker of aspect than the perfect in English because it interacts with
each distinct form in Bull’s matrix; it is not restricted to “a time before” or “a time after.”
Μ 0 TIV AT 10 N s F 0 RCHANG ING 0 NES AXIS OF OR IE N TAT 10 N
A Shift of Time (Explicit). When we teach learners about the Bull Framework, we initially
encourage them to stay within the same axis of orientation. Yet there are certainly reasons for
changing one’s axis, and we can notice them as soon as we examine authentic discourse. The most
obvious reason for changing one’s axis of orientation is the presence of a temporal expression
that overtly signals the need for such a shift. For example, the following caption, which appears
below a newspaper photo showing workers making repairs to a damaged highway overpass reads:
Caltrans [California Transportation Authority] workers shore up a tunnel under the
5 Freeway north of downtown L.A. A fiery tanker truck crash in the tunnel Saturday
forced the closure of most lanes of the 5, causing chaos for commuters. (Los Angeles
Times, Tuesday, July 16,2013, Section AA, p. 1)
In this short text, present tense (present axis) occurs in the first sentence to describe
the photo. The second sentence contains Saturday, which refers back to a specific past date
(July 13, 2013) and the event that took place on that date, thus requiring the use of the past
tense (past axis) on the main verb (forced) in the second sentence of the caption.
A Shift of Time (Implicit). There are sometimes less overt reasons for shifting one’s axis of
orientation, such as the rhetorical structure of a text. Consider the following text for an advertisement:
For the second year in a row, the Chrysler Town & Country has been honored with J.D.
Power and Associates' prestigious APEAL award. เท their recent study. Town & Country
tied as "America's Most Appealing Minivan" after its owners rated it on over 100
attributes. So while we always insist that it be quiet, we certainly don't mind hearing
this sort of noise. (Chrysler, 1998)
There are three sentences in this text. The first is a statement of current relevance that
begins in the past and continues to the present; thus the present perfect (present axis) is used.
In the second sentence, the results of a prior survey are reported in the past tense (past axis).
There is no explicit mention of a prior time, and, in fact, the use of recent might lead learners
to expect the present perfect to be used. Then in the final sentence, the text returns to the
present axis and uses the present tense to offer a subtly boastful evaluation.
Thus, a motivated shift of axis in discourse may be explicitly marked by a temporal expression
as it was in the caption, or it may be due to the meaning and rhetorical organization of the
propositions in the text as it was in the advertisement. The latter case is definitely more difficult to
teach and learn than the former because there is no explicit marking to indicate the shift.
Backgrounding in Narratives. Chafe (1972) was among the first to introduce the notion of a
“generic” tense (i.e., a tense used to make a comment or an aside). We described this concept
Chapter 9: The Tense-Aspect-Modality System in Discourse
165
as “backgrounding” in Chapter 2. Typically, the form used for backgrounding is the present
tense, often interrupting a past tense (past axis) narrative, as in the following excerpt from a
longer transcribed oral narrative:
"Skiing over a Cliff"3
ไ. So my front skis bent down;
2.	Interestingly enough, when something like this happens
3.	all these thoughts flash in your mind;
4.1	managed to flash my whole life in front of me.
Lines 1 and 4 are in the past tense (past axis) and represent the main storyline, while lines 2
and 3 are an evaluation in an inserted aside in the present tense that provides background material.
Immediacy in Narratives. Linguists have long been aware that speakers and writers sometimes
make their narratives of past events more immediate and vivid if they recount them in the present
tense. This convention is referred to as the “historical present,” and it represents the suspension
of past axis to achieve a dramatic effect. This is different from backgrounding since it applies to
the main storyline. It is illustrated in the following excerpt from a longer oral narrative:
"Driving Home"4
1.	So Dad decides that he's gonna pass these cars
2.	And, uh he pulls out in the other lane
3.	And starts passing them
4.	And all of a sudden we see this big truck,
5.	You know, this truck coming for US.
This narrative is based on past events, yet the speaker tells much of his story in the
present tense (i.e., the historical present).5
A Turn of Events in a Narrative. In a study of the narratives of younger English speakers
in the United Kingdom, Levey (2006) reports finding the present perfect being used in a
past narrative. He invites US to consider the following story, recounted by a twenty-year-old
British student who is frustrated when trying to print out a document:
"Printing a Document"
1.	and it was quite a big document
2.	it was like thirty pages long
3.	and all of a sudden it's gone through
4.	and the printer's just started printing
5.	it's got to page thirty
6.	and it's kept going
7.	and I couldn't stop the printer... [Levey, 2006, p. 137 with an example from Cheshire's
(2005) corpus]
In this extract, clauses 3-6 all relate a sequence of past events while containing a verb
in the present perfeçt. What is noteworthy is that it has been said that the historical present
most often follows the phrase all of a sudden·, however, here, it is the present perfect, which
follows this phrase and which is used to signal a turn of events in this past narrative.
Direct Quotes. Sometimes a narrative or a news report will contain direct quotes. In such
cases, using a direct quote often câuses a change of temporal perspective or axis. Consider the
following excerpt from a newspaper article that appeared in the Los Angeles Times:
"Firefighters Make Stand at Idyllwild"
1.	Working in searing conditions and aided by water-dropping aircraft,
2.	crews cleared paths and laid down red-colored fire retardant
3.	on the outskirts of Idyllwild and several nearby communities -
166
The Grammar Book
4.	an effort to contain the flames and keep them from residential areas.
5.	"That's our primary goal,"said Bob Poole,
6.	a fire Information officer with the บ.ร. Forest Service,
7.	who noted the blaze came as close as 2.5 miles to Idyllwild.
8.	"But fire sometimes is unpredictable." (Los Ange/es Times, Friday, July Id, 2013,
Section AA, p. 1)
In this excerpt, the tensed verb forms in the first two lines of the first paragraph are in
the past tense because the article was a report of events that had happened the day before (i.e.,
on July 18). Line 4 is an untensed infinitive phrase connected to the three preceding lines.
Line 5 begins a new paragraph with a direct quote from the information officer of the บ.ร.
Forest Service. The quoted material in lines 5 and 8 is in the present tense, while other verbs
used to frame the officer’s quote and say more about the fire are once again in the past tense.
The quoted material in the present tense is set off visually through the use of quotation marks.
The Frame-Elaboration Hypothesis
A somewhat different perspective on the use of tense-aspect-modality sequences in discourse
is taken up in Kyung-Hee Suh’s research. Drawing on a number of existing databases, Suh
(1992a) hypothesized that in the course of constructing oral narratives, English speakers
often use one tense-aspect-modality form to frame or introduce a type of narrative or an
episode, and then they switch for the remainder of the episode to another form to elaborate
the episode and provide the details.
F RAM E- E LAB
Introducing a Present Habitual Narrative. In this regard, one pattern that Suh noticed was
that the present perfect tense can be used to introduce a present-tense habitual narrative.
Observe how this pattern is illustrated in the following example:
"Jazz Musician"
1.	There's been a lot of untruths told about improvisation.
2.	Men just don't get up on the stage and improvise on things they're not
familiar with.
3.	True improvisation comes out of hard work.
4.	When you're practicing at home, you work on a theme, and you work out all the
possibilities of that theme.
5.	Since it's in your head, it comes out when you play.
6.	You don't get out on the stage and just improvise,
7.	Not knowing what the hell you're doing.6
8.	It doesn't work out that way. (Terkel, 1974, pp. 598-599)
In this narrative, the present perfect initiates the episode in line 1, and the simple
present—modified by two present progressives in lines 4 and 7 that seem to be background
information—completes the episode. The entire episode is in the present axis and describes
what repeatedly happens with jazz musicians as they work at their art form.
Providing a Transition to a Past Narrative. Suh (1992a) noticed even more cases in oral narrative
where the present perfect provides a transition—here, from the moment of speaking (i.e., Bull’s
present axis) to introduce a specific past experience, the details of which are then reported in
the simple past (past axis). The following narrative exemplifies this frame-elaboration pattern:
Chapter 9: The Tense-Aspect-Modality System in Discourse
167
"Gas-meter Reader"
1.	I've been bit once already by a German shepherd.
2.	And that was something.
3.	It was really scary.
4.	It was an outside meter the woman had.
5.1	read the gas meter and was walking back out and heard a woman yell.
6.1	turned around, and this German shepherd was coming at me.
7.	The first thing I thought of was that he might go for my throat, like the movies.
8.	So I sort of crouched down and gave him my arm;
9.	Instead of my neck, he grabbed a hold of my arm, bit that, turned around.
10.	My arm was kinda soft so I thought I'd give him something harder.
11.	So I gave him my hand, a little more bone in that.
12.	So he bit my hand.
13.1	gave it to him so that he wouldn't bite my throat.
14.1	didn't want him to grab hold of my face. (Terkel, 1974, pp. 365-366)
In this excerpt, the present perfect introduces or frames the specific past event and the
simple past is then used to elaborate and give the details. There is also limited use of the past
progressive in lines 5 and 6, perhaps to better focus on the target actions of the man’s walking
away and the dog’s coming at him. The entire excerpt, other than the opening present perfect
frame, is reported in the past axis.
__________________________________________________________________________________
FRAME-ELABORATION PATTERN WITH PHRASAL MODAL
AND MODAL SEQUENCES ___________________
In addition to tense and aspect sequences like the two illustrated above, Suh’s (1992a) frame-
elaboration hypothesis also works for two other interesting cases that involve phrasal modals
and modals: the use of used to and would for past habitual narratives and be going to and will for
future scenarios.
Used To and Would in Past Habitual Narratives. Previously, researchers have had problems
distinguishing used to and would at the sentence level, for it seemed that pairs such as the following
were more or less equivalent in terms of stating habitual actions or states in the past:
a.	My father used to exercise every morning.
b.	My father would exercise every morning.
Certainly, one difference is that (a) can signal only habitual past action, whereas (b) can
also be conditional given appropriate context (i.e., “if he had time”). However, without further
context, (a) and (b) cannot be distinguished at the sentence level. In collecting many instances
of spontaneous oral narratives with past habitual time references, Suh (1992b) noticed that
the semantically more salient phrasakmodal used to tends to mark an episode boundary or set
up a frame for a past'habitual event, whereas the more contigent form would (or’d) marks the
details or elaborates the topic, witfrthe simple past also occurring as an alternative to would.
Consider the following example:
"Farm Worker"
1.	The bad thing was they used to laugh at US, the
2.	Anglo kids. They would laugh because we'd bring tortillas
3.	and frijoles to lunch. They would have their nice little
4.	compact lunch boxes with cold milk in their thermos and
5.	they'd laugh at us because all we had was dried tortillas.
6.	Not only would they laugh at US, but the kids would pick fights. (Terkel, 1974, p. 32)
168
The Grammar Book
Here, the form used to clearly initiates and frames the episode while would and contracted
’d accompany the elaborating statements. Thus, we have a difference at the discourse level
that was not possible to detect with an analysis that considered only the sentence level.
Used To ...Hut for Contrasts. In contrast to the relatively longer texts in the habitual past
that Suh (1992b) described, many shorter texts exist in which patterns with used to are also
discernible. In the following examples, used to occurs in the first clause and is followed by but
and a second and possibly third clause in the present, present progressive, present perfect, or
present perfect progressive. These noninitial clauses typically follow but and contrast with
and negate the past habitual state expressed in the first clause with used tod
a.	Alice used to be a kindergarten teacher, but she doesn't work outside the home
anymore. She's now a mother and homemaker.
b.	Jack used to live in Chicago, but since 2002, he's been working in Des Moines.
We feel that such shorter frames should also be identified, described, and then presented
and practiced with learners who are not yet ready to deal with the longer episodes that are
typical of the narratives we have cited above.
Be Going To «พ Will in Future Scenarios. Suh (1992a) also found many examples of future
narratives that lend further support to her frame-elaboration hypothesis. She found that oral
narratives that express future scenarios tend to be framed by be going to, which makes a bridge
from the present moment of speaking to the future. These narratives are then elaborated with
will ('//), which expresses future contingencies. Consider the following example:
"Gastric Restriction"8
[A doctor informally explains the surgical procedure he performs on the morbidly obese.]
1.	They're going to go in and, uh, have their gut
2.	slit open, their stomach exposed, and have it stapled off
3.	so that there'll be two pou—/an upper pouch in the
4.	stomach which will hold about two ounces of food,
5.	it's got a little hole right in—in the middle of that
6.	pouch where—where food when it's finally ground up
7.	will slowly go through.
In this passage, the initial be going to holds for the first two lines, after which the speaker
switches to will (’ll) except for the background aside given in the simple present in lines 5
and 6. Just as with used to and would, Suh (1992a) found that some of the important differences
between be going to and will can be explained in terms of their distribution in discourse episodes
expressing future scenarios rather than trying to explain everything at the sentence level.
Be Going To ...So + Can/Will in Future Plan with Purpose. As we saw at the outset of
this chapter, be going to also seems to participate in a shorter frame that contrasts with the
longer future scenarios described by Suh (1992a). In these cases, be going to expresses a future
planned action; the subsequent clause often begins with so and is elaborated with can or will
to express the justification, purpose, or expected outcome of the planned action:
a.	Patrick O'Brien is going to marry his American girlfriend so he can get a green card.
b.	I'm going to study in Spain for a year next year so I'll be fluent in Spanish.
Once again, we feel that such shorter frames, when they can be described and documented,
are also very useful for pedagogical purposes. Their brevity makes them accessible even to
beginners, who can understand them and create meaningful short discourse segments by
referring to such frames early in their language-learning experience.
Chapter 9: The Tense-Aspect-Modality System in Discourse
169
SUMMARY OF PATTE^^
Perhaps it would be useful at this stage to summarize the various frames that have been
described thus far for oral narratives:
introducing a present habitual narrative
providing a transition to a past narrative
past habitual narratives
short contrasts (past state vs. present)
future scenarios
future plan + expected outcome/purpose
frame: present perfect
elaboration: simple present
frame: present perfect
elaboration: simple past
frame: used to
elaboration: would [fd] (sometimes simple past)
frame: used to
conjunction: but
elaboration: simple present (with progressive
and/or perfect aspect acceptable, too)
frame: be going to
elaboration: will ['ll]
frame: be going to
conjunction: so
elaboration: can or will
These discourse frames are not the only way these types of oral narrative can be
accomplished, of course; however, they are sufficiently frequent and salient in English
speakers’ spontaneous discourse to merit pedagogical attention; they give learners a valuable
tangible heuristic for creating coherent discourse.
A More Complex Example:
The Present Perfect Progressive
All of the preceding examples have had an initial marked form providing a frame and then
a simpler, shorter form used for elaboration. Other types of textual organization are also
possible. Consider the case of the present perfect progressive (PPP) in English, which needs
to be explained using a more complex rhetorical structure that requires background, giving
prior information, as well as some follow-up discourse. A sentence using the ppp without any
context is not fully interpretable and leaves the listener or reader dangling:
Lucy has been hiking.
Does this sentence mean that Lucy has been hiking just prior to the moment of speech?
Or does it mean that Lucy has been hiking off and on lately? Or does it mean something
else? To better understand when and'why the ppp is used, Celce-Murcia and Yoshida (2003)
examined 250 tokens' of ppp in spoken and written discourse and found that most episodes
with PPP consisted of three moves or steps:
First move: present context plus background information (present or present perfect tense)
Second move: activity of special focus/concern (PPP)
Third move: evaluation or follow-up (present tense)
In other words, the ppp typically occurs as a pivot in the middle of an episode rather
than at the beginning or the end. The following is a transcription of a segment from a radio
talk show, with the names changed to respect the privacy of participants:
170
The Grammar Book
"Lucy's Call"
Host: I'm Dr. Mary Smith and you're on talk radio, Hello?
Caller: Good afternoon, Dr. Smith. I'm Lucy and I'm 59. I'd just like to share a positive
thing that I have found in the last year or so. I've been hiking and find that this
is a wonderful way to keep your weight down and meet some people and just
feel really good. (Celce-Murcia & Yoshida, 2003, p. 6)
In this segment, after the opening greetings, Lucy gives Dr. Smith some background
concerning her age and her wish to share a positive experience. This is the first move, and she
uses the present tense and present perfect tense. Then Lucy uses the ppp “I’ve been hiking,”
and this is the second move. Everything after the ppp sentence is the third move (i.e., the
follow-up and evaluation of the activity mentioned in the second move).
This three-move rhetorical structure is so salient that if interlocutors are very familiar
with each other, the first and even the third move can be unspoken and implied. For example,
if the shared knowledge is that a good friend has been working hard to stop smoking, and if
one then encounters this friend, sniffs the air, and says, “You’ve been smoking again,” then the
first verbal move was unnecessary and the third move (i.e., the negative evaluation) is implied
without the speaker making any additional comment. The moves are still there contextually;
however, they can be explained through shared knowledge rather than explicit discourse. For
the most part, the data that Celce-Murcia and Yoshida (2003) collected and examined had the
three-move structure explicitly expressed. Also, while many of the ppp tokens collected were
spoken discourse, there were quite a few also found in written discourse of a more informal
nature.
Given the complexity of the three-move structure and of the ppp verb form itself,
learners should be at the intermediate or high-intermediate level to comprehend and produce
such discourse episodes. They would need to have good control of the present tense, the
present progressive, and the present perfect tense before taking on this more complex tense-
aspect construction.
Tense-Aspect-Modality and Interaction
in Conversational Oral Discourse
The patterns discussed were for more or less monologic oral narrative. When two or more
speakers are engaged in conversation, however, the dynamics are often different such that we
can note other ways in which tense-aspect-modality forms are used.
Knowledge/Confirmation Checks. For example, Suh (1992 a) noticed that when an interrogative
structure with present perfect tense is inserted in the middle of a storytelling sequence, the
speaker is often checking the interlocutor’s knowledge before proceeding further.9
"Juarez and El Paso"
Ken: We went down into Juarez and through El Paso, and oh, we had a ball.
Louise: Really?
Ken: Yeah. Have you ever been t— have you ever hearda Juarez?
Louise: I've hearda both of 'em because my girlfriend's old boyfriend was stationed
in El Paso.
Ken: Well we went to Juarez... (Suh, 1992a, p. 94)
Chapter 9: The Tense-Aspect-Modality System in Discourse
171
In this example, Ken uses the present perfect in his second turn to interrupt his past-
tense narrative in order to check Louise’ร knowledge of the places he is talking about. Louise
also uses the present perfect in her response in order to display her knowledge. Here the shift
from simple past to present perfect is interactionally motivated rather than being driven by
the structure of the narrative that Ken is relating.
Marking Personal Involvement. McCarthy and Carter (1995) have pointed out that some
instances of variation between be going to and will are interactionally driven, in that be going
to expresses greater personal involvement on the part of the speaker, whereas will is a more
neutral, detached, and formal option. One of their examples follows:
"BBC radio weather forecast"
Temperatures will be below freezing, and it's going to be icy on those country roads,
so do take care if you're driving. (McCarthy & Carter, 1995, p. 24)
Here, McCarthy and Carter (1995) feel that their interactional explanation describes the
form shifts occurring in such informal weather forecasts given on radio and TV where will is
used for neutral prediction and be going to signals the forecaster’s more interpersonal message
to listeners. We noted in Chapter 3 that argument structure is more fluid in conversation than
in written discourse. Similarly, McCarthy and Carter (1995) conclude that “real spoken data
pushes us away from considerations of the semantics of time and more towards interactive
interpretations of verb-form choices” (p. 114).
Marking Involvement and Interaction. In a study of related interest, Schwarz (1988) had
consultants place 24 oral and written texts along a continuum ranging from “involved,
interactive” to “detached, no interaction” and found that the frequency of the progressive
aspect was much higher in texts that were rated as having high interaction and involvement
than in texts that did not. Here are the numbers for four texts representing the two extremes
on the continuum (the first two were ranked highest; the last two lowest):
Text	Frequency of progressive
conversation between good friends	30/1,000 words
personal letters to friends	20/1,000 words
phonetics textbook	1.3/1,000 words
economics textbook	1/1,000 words
There was a near perfect correlation between where the texts fell on the continuum and
the frequency of the progressive aspect, which means that English speakers make systematic
use of the progressive to signal involvement and interaction, or to signal detachment,
formality, and lack of interaction, by not using the progressive.
Marking the Potential for Change. Batstone (1995) proposes that a simple tense—by virtue
of signaling a neutral, unchanging situation—can bring about different results in conversation
from the same tense/with progressive aspect, which signals potential for change:
a.	Sheila says she doesn't wantjo come.
b.	Sheila is saying she doesn't want to come.
In Batstone’s (1995) data, the (b) version occurred in the conversation, and the two
interlocutors quickly shifted to a discussion of how to get Sheila to change her mind. Had the
(a) version occurred, Batstone feels the speaker would have signaled that Sheila’ร position was
not open to change, and a different conversation would have ensued.
A similar observation has been made by Bhimiji (2001) about radio talk show discourse. She
noticed that when the host of the radio show shifted topics, he first conveyed prior talk as fixed and
complete, using the past tense. However, when he presented an ongoing viewpoint or he granted
his caller an opportunity to elaborate on what was just said, he used the present progressive:
172
The Grammar Book
"Radio Talk Show Discourse"
Host: as I understand
what you are sayin'
when you are talkin' about stereotypes... (Bhimiji, 2001, p. 564)
Bhimiji notes that “the progressive tense allows the host to give the speakers an opportunity
to further define or confirm their viewpoints before he initiates any opposition” (p. 566).
We agree with the researchers concerning the importance of examining oral language in
interaction for special uses of tense-aspect-modality forms. However, by referring to our earlier
discussion of the Bull Framework, we point out that it is not accidental that present-axis forms
(simple present, present perfect, present progressive, and be going to future) are frequently used
to accomplish interactive functions. Interaction relates to the “here and now,” in contrast to the
simple past, which signals past events, or the form will, which makes future predictions.
Tense Patterning in Written Discourse
Marking a Climax. Sentence-level accounts of tense and aspect tell US that the past perfect
generally marks an event occurring prior to some other time or event in the past (e.g., Before
John came, I had finished my dinner.).10 However, in written discourse, we have found that the
past perfect can be used to mark a climax—that is, to state a purpose for relating a prior series
of actions and events narrated in the simple past. Consider the following example:
"The Convocation"
The students sat in the bleachers of Pauley Pavilion watching the faculty enter in
their caps and gowns. Dignitaries continued to arrive while the band played a festive
melody for the onlookers. To the cheers of the crowd. President Clinton came in
and took his assigned seat on the podium... UCLA's 75th anniversary had begun.
(Adapted from the UCLA Daily Bruin, May 25,1994)
This pattern is similar to those of Suh (1992a) and the authors identified above; however,
here the past tense is used to give the storyline from the outset and the past perfect is used to
terminate the written narrative episode rather than to initiate a narrative episode because it is
functioning here to mark the outcome or resolution. It is certainly not being used to mark a
prior action or event. In fact, an interesting permutation of this narrative pattern also occurs
in the historical present. In other words:
Text in simple past with climax in past perfect —> Text in simple present with climax in
present perfect (i.e„ historical present)
The following text is an example of this historical present pattern:
"Life เท an Icy Inferno"
...we're wearing harnesses and hard hats and descending on ropes and ladders into
an ice cave known as Warren Cave, which has been hollowed out by steam from the
volcano. We unclip the harnesses about 40 feet below the surface of the mountain.
The floor is moist, soft soil and rocks; the walls are ice. We are here to retrieve a
temperature probe-one of 23 the group left on the mountain a year ago in the hopes
of determining how much the soil temperatures change and thus whether these
environments are relatively stable. As we move away from the entrance, the light
fades, and we have to use flashlights... Moore disappears down a corridor and after
a few moments gives a shout. He's found the probe, (i.e., he has found) (Judson, 2012, p. 115)
This text is in the historical present, and the climax is marked with the present perfect.
Note that in both this example and the previous one, the verb phrase marking the climax is a
punctual verb phrase (i.e., a verb phrase that expresses something that occurs in an instant, like
to begin, to find the probe). This also seems to be a necessary element of such rhetorical structures.
Chapter 9: The Tense-Aspect-Modality System in Discourse
ไ73
Illustrating a Point and Generalizing. Another systematic use of tense shift in written
discourse has been noted by Brinton (1994), who prepared grammar exercises to accompany
an introductory college-level psychology text by Huffman, Vernoy, and Vernoy (1994). Brinton
found many adjacent paragraphs or episodes, such as the following:
"Psychology Textbook"
In 1848, Phineas Gage suffered a bizarre accident when an explosion happened at
his work place. As a result of the explosion, an iron rod entered his skull and pierced
his frontal lobe. Phineas recovered physically from this accident, but his personality
changed forever.
From the case study of Phineas Gage, it appears that the frontal lobe controls much
of our individual personality and defines our ability to make decisions. We now know
that the frontal lobe helps US to plan and change actions. (Brinton, 1994, p. 9)
Brinton (1994) noticed that the authors of this psychology text frequently presented a
real-life illustration of a phenomenon in a paragraph written in the past tense as in the first
paragraph above. The story or anecdote then becomes the basis for the authors’ discussion
in the second paragraph of the significance of the anecdote and similar events. This more
general discussion invariably occurs in the present tense.
Although the above order is the preferred and most frequent one for presenting anecdotes
and generalizations in this particular textbook, sometimes the reverse order occurs—the
generalization paragraph or episode comes before the anecdote. Whichever order occurs,
however, the real-life illustration is in the simple past tense, which includes historically past-
tense modal forms (e.g., 'พould and could), and the authors’ generalizations and discussion are
in the simple present tense. This discourse-level use of these tenses is in fact similar to their
sentence-level uses since simple past tense is often used to relate a past event or fact and the
simple present is used to express generalizations. If this pattern occurs widely enough in
other social science textbooks, it is one that can be taught explicitly to ESL/EFL readers and
writers who are using such a textbook in their content classes.
Reporting Research. Burrough-Boenisch (2003) observes that when reporting research, it is
customary for the present tense to be used to signal general truth and for the researcher’s own
findings to be reported in the past tense. She adds that a popular book on scientific English
writing (Day, 1995) lists the following conventions:
1.	Established knowledge (previous results) should be given in the present tense.
2.	Description of methods and results in the current paper should be in the past tense.
3.	Presentation (Table 1 shows that...) is given in the present tense.
4.	Attribution (Jones reported that...) is given in the past tense, (p. 72)
However, as Burrough-Boenisch acknowledges, Swales and Feak’s (1994) research
reveals that researchers do not always adhere so strictly to such conventions. In fact, they
state that tense choice in reviewing' previous research is subtle and somewhat flexible. As a
general guideline, Swales & Feak (1994) offer
... a move from past to present perfect and then to present indicates that the research
reported is increasingly close tp the writer in some way: close to the writer's own opinion,
close to the writer's own research, or close to the current state of knowledge, (p. 184)
In her own research, Burrough-Boenisch (2003) found that what motivated evaluators of
Dutch biologists’ writing to change the tense of a particular verb was often a desire to achieve tense
consistency within a sentence or paragraph (what we have called attention to with our discussion of
174
The Grammar Book
the Bull Framework). On the basis of her research, she adds that “tense use conventions in English
scientific and academic writing are not adhered to slavishly by NSs [native speakers]” (p. 19).
Conclusion
This chapter has presented generalizations and data demonstrating how important the English
tense-aspect-modality system is for achieving coherence in discourse and how important it is to
present tense and aspect as a system, rather than presenting each tense as a discrete construction.
In this text, we introduced some of the tense-aspect patterns found in written discourse.
We pointed out that these frames are not the only means in English for expressing these
rhetorical relationships. They are not like sentence-level grammatical rules; they are rhetorical
tendencies. However, they are frequent and salient enough for US to suggest that teaching them
to learners of English is a useful strategy. Learners who use these frames appropriately for their
production of discourse will be producing coherent text that will be readily understandable to
users of English.
We feel that this chapter offers teachers and learners more options than other resources and
that it also begins to explain where one form is preferred over another, especially in cases where
one or more forms can often be used at the sentence level to “mean” essentially the same thing:
pres perfect/simple past
be going to/will
used to/would
The findings reported in this chapter have pedagogical implications because the patterns
of use reported here have the potential to serve as templates or discourse “scripts” regarding
certain discourse functions of these forms. Such information can readily be applied in materials
development. Teachers (and learners) will encounter authentic materials that contain segments
that frequently conform to a large extent to the patterns we have described. Suh (1992a; 1992b)
found them occurring frequently in comic strips and novels, as well as transcribed conversational
data. There are of course other patterns as well; L. Gray (personal communication) has
reminded US that teachers of English for specific purposes need to know how tenses are used
in different disciplines.
Teachers also need to help learners understand how the English tense-aspect-modality
system works in relation to different discourse types and to realize that it operates differently
in different languages; that is, the discourse conventions of learners’ native language tense-
aspect-modality system will most likely not transfer positively to English. In fact, in examining
tense choice in essays and cloze passages completed by native and nonnative speakers of
English,11 Hinkel (1997) found that the past-tense selections of these two groups differed
significantly due to different styles of rhetorical development and temporal organization, as
well as culturally different ways of framing events. She concludes that the way that past time
frames are conventionalized in English is not always obvious to nonnative speakers because
boundaries of objective time and tense are conventionalized differently within discourse
frames in different cultures and in the languages associated with these cultures.
Finally, further research is needed to help complete and refine the preliminary sketch
that we have given here of the uses of tense-aspect-modality in English discourse. The studies
that we have presented constitute neither a complete nor a unified account; however, they do
provide a useful beginning that we hope others will be able to extend and refine.
Tense, aspect, and modality are not the only areas where the discourse level is crucial
to understanding how grammar functions, and we will adopt a discourse-level perspective
Chapter 9: The Tense-Aspect-Modality System in Discourse
175
in other chapters. As Michael McCarthy (1991) has so aptly stated, “A discourse-oriented
approach to grammar would suggest not only a greater emphasis on contexts larger than the
sentence, but also a reassessment of priorities in terms of what is taught..." (p. 62).
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form. Celce-Murcia and Hilles (1988) suggest that students or the teacher bring in
postcards of scenic places in their country (or pictures of any places they would like to
visit) to elicit discussion of travel plans. The teacher should have some extra postcards
and pictures available. Each student presents a card or picture (or several) and gives a
short narrative about travel plans or suggestions using be going to to frame and will/’ll for
elaboration; the student should also give a reason and can use a because clause with present
tense to signal the reason. The teacher should model a sample narrative for the class,
using appropriate postcards or pictures (p.80):
I'm going to visit the Tuscany region of Italy on my vacation. I'll go to Florence, Pisa, and Arezzo
because these are interesting old towns with beautiful art and historical architecture.
2.	Form. Making explicit use of the Bull framework, K. Bailey (personal communication)
devised a lesson for simultaneous review of the past perfect and the future perfect for
high-intermediate students. In this lesson, Bailey used many examples to show the
semantic relationships and adverbial markers that the two tenses share in the past axis
and future axis respectively. For example:
Monday (future axis): John will arrive at 9 P.M. tomorrow. (By that time/Before then)
I will have finished reading the book you lent me.
[Tuesday: John arrives at 9 P.M.]
Wednesday (past axis): John arrived at 9 P.M. yesterday. (By that time/Before then) I had
finished reading the book you lent me.
Students would then use the teacher’s model to create their own examples, based on their
own experience.
3.	Form. Have each student make a list of 10 things they did when they were 10 years
old. Next, ask them if they still do each of these things now. For every item on the list
that states something they no longer do, students should generate short texts with used
to marking the past habitual action or state and with the simple present tense and/or the
present perfect expressing the present contrast. For example:
I used to roller-skate when I was 10 years old, but I no longer do.
I used to speak Spanish when I was 10 years old, but now I can't. I've forgotten my Spanish.
4.	Use. Ask students to write a brief story about an experience they had in the past. They
should be told tostay in the past axis when they write. For example:
เท 1968,1 spent the summer with my uncle, who lived on a farm. I learned to milk cows,
bring in the hay, and feed the chickens. It was a very good experience.
After getting feedback and correction from the instructor or from peers, the students
should then rewrite their stohy in either the present or the future axis, changing time
markers as appropriate.
5.	Use. Students can be given several texts (at least three) that exhibit the same pattern,
for example, the used to . . . would (d) framework-elaboration pattern often used in
past habitual narrative. They should work in pairs or small groups in order to figure
176
The Grammar Book
out the function of used to and would/’d in the narratives. The reports of the various
groups, with appropriate input from the teacher, should result in an informal version of
Suh’s (1992b) Framework-Elaboration Hypothesis. Here are example texts you might
use in addition to texts cited earlier in this chapter:
a.	My older brother used to do most of the fighting for US, and he'd come home with
black eyes all the time. (Terkel, 1974, p. 32)
b.	We used to joke about him in the office. We'd call him Mr. Straight because he was Mr.
Straight—a man who'd never invite me to have a drink after work. He would never invite
me to lunch alone. Would never, never make an overture to me. (Terkel, 1974, p. 107)
c.	We used to have these things when I was a kid up in Northern California.The flowers—
after the flower would wilt—this little pea-like structure would come, and it would
form kind of a coil, and the seed would grow inside it.... (Suh, 1992b, p. 8)
6.	Use. For a good review activity to practice applying the Bull Framework, we draw on and
extend a suggestion from Haccius (2002), who recommends asking one of his students
to give a sequence of his/her daily activities with some time references. For example,
Haccius elicited and wrote on the board:
San gets up at 5 A.M.
San takes a shower and gets dressed.
San eats breakfast.
San brushes his teeth.
San goes to the station to catch his train at 6:15 A.M.
All of these activities can be related by the class in the simple present tense to create a
narrative reflecting a habitual present perspective on San’s activities. However, Haccius
then asks his students to begin with the final activity on the list in order to practice the
present perfect:
When San goes to the station to catch his train at 6:15 A.M.,
he has already brushed his teeth.
Different students can begin with the underlined activity and state something else that
San has already done.
The same practice activity can be extended to the past axis by using “yesterday” as
the frame of reference. The students can relate what San did yesterday in a simple past
narrative. Then they can again take the final activity (San went to the station to catch his
train at 6:15 A.M.) and use it as a foil for practicing the past perfect; When San went to the
station yesterday to catch his train at 6:15 A.M., he had already brushed his teeth, etc. Likewise,
by changing the frame of reference to “tomorrow”, the students can relate the activities
using a future orientation (tomorrow) and then begin with the final activity in order to
practice the future perfect: San will go the station to catch his train at 6:15 A.M. tomorrow. At
that time, he will already have brushed his teeth.
Chapter 9: The Tense-Aspect-Modality System in Discourse
ไ77
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1.	Provide original example sentences that illustrate the following concepts. Underline
the relevant word(s) in your examples. You may need to write a short series of
sentences for some of the terms.
a.	historical present	f. frame-elaboration pattern for
b.	backgrounding tense	(i.) present habitual narrative
c.	past time axis	(ii.) past habitual narrative
d.	future time plus progressive aspect	(iii.) future scenario
e.	interactive use of the present perfect
2.	Explain the difference in meaning between the italicized parts of the following two
sentences:
a.	I see; him every day at school.
b.	The other day, I’m walking home from school and I see him coming up the road.
3.	Explain the reason for the tense changes in the following excerpt from a short story:
There's a man in the habit of hitting me on the head with an umbrella. It is five years
to the day since he began hitting me on the head with his umbrella. At first I couldn't
stand it; now I've grown accustomed to it. I don't know his name. I know he's an
ordinary man, with a plain suit, graying at the temples, and a nondescript face. I
met him one sultry morning five years ago. I was sitting peacefully on a bench in a
Palermo park, reading the newspaper in the shade of a tree. All of a sudden I felt
something touch my head. It was this same man who now, as I write, automatically
and impassively keeps striking me blows with his umbrella.
That first time I turned around full of indignation (I become terribly annoyed
when I'm bothered while reading the paper); he went right on, calmly hitting me.
(Sorrentino, 1989, p. 233)
4.	What difference in effect is there in the following excerpt from a short story when the
simple past tense (a) is changed to the historical present (b)?
a.	I was a little girl, nine years old, in 1961. You’d left my father and me only two years
before. Four months after leaving, you sent me—always me, never him—your first
postcard, of a turnpike in the Midwest, postmarked Enid, Oklahoma. You called me “My
little angel” and said that the sunflowers by the side of the road were tall and very pretty.
(Kaplan, 1989, p. 85)
b.	lama little girl, nine years old, in 1961. You’ve left my father and me only two years
before. Four months after leaving, you send me—always me, never him—your first
postcard, of a turnpike in the Midwest, postmarked Enid, Oklahoma. You call me “My little
angel" and say that the sunflowers by the side of the road are tall and very pretty.
5.	In the following excerpt from, a newspaper article, the past perfect occurs twice
(underlined here). Describe the rhetorical function of these two tokens of past perfect.
Mark Williams was out with his butterfly net in his favorite South African mountain
range when a flutter of gray-blue wings sailed by. They were almost as small and
nondescript as the other gray-blue butterflies drifting past.
178
The Grammar Book
Almost.
Heart pounding and net flailing, he dashed after the bobbling sliver of color, hope
fluttering like a wind-blown flag. He hooked in the tiny creature, its wingspan just
over 1.5 inches. It was a Lotana blue, believed to be extinct. Nobody had seen one
alive in decades.
"I ran it down and caught it with a huge...swipe, because they can move," Williams
said of that moment five years ago. "I knew straight away I'd rediscovered the
Lotana blue." (Dixon, 2013)
6.	Refer to the Bull Framework to explain the use of tense and aspect in the following
newspaper article (Brattleboro Reformer/
เท ใ 982, the city that now stands as a monument to effective downtown rebirth
could have been a war zone.
Some 18,000 manufacturing jobs had left in the previous 10 years. Homeless
people wandered the streets, living in abandoned warehouses. เท 1969, the federal
government determined that Chattanooga had the dirtiest air in America, even
worse than Los Angeles.
"The air was so bad that you had to drive to work with your headlights on every
day," recalled resident Roy Anglin, who was a manager of one of the factories that
stayed. "We're situated in a basin so the pollution was trapped."
"Downtown was basically a ghost town," said Rich Bailey, director of the local
chamber of commerce's news bureau. "That was a result of economic change all
across the country. Historically, Chattanooga was a manufacturing town, and many
of the manufacturers left the city. We had entire blocks with almost empty buildings
and parking lots. It was scary."
All that has changed now. The air is much cleaner, the warehouses have either been
torn down or renovated to accommodate the new businesses, and the Tennessee
River waterfront that had once been used for slag heaps and empty coke furnaces is
today lush, green and vibrant. (Seitz, 1999, p. 1)
Test your ability to apply what you know.
7.	Students of yours have written the following problematic tense sequences in their
essays. In each case, explain the nature of the problem,
a.	?Now that John had won the nomination, he is going to campaign for the election.
b.	?Zero Dark Thirty was a film that had affected the way that I thought about
terrorism.
c.	?After I learned this, I suddenly realize that my working thesis was too large in
scope.
d.	?I have come from China in 1991 and I am here for six years. I have some problems.
My biggest problem was English. The teacher used to ask me questions, but I used
to hate it.
8.	A student is unsure about the tense changes she has made in the following section of
an essay she is writing. She asks you to correct her tenses. How will you respond?
Since the mid-20th century, ล great number of immigrant women came to the
United States and looked for jobs to support their families. The garment industry
has become a place where these women are oppressed because garment workers do
not need to speak English and do not even have to be บ.ร. citizens.
Chapter 9: The Tense-Aspect-Modality System in Discourse
179
9.	Explain any differences between the following sentences to a student who is confused
whether one is more accurate:
a.	I’m going to study in Spain for a year next year, so I’ll be fluent in Spanish.
b.	I’m going to study in Spain for a year next year, so I’m going to be fluent in Spanish.
Bibliography
R E F E R E N c EsT	'	'
Batstone, R. (1995). Grammar in discourse: Attitude and deniability. In G. Cook & B. Seidlhofer (Eds.),
Principle and practice in applied linguistics: Studies in honour ofH. G. Widdowson (pp. 192-213). Oxford,
England: Oxford University Press.
Bhimiji, E (2001). Retrieving talk from the simple past and the present progressive on alternative radio.
Journal of Pragmatics, 55(4), 545-569.
Brinton, D. (1994). Handbook for non-native speakers to accompany Psychology in Action (3rd ed.). New York,
NY: John Wiley & Sons.
Bull, พ. E. (1960). Time, tense, and the verb: A study in theoretical and applied linguistics, with particular
application to Spanish. Berkeley, CA/Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press.
Burrough-Boenisch, J. (2003). Examining present tense conventions in scientific writing in the light of
reader reactions to three Dutch-authored discussions. English for Specific Purposes, 22(1), 5-24.
Celce-Murcia, M., & Hilles, ร. (1988). Techniques and resources in teaching grammar. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Celce-Murcia, M., & Yoshida, N. (2003). Alternatives for teaching the present perfect progressive. English
Teaching Forum, 41(f), 2-9, 21.
Chafe, พ. (1972). Discourse structure and human knowledge. In J. B. Carroll & R. o. Freedle (Eds.),
Language comprehension and the acquisition of knowledge (pp. 41-69). Washington, DC: V H. Winston
& Sons.
Cheshire, J. ( 2005). The Queen Mary narrative corpus. London, England: Queen Mary, University of London.
Chrysler (1998, August). [Advertisement]. National Geographic, p. 129.
Day, R. A. (1995). Scientific English: A guide for scientists and other professionals. Phoenix, AZ: Oryx.
Dixon, R. (2013, July 17). All tangled up in a butterfly net. Los Angeles Times, pp. Al & A5.
Givón, T. (1984). Syntax. Amsterdam, Netherlands/Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Haccius, M. (2002). The use of frameworks in the teaching of tense (Unpublished independent professional
project). School for International Training, Brattleboro, VT.
Hinkel, E. (1997). The past tense and temporal verb meanings in a contextual frame. TESOL Quarterly,
57(2), 289-313.
Houts Smith, L. (1993). An investigation of the Bull Framework: One teacher’s personal inquiry into the English
tense system (Unpublished independent professional project). School for International Training,
Brattleboro, VT
Huffman, K., Vernoy, M., & Vernoy, J. (1994). Psychology in action (3rd ed.). New York, NY: John Wiley
& Sons.
Jespersen, o. (1964). Essentials of English grammar. University, AL: University of Alabama Press.
Judson, o. (2012, July). Life in an icy ihferno. National Geographic, 222, 94—115.
Kaplan, D. M. (1989). Love, your only mother. In R. Shapard & J. Thomas (Eds.), Sudden fiction international:
60 short-short stories (pp. 85-88). New York, NY/London, England: พ. พ. Norton & Company.
Keenan, E. o., & Bennett, T. L. (Eds.). (1997). Discourse across time and space. Southern California
Occasional Papers in Linguistics, 5. Los Angeles, CA: University of Southern California.
180
The Grammar Book
Labov, พ. (1972). The transformation of experience in narrative syntax. In Language in the inner city: Studies
in the black English vernacular (pp. 354—405). Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Larsen-Freeman, D., Kuehn, T, & Haccius, M. (2002). Helping students make appropriate English verb
tense-aspect choices. TESOL Journal, 11(4), 3-9.
Larsen-Freeman, D., & Long, M. (1991). An introduction to second language acquisition research. London,
England: Longman.
Levey, ร. (2006). Tense variation in preadolescent narratives. Journal of English Linguistics, 34(2), 126-152.
McCarthy, M. (1991). Discourse analysis for language teachers. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
McCarthy, M., & Carter, R. (1995). spoken grammar: What is it and how can we teach it? ELT Journal,
49(3), 207-218.
Schiffrin, D. (1981). Tense variation in narrative. Language, 57(1), 45-62.
Schwarz, ร. (1988). The progressive aspect in American English usage (Unpublished master’s thesis). University
of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Seitz, ร. (1999, July 7). Chattanooga teaches. Brattleboro Reformer, p. 1.
Sorrentino, F. (1989). There’s a man in the habit of hitting me on the head with an umbrella (N. T di
Giovanni & p. D. Cran, Trans.). In R. Shapard & J. Thomas (Eds.), Sudden fiction international: 60 short-
short stories (pp. 233-236). New York, NY/London, England: พ. E. Norton & Company.
Suh, K. H. (1992a). A discourse analysis of the English tense-aspect-modality system (Unpublished doctoral
dissertation). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Suh, K. H. (1992b). Past habituality in English discourse: Used to and ivould. Language Research, 28(4), 857-882.
Swales, J. M., & Feak, c. B. (1994). Academic writing for graduate students: Essential tasks and skills—A course
for nonnative speakers of English. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Terkel, ร. (1974). Working. New York, NY: Ballantine Books.
Weinstein, N. (1984). The effects of levels of formality and tempo on reduced forms (Unpublished master’s thesis).
University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Wolfson, N. (1982). The conversational historical present in American English narratives. Dordrecht,
Netherlands: Foris Publications.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
For pedagogical suggestions on teaching tense-aspect-modality (and other features of discourse grammar)
to language learners, see:
Celce-Murcia, M., & Olshtain, E. (2000). Discourse and context in language teaching. New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2003). Teaching language: From grammar to grammaring. Boston, MA: Thomson Heinle.
McCarthy, M., & Carter, R. (1995). spoken grammar: What is it and how can we teach it? ELT Journal,
49(3), 207-218.
McCarthy, M., & O’Keeffe, A. (2014). spoken grammar. In M. Celce-Murcia, D. Brinton, & M. A. Snow
(Eds.), Teaching English as a second or foreign language (4th ed., pp. 271-287). Boston, MA: National
Geographic Learning, Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Tregidgo, p. ร. (1979). Tense subordination. English Language Teaching, 33(3), 191-196.
For creative pedagogical suggestions for applying the Bull Framework to exercises and activities for ESL
learners, see:
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Thewlis, ร. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 3 (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage
Learning.
Houck, N., & Hilles, ร. (2009). Grammar connection: Structure through content 4. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage
Learning.
Chapter 9: The Tense-Aspect-Modality System in Discourse
181
Endnotes
1.	Some readers have questioned the validity of this combination; however, we have seen and heard many
examples of it, such as "I'm gonna be visiting my cousin next week."
2.	Recall that the perfect aspect signals a "before time" not just with the basic tenses, but also with modals,
infinitives, and other nonfinite forms.
z. This is only a short excerpt from a longer narrative. It is from data collected by Keenan and Bennett
(1977) for a research project.
4.	From the database used to produce the research reported in Keenan and Bennett (ใ 977).
5.	เท such oral narratives, there are sometimes many motivated switches from present tense to past tense
and vice versa. The research on this tense switching by Labov (1972), Schiffrin (1981), Wolfson (1982), and
others is very interesting, but it takes US beyond the scope of this chapter.
6.	The first -ing form in this line (knowing) is a participle, not a progressive (see Chapter 25).The second
(doing) is a progressive form.
7.	Note that used to เท this short frame cannot take would as a substitute since it refers to a past state.
(Wee would be a kindergarten teacher, but she doesn't work anymore.) Only past habitual actions can be
expressed with would as well as used to.
S.	This is from data that Nina Weinstein (1984) recorded and transcribed for her master's thesis, which
focused on pronunciation, not grammar. We used her transcripts to search for grammatical patterns
since it was authentic spoken data.
9.	Larsen-Freeman and Long (1991) call these "confirmation checks." They are common in discourse
between native and nonnative speakers, where they are cited as an example of interactional
modification employed by native speakers.
10.	There are, of course, cases where the past perfect marks some later noncompleted event (G. Stevens,
personal communication); e.g., The instructor collected the papers before I had finished the exam. เท such
cases, we say that the past perfect is signaling a counterfactual clause in that "before I had finished - I
did not finish."
11.	The nonnative speakers in Hinkel's study had only first languages that do not mark verbs for tense, such
as Chinese, Thai, and Yoruba.
182
The Grammar Book
Negation
p CHAPTER
10
Introduction
The acquisition of English negation by first and second language learners has been widely
studied (see, for example, Cancino, Rosansky, & Schumann, 1978). Researchers have reported
similar orders of acquisition. Even though the researchers do not always agree on all die
details, the sequences reported seemed remarkably congruent. Learners first use no, sometimes
preceding an entire sentence. Later, they add not to their repertoires. They also use don't
correctly in formulas (I don't know), but overgeneralize it elsewhere (e.g., She don't go).
Then they add die auxiliary verb can't and the negative copula isn't. Following these, they
begin to use don't accurately (as opposed to only correctly in the formula I don't know), and
then finally they use other forms of do (i.e., doesn't and didn't and other auxiliary verbs and
negative adverbs). We bring up these findings to call attention to one interesting and relevant
phenomenon, which revolves around the nature of language and its learning. The first stage
of English negation acknowledged by most researchers has been referred to as the No + V or
external no stage, where English learners produce utterances such as:
No it go.
The question that immediately springs to mind is where such utterances might have
come from. English does have a negative particle no, but it is not used in such a way. In a
discussion of the issue for one child’s acquisition of English negation, Lieven and Tomasello
(2008) observe that no was the child’s mother’s most frequent negator. Of course, she did not
use it in the same way as the child, instead using it to negate nouns (e.g., no books), and gerunds
(e.g., no shouting, no running, no hitting). Apparently, the child heard enough of such phrases to
prompt him to create a novel construction. This is an example of creative structure building,
in complex interaction with the frequency of forms in the language environment and of the
child’s own current capacity. This explanation works well for older learners of English as
a second language, too, who use the wo-structure, e.g., “I no remember” (Eskildsen, 2012),
even when their native language has no such form. Thus, the lesson to be derived from this
brief excursion into the L2 acquisition literature is that there is a combination of factors at
work—frequency or saliency of the form in the language of the environment (which draw the
learner’s attention), the social interaction between the learner and others, and the creativity
of the learner himself or herself.
183
An initial learning challenge for instructed ESL/EFL students is the syntax of English
negation. Different languages tend to place their negative particle in different positions in
the sentence:
Spanish (preverbal): Juan
(John)
no habla inglês. 'John doesn't speak English.'
NOT (speaks) (English)
German (postverbal): Johann
geht nicht zur Schule.'John doesn't go to school.'
(John)
(goes) NOT (to) (school)
English (postauxiliary): John I พุ'"
does
NOT talk to Judy.
Also, many languages allow multiple negation in one sentence (negative concord). Here
are some examples from Penka (2012):
Spanish: Ella no ha dicho
She	NOT has said
nada. 'She hasn't said anything.'
N-thing
Polish: Nikt	mnie	nie	odwiedza. 'Nobody comes to visit me.'
.N-person me	NOT	visit
While multiple negation was historically acceptable in English, depending on the
scope of the negation, negative concord has only survived in Modern English in nonstandard
sentences such as “I did n’t say nothing" (Kallel, 2007).
In addition, some languages do not have distinct forms for expressing their equivalents
of the English words not and no. Some have more than two negative particles.1 Finally, English
usually contracts not in speech and in informal writing, which few other languages do with
their negative particle. This makes it less salient, and therefore harder, for learners to perceive
and acquire than if it were consistently produced as a separate, uncontracted word.
As we will see, negation in English is a very broad topic, affecting words, phrases, and
sentences. Many of our comments here are restricted to the simple sentence level; that is, to
the means of constructing negative rather than affirmative (also known as positive) simple
English sentences:
Affirmative	Negative
Cynthia likes to fish.	—> Cynthia does not/doesn't like to fish.
Danielle is an editor.	—> Danielle is not/isn't an editor.
Robby can cook well. -> Robby cannot/can't cook well.
although we discuss word and phrasal negation as well. We also, of course, deal with the
meaning and use of negation in English. In this chapter, we mention only in passing negative
questions, negative commands, and negative compound/complex sentences. Those negative
structures are examined in detail in other parts of this book.
The Negation System: Its Forms
THE wordIeveT"
At the wojrd level, one can simply use a negative affix in English to convey negativity. The
way to make many adjectives and adverbs negative is to add a negative derivational prefix to
a word:
184
The Grammar Book
Adjective	Adverb
happy	unhappy	happily	—> unhappily
appropriate —>	inappropriate	appropriately -> inappropriately
possible	—>	impossible	possibly	—» impossibly
logical	—>	//logical	logically	-> //logically
relevant	irrelevant	relevantly	-> irrelevantly
ordered	disordered	orderly	—> disorderly
typical	—>	atypical	typically	—» atypically
leading	—>	misleading	leadingly	misleadingly
The variety of prefixes derives in part from the fact that different ones were borrowed
from different languages. For example, un- is a native English prefix (and the most productive
one in English today); in- and its allomorphs (different forms of the same morpheme) im-/
il-/ir-, come from Latin; dis- comes from Greek; a- from Greek through Latin; and -mis from
earlier forms of English and French.
Other parts of speech can also take some of these prefixes to make them negative;
for example, with verbs, dis- combines to make dislike and distrust·, mis- combines to make
misunderstood and misinterpret; and de- (not on our list for adjectives and adverbs) is also used
with verbs—for example, declassify and decode.
The negative prefix non- is used to form certain negative nouns and adjectives:
Nouns	Adjectives (non- + verb)
non- + sense = nonsense	non- + drip = non-drip (as in non-drip paint)
non- + intervention - nonintervention	non- + stick - non-stick (as in non-stick surface)2
Some of these prefixes can have more than one meaning. บท-, for instance, does not
always indicate negativity. Consider verbs such as unfasten and unwrap, in which the un- means
a reversal of the process denoted by the stem. The use of the un- to signal this other meaning,
however, is not as frequent as the use of the un- prefix to mean “not” with all the gradable
adjectives (those denoting a property that can be possessed to varying degrees), as in unreasonable,
unwise, and unkind. Nevertheless, un- is still subject to various restrictions; in particular, it is not
used where some etymologically unrelated opposite is available (we say bad, not * ungood), where
some other, less productive prefix is established (disloyal is more common than *unloyal), or with
adjectives that express the same notion to a stronger degree (unhappy, but not *unecstatic).
Determining which prefix to use with which stem is not always predictable. Further, the
rules about which negative prefix to use when more than one is possible are not absolute, but
we can make the following generalization: ๓-(and its allomorphs), dis-, and (less so) un- tend to
be pejoratively evaluative of the stems to which they attach, while non- and a- prefixes are more
descriptive or objective (Hom, 1989). Some minimal pairs that illustrate this contrast are as follows:
Pejoratively evaluative
irrational
disbeliever
disfunctional
unprofessional
unprofitable
untheoretical
immoral
Descriptive/Objective
nonrational
nonbeliever
nonfunctional
nonprofessional
nonprofit
atheoretical
amoral
Chapter 10: Negation
185
The choice of in-, im-, il~, or ir- is phonologically conditioned by the consonant that
follows it. In- is most common, but im- is used if the following consonant is a bilabial (Ibl,
Ipl, /m/), il- with a stem beginning with I, and ir- when the adjective or adverb begins with r?
There is also a negative suffix, -less, which can be used to negate nouns by expressing their
absence or nonexistence, thus forming adjectives such as hopeless,penniless, speechless, lifeless, and
shameless. Howell (personal communication) has pointed out that there is a similar suffix, -free,
with a more positive connotation (cf. csrefrn versus carefree)·, smoke-free workplace, fat-free food.
Certain indefinite pronouns and adverbs beginning with no-/not- can also be used to
convey a negative meaning:
Indefinite pronouns and an adverb
no + thing - nothing
no + body — nobody
no + one — no one (two words)4
no + where — nowhere
not + ever — never
Examples
Nothing has been done.
Nobody is home.
No one seems concerned.
They were nowhere to be seen
They are neverat home.
However, not all words can be made negative with the use of affixes. Lexical gaps exist; some
words have no single-word negative counterparts. For instance, we say not unique, not *ununique.
It works the opposite way as well. Some words exist in negative forms that have no affirmative
counterparts, or ones that are seldom used, as the following humorous excerpt from Jack Winter’s
essay in the New Yorker entitled “How I Met My Wife” makes clear:
It had been a rough day, so when I walked into the party I was very chaiant, despite
my efforts to appear gruntled and consolate.
I was furling my wieldy umbrella for the coat check when I saw her standing alone
in a corner. She was a descript person, a woman in a state of total array. Her hair was
kempt, her clothing shevelled, and she moved in a gainly way. (New Yorker, July 25,
1984, volume 75, p. 82)
Other formally negative items are the negative coordinating conjunction nor (and + not),
and the negative correlative conjunctions neither. .. nor (not + either). Functional items that
are not formally marked for negation but that connote negativity are the quantifiers little and
few, as opposed to the positive quantifiers a little and a few—the latter being made negative
with the use of the adverbs only and just, the negative adverb subordinator of conditionals
unless, the negative adverb of time yet, the negative intensifier too (e.g., too late), and adverbs of
frequency seldom, rarely, scarcely, and hardly. There are also words that Jespersen (1917) calls
“inherent negatives.” These are content words that have a negative meaning but that appear
positive in form (e.g., fail, forget, lack, exclude, and absent).
THE PHRASE EEVEl^^^
At the phrase level, no can function as a negative determiner in an NP:
I am surprised that no alternative was proposed.
No plans have been made.
Many idioms take this form; for example, no way, no problem, no wonder, no sweat, no
worries. Another common idiomatic pattern that we saw being used by the mother of the LI
English learner is no + gerund, which may be used to indicate that something is prohibited—
no shouting, no hitting·, also common for prohibition are no smoking, no parking, no trespassing—
or unexpected, such as no kidding, no fooling.
Before infinitives (i.e., a sequence of to + verb that follows an inflected verb), not is used
to make the phrase negative:
Marge has decided not to pay her income tax this year.
186
The Grammar Book
Although prescriptively prohibited (see Perales-Escudero, 2011, for discussion), we
have noticed that many native speakers of English will split the infinitive with the negative
particle, presumably to emphasize the negative action in the phrase:
Marge has decided to not pay her income tax this year.
_____________________________________________
THE SENTENCE LEVEL
Not is also the main sentence-level negator:
Not	Not Contracted (more common)
Statements:	Mario is not at home.	Mario isn't at home.
Questions:	Are you not going?	Aren't you going?
Commands:	Do not move!	Don't move!
Exclamations:	Is that not grand!	Isn't that grand!
However, no can also make a sentence negative, especially when it negates the subject:
No one was home to sign for the package.
No and not are also negative substitutes. No can be a negative substitute for an entire
sentence:
A: Are you going to town after class?
ร: No. I have got to meet Ahmad in the library.
and not can substitute for a negative subordinate clause (parallel to so substituting for an
affirmative subordinate clause):
.________, โ if not, please let me know.
Are you coming? 1"	,	7 7	.	. , . ,
[ If so, please bring something to drink.
-	11	I think not.
Are you coming? 1 , ,
[I think so.
____________________________________________________________
SUMMARY
_______________________________________________________________
The following table summarizes the basic formal markers of negation in English:
A SUMMARY OF BASIC NEGATIVE FORMS IN ENGLISH
Affix-Negation	No-Negation	Not-Negation
a-	no	not, -n't
dis-	nothing	never (not + ever)
in-/im-/il-/ir-	nobody	neither (not + either)
mis-	no one	nor (and + not)
de-	nowhere	
non-		
un-		
-less		
-free		
Chapter 10: Negation
187
A SYNTACTIC ANALYSIS OF SENTENCE LEVEL NEGATION
Here, we deal with negation in statements, returning to negation of other sentence types in
later chapters.
With Auxiliary Verbs
Consider the following sentences:
1.	(a) I can swim.
(b)	I cannot swim.
2.	(a) It is going to rain on Monday.
(b) It is not going to rain on Monday.
3.	(a) We have done our homework.
(b) We haven't done our homework.
4.	(a) Philip is taking a nap.
(b) Philip isn't taking a nap.
It is clear that what distinguishes the form of the (b) sentences from the form of the (a)
sentences is the presence of the negative particle not or its contracted and suffixed form -n’t.
As we noted previously, English has postauxiliary negation, and these sentences illustrate that
generalization. Auxihary verbs, such as modals, phrasal modals, the perfect have, and the progressive
be, are all followed by the not particle. Moreover, if more than one auxihary verb is present, as in
the next example (have and be), it is the. first auxiliary verb that is followed by the negative particle:
5.	(a) Pam has been working hard.
(b) Pam hasn't been working hard.
Following Quirk, Greenbaum, Leech, and Svartvik (1985), we call the first or only auxiliary
verb the operator in that this verb performs several operational functions in English that
involve relating major syntactic structures.5
Since in all of our sentence-level examples thus far, the negation applies to the entire
sentence, not just the auxiliary verb, we depict not as a sentence modifier.
sm	ร
not	affirmative sentence
To be more precise, the basic structure for sentences 2(b) and 5(b) are as follows:
188
The Grammar Book
2. (b) It is not going to rain on Monday.
	
sm	
not	SUBJ	PR ED_		 NP	AUX	VP	ADVL pro	T	pm	V	PrepP it	-pres	be going to	rain	prep	NP
on	N
Monday
5. (b) Pam hasn't been working hard.
	
sm	ร
not	SUBJ	PREP NP	AUX	VP	ADVL N	T	perf	prog	V	AdvP ! 1	1	L Pam -pres	have	be -en	work -ing	ADV
hard
Then a way to show your students sentence-level negation is to put the -rot-particle in
its proper position in English—after the operator.
Chapter 10: Negation
189
Not Contraction
You might also point out that in many English sentences, the not reduces to -n't and attaches
to the appropriate verb, as can be seen in sentences 3(b), 4(b), and 5(b). Many combinations
of -n't with an auxiliary verb are regular, but some are irregular:6
Regular—disyllabic negatives	Irregular (orthographically and/or phonologically)—monosyllabic negatives
did + n't -- didn't	will + n't —> won't ("II" is lost, vowel changes)
would + n't —- wouldn't	can + n't —» can't (one "ท" lost)
have + n't —> haven't	do + n't —> don't (vowel sound changes)
With the not contraction, we can now also produce sentences such as 3(b), 4(b), and 5(b).
For example, here are the trees for sentence 3(b):
not
SUBJ
NP
pro
we
PRED
our homework
190
The Grammar Book
NP
pro
we
AUX	VP
not contraction our homework
With the Be Copula
So far we have accounted for the placement of the negative particle when a sentence contains
an auxiliary verb. But not all sentences have such a verb, of course. Two other types of verbs
are possible: the be copula and all main verbs other than be.
You may have wondered why in our phrase structure rules we made a distinction
between the be copula and other main verbs. Actually, the be copula is distinctive for a number
of reasons. One of the main ones is that the be copula patterns very much like the auxiliary
verbs in that it, too, can be an operator. For instance, to make a sentence with the be copula
negative, we place the not after the be, just as we did with the first or only auxiliary verb. (This
is not true with other main verbs, as you will see later in this chapter.) In 6(b), the not is placed
after the be copula operator; and in 7(b), the not is placed after the be copula operator and is
optionally contracted to it:
6.	(a) Brad is a teacher.
(b) Brad is not a teacher.
7.	(a) The beach is crowded.
(b) The beach isn't crowded.
The only exception to this worth noting is the gap and the stigma that exist in Modern
Standard English against contracting the negative particle with the first person singular form
of the be verb, am (see Hudson, 2000; Anderwald, 2004, for discussion).
8.	(a) I am tired.
(b)	I am not tired.
(c)	*1 amn't tired.
(d)	I ain't tired, (nonstandard)
Of course, a contracted form of 8(b) is possible in Standard English if the be verb contracts
with the subject instead of the negative particle:
(d)	I'm not tired.
However, the difference between the auyJbe contraction with subjects and the not
contraction with verbs is not merely a stylistic option, an issue that we take up later in this
chapter.
Chapter 10: Negation
191
With Other Main Verbs
Another aspect of English that has changed over the years is the fact that it is no longer
grammatical, as it was in the Elizabethan period, to place the negative particle after a main
verb other than be.7
*1 go not.
Instead, the do auxiliary of Modern English, already extant in the 15th century, had
become obligatory for forming negatives by the 18th century (Han & Kroch, 2000):
I do not go.
Thus, in Modern English, when there is no other operator in a negative sentence, we
insert the auxiliary verb do to perform the function of operator, to carry the tense and permit
the negative to attach to it in contracted form. This is called do-support:
9.	(a) Muriel plays the piano.
(b) Muriel does not/doesn't play the piano.
10.	(a) Shirley smoked.
(b) Shirley did not smoke/didn't smoke.
Shirley didn't smoke.
not
รบBJ
NP
N
Shirley
PRED
192
The Grammar Book
ร
ร
sm
With Have
One dialect difference that we should note is the negative with the verb have or have got to
show possession. Nelson (2004) lists five possible negative forms of have/have got, followed by
an indefinite NP and three forms followed by a definite NP:
Have + Indefinite NP 1.	1 don't have any money. 2.	1 haven't any money. 3.	1 haven't got any money. 4.	1 have no money. 5.	I've got no money.	Have + Definite NP 1 don't have the money. 1 haven't the money. 1 haven't got the money. 0 0
The first three involve not-negation and the last two 720-negation. The form with have got is
technically the present perfect, but have got, as opposed to have gotten, is used to show possession
in both British English and American English. Based on conversational data from the Longman
Corpus of Spoken and Written English (LSWE; Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad, & Finegan,
1999), Nelson reports that American English speakers overwhelmingly preferred sentence 4,
followed distantly by sentence 1, to show possession (or the absence of it) for indefinite NPs.
Showing a greater range of preferences, British English speakers favored sentence 3 the most.
For have + the definite NP, American English speakers strongly preferred sentence 1, with
sentence 3 used far less frequently. Again, in British English, there was a greater use of all
available choices, with sentence 3 the one most frequently used. Nelson also looked at these
forms in other varieties of English. Using several corpora from the International Corpus of
English (ICE), Nelson found that no variety adhered to the American or to the British model.
The Meaning of Negation
There is a duality when it comes to negation. The first kind, descriptive negation, is used
to say how things are not in the world, and we discuss this type here within this section on
meaning. The second kind is more discourse oriented, and we will treat it under the use
section in this chapter.
As for descriptive meaning, logicians would say that there is a symmetry between
affirmative and negative propositions:
affirmative statement: It is the case that...
negative statement: It is not the case that...
Chapter 10: Negation
ไ93
As you will see in this section and the one that follows, however, the meaning and use
of negatives are not as straightforward as this analysis makes it seem. Accordingly, we begin
this section of the chapter by acknowledging that the negative particle can have different
meanings. Bloom (1970), in her pioneering study of the acquisition of negation by children
whose first language is English, observed that most children in her study learned the word
no rather quickly (certainly by the “terrible twos”!) but used it for a variety of meanings
and purposes. For instance, in the data that Bloom collected, the children said “No” for
nonexistence, rejection, and denial:
"No pocket."	[There are no pockets.]	(nonexistence)
"No dirty soap."	[I don't want...]	(rejection)
"No truck."	[This isn't a truck.]	(denial)
While acknowledging that a developmental psychologist might need to distinguish the
meaning of nonexistence from denial, linguist Tottie (1991) sees nonexistence as a subcategory
of denial. Saying that something doesn’t exist is denying the (at least implicit) assertion that it
does exist. In other words, “No truck” is a denial of the (possibly implicit) assertion, “This is
a truck.” Denials, then, may be either explicitly expressed or contextually inferred. Compare
the following from Tottie (1991, p. 21):
A: John is married.	X: John's wife is a teacher.
ระ John isn't, (married)	Y: John isn't even married.
B denies what A has just explicitly stated, but Y merely denies the implicit presupposition
of X, the belief of X that John is married. Thus, we may sum up Tottie’s treatment of the
meaning of negation in English in the following way. There are two meanings of negation in
English, rejection and denial, with denial being either explicit or implicit.
Meaning of Negation (Tottie, 1991)
1. Rejection (including refusals)	A: Would you care for scotch?
ระ No, thanks. I don't drink.
2.	Denial a. Explicit
B's denial of something
that has just been as-
serted
A* That dress must have been very expensive.
ระ It wasn't (expensive). เท fact, I bought it
at a sale.
b. Implicit
B's denial of something
that has not been
explicitly asserted.
A: How are you and Bill getting along?
ร.* We are not serious.
Tottie also mentions a category that she calls “supports,” in which listeners signal that the
information that speakers are giving them is received:
A·, but I left that out because
ระ yes
A', it wasn't typical
ระ no
This category, however, represents only about 8 percent of Tottie’s data, and we will consider
this type of negation in conversations in the section on use.
194
The Grammar Book
As his own refinement of the denial category, Horn (1989) notes that by denying
something, a person can be denying (1) the truth value of the previous proposition, the type we
have just discussed, or (2) its form. Horn calls examples of the latter “metalinguistic” (p. 371):
"I didn't manage to trap two mongeese, I managed to trap two mongooses."
where the morphological form of the prior assertion is challenged, and where the register or
stylistic level is being corrected.
"Grandpa isn't feeling lousy, Johnny, he's just a tad indisposed."
Pitts (2011) finds that this form of negation is quite common. Here are some examples she
has compiled:
It's not "definately," but "definitely".
Astrid didn't eat SOME of the chocolates; she ate ALL of them!
That's not funny... it's absolutely hilarious.
You don't need your driver's license or your passport as proof of ID—you need both.
I don't look like my sister—my sister looks like me.
THE
When we are concerned with the meaning of the negative in English, we must also be
concerned with its scope. It is usually said that what is negated in a sentence is everything
that comes after the negative particle until the end of the clause.8 Thus, there is a meaning
contrast in the following pair of sentences:
Joe obviously hasn't understood a word. (It is obvious that he did not.)
Joe hasn't obviously understood a word. (It is not obvious that he did.)
It follows, then, that typically the subject of an English sentence will be outside the
scope of sentential negation, but it can, of course, be negated with the negative determiner no:
*Not anyone was planning to come.
No one was planning to come.
In speech, the scope of negation is naturally affected not only by the clause boundary,
but also by the prosodic boundary. Thompson and Ono (2014) concur that the scope of
negation follows the negative morpheme, but they argue that the scope doesn’t end until a
clause boundary coincides with a prosodic boundary. In other words, there may be several
clauses in a row, but the listener knows to listen for the speaker’s signal that he or she has
come to the end of a predicate before the listener can compute the scope of the negation. This
can be seen in one of their examples:
Kelly: I don't <think| I'm gonna like it.||>
Although this utterance is comprised of two clauses, Kelly’s listener knows that the
scope of the negation extends to the end of the second clause, which coincides with a prosodic
boundary.
We have already pointed out that negation can occur at three levels. Thus, the first
sentence in the following set exemplifies word negation, the second sentence illustrates
phrasal negation, and the third sentential negation:
1.	Harry is uncoordinated.
2.	Marge has decided not to pay her taxes.
3.	John is not at home.
Chapter 10: Negation
195
We can demonstrate that only the third sentence has negation that is sentential in scope
by adding a tag question to each. When tag questions in their unmarked form are negative,
the sentence is affirmative; when tags are affirmative, the sentence is negative:
1.	Harry is uncoordinated, isn't he?
2.	Marge has decided not to pay her taxes, hasn't she?
3.	John is not at home, is he?
The same question tag test can show that while no is only a determiner, its scope can be
sentential:
No one came to fix the plumbing problem, did they?
The same is true for the other negative forms associated with no:
Nothing is going right, is it?
and with not·.
They never answered, did they?
We have already noted that unlike in the past and unlike other languages, Standard Modern
English does not permit double negation.
I didn't buy no books, (nonstandard)
This is a somewhat simplified prohibition, however, because although it isn’t possible
to have two negatives that are sentential in scope, it is possible to have a word with a phrasal
negative or a phrasal or word negative with a sentential negative. Here is an example from a
newspaper interview that has sentential and phrasal negation in the same sentence:
I have friends who decided not to have TV in the house, or who restrict it very strictly.
But I do this for a living! I'm not go/ng to not have a TV, and besides, I like TV! (Ann Arbor
News, July 28,2010, in an interview conducted by Leah DuMouchel)
ASHIFTINIVIEANING
Usually, when you negate something, the basic meaning of the proposition is maintained in
its negative form. In English, however, this is not true in several cases:
1.	In the affirmative, must can convey obligation, as can its phrasal counterpart have to:
We must be on time, (obligation)
We have to be on time, (obligation)
In the negative, however, the meaning of must shifts:
We mustn't be at school until 9:00. (It's prohibited that we arrive before 9:00.)
We don't have to be at school until 9:00. (no obligation)
2.	Although there can be synonymy between affixal and nonaffixal negation,
I dislike lima beans. - I don't like lima beans.
often they are not semantic equivalents. Semantic nonequivalence occurs when there is
an adverbial intensifier:
This is totally untrue. Ψ This is not totally true.
His laugh was so unreal. Ψ His laugh wasn't so real.
Semantic nonequivalence can also occur between sentential negation and negation in
prepositional phrases:
196
The Grammar Book
My aerobics class isn't continuing for any clear reason. Ψ My aerobics class is continuing
for no clear reason.
and before “non-pejorative” nouns (Bailey, 1997):
He's not a doctor. Ψ He's no doctor.
Here, no-negation indicates either that he is a doctor but not a very satisfactory one, or
that he is pretending to be one—i.e., he is a “quack.”
Ambiguity arises with the interaction of not- with quantifiers, especially all,
All the guests didn't drink wine.
which can mean that none of the guests drank wine or that some did and some didn’t
drink wine. In fact, Tottie and Neukom-Hermann (2010) found examples of the all.. .not
construction in the British National Corpus (BNC) which were three-way ambiguous.
These researchers also reported finding a number of formulaic constructions, especially
where all is an NP head as in AU is not well or All is not lost. All is/was not constructions
vastly outnumbered those beginning with not all is in the BNC.
3.	Finally, there is semantic nonequivalence between positive comparatives and negative
equatives with negative polarity adjectives:9
Samantha is older than Emily, (positive comparative)
Samantha is not as young as Emily, (negative equative)
With the comparative, we have no real idea about the age of the two people involved.
They could be young, elderly, or any age in between. With the negative equative,
however, the implication is that both people are young. We will have more to say about
negative equatives in the section of this chapter on the use of negatives.
Some versus Any
The last area that we need to deal with regarding meaning and negation has to do with words
that accompany the negative particle. Many textbooks point out that following a negative
particle, some in an affirmative sentence changes to any in a negative one:
Laura bought some cheese.
Laura didn't buy any cheese.
This is true even when some is part of an indefinite compound pronoun:
Stan has something to wear to the party.
Stan doesn't have anything to wear to the party.
While this is probably a useful generalization to offer beginning-level students, more
advanced-level students should know that this is not always the case. Some and any actually
have two main meanings, and one of the meanings is compatible with negation. It is, in fact,
possible for some to occur in a negative sentence when a meaning of identity is invoked:
I don't eat some foods—lima beans, for example.
In a negative sentence, the some is stressed. When some/any refer to an indefinite quantity
or amount (such as in the previous sentences about Laura and Stan), some is weakly stressed
and occurs with positive sentences. It is not used with ordinary negative statements. It is also
possible for the stressed any to occur in an affirmative sentence:
Anyone can do that.
Here, any refers to a person of such unspecified identity that it refers to virtually all persons.
Chapter 10: Negation
197
Use of the Negative System
SOCIAL FUNCTION^ ~	~	~	_
It is said that while affirmatives and negatives often have a logical semantic symmetry, they
have a functional asymmetry: while affirmatives are standardly used to introduce propositions,
the chief use of negatives is directed at a proposition already in the discourse (Horn, 1989,
pp. 202-203). In other words, the claim is that negatives are used more to respond than to
initiate. In social interaction, then, a negative assertion can be a contrary, denying speech
act (Givón, 1993, p. 193). As such, we might expect its use to vary with regard to the relative
social position of interlocutors; and when there is a marked difference between them, we
might expect the subordinate-status speaker to use means other than negation to register
disagreement such as “Perhaps you may wish to consider an alternative.”
This expectation was supported by Yaeger-Dror (1985), who has shown that when the
negative utterance can be construed as showing disagreement, it is generally realized with
reduced intensity and nonprominent pitch on the negative elements. Although one might
expect that the negative, being new information, would receive prominent stress, in fact the
stress is reduced to mitigate the disagreement, presumably with the goal of maintaining social
harmony. Interestingly enough, when negatives are used in disagreeing with oneself or when
agreeing with the previous speaker, they are realized with prominent pitch on the negative,
often accompanied by enhanced intensity. Here is an example of a prominent negative
showing agreement, adapted from Yaeger-Dror (1985, p. 216):
A·. You see the fault I am getting at with the schools, they haven't got an answer
to the problem.
B: No! They don't.
A·. But they think they do.
B: I agree with you.
This is an apt time to remind readers that speech acts come in many forms. For example,
we have seen that one of the meanings of the negative is refusal. It does not follow, though, that
all refusals have to be negative in form. In investigating refusals made by English and Arabic
speakers, Stevens (1993) found very few outright no’s in the responses of native-speaking
subjects in either language. Nonetheless, there were “pragmatic failures” among the refusal
strategies adopted by Arabic speakers speaking in English. For instance, the chiding strategy
(reprimanding someone as a way of refusing an offer) that works in Arabic is pragmatically
inappropriate in English.
Don't make me mad; keep your money with you. (a refusal to another's offer to pay his/her
own share of a movie admission)10
Similarly, Snipp (1992), studying the’refusal strategies of Japanese EFL speakers, found that
the speakers’ intended refusals were sometimes misconstrued by native English speakers
because of their indirectness.
For instance, in the following exchange, speaker B, a native Japanese speaker, is indirectly
refusing As request. Speaker A, an English speaker, does not necessarily understand that she
is being refused:
A·. Nice scarf! Can I borrow it to wear to the dance tomorrow?
B: It is new.
A·. Yes. I didn't think I saw you wearing it before.
Not only can negatives seem too direct for certain speech acts; paradoxically, negatives
can be used to soften other speech acts in the presence of a perceived social status gap:
198
The Grammar Book
Won't you come in, please? (Come in.)
I don't suppose you've had the chance yet. (Have you had the chance yet?)
No As a Discourse Marker
We have not had the opportunity in this volume so far to discuss grammatical constructions
being used as discourse markers. Discourse markers connect pieces of text at the discourse
level as well as connecting the discourse to the extralinguistic context (Lee-Goldman, 2011).
No has several functions as a discourse marker. From his work with conversation analysis,
Schegloff (2001) observed that when used initially in a conversational turn, no is often
deployed to mark topic shifts, specifically from non-serious (joking) to serious talk.
Examining conversations from two speech corpora, Lee-Goldman (2011) found support
for this observation about the function of no, but he felt that this function is a specific type of a
more general move to restore the conversation to a topic after an interruption. He posits three
distinct functions of turn-initial no: to initiate a topic shift, to manage a misunderstanding,
and to negotiate a turn. Here is an example of each of these three from Lee-Goldman’s data
(p. 2640):
Topic-shift: "I blame her but no um so that's how I kind of got involved."
Misunderstanding-management:"No, this is useful, you know, don't worry."
Turn-negotiation:"No, go ahead."
Not versus No
Earlier, we spoke of the semantic nonequivalence of the negative particles not and no in certain
structures, such as those with quantifiers. On other occasions, though, it is difficult to discern
a meaning difference between them:
I don't have any time to help this weekend.
I have no time to help this weekend.
What, then, constitutes the difference?
From an examination of the conversations in the London-Lund Corpus and of written prose
in the Lancaster-Oslo/Bergen Corpus,11 a significantly different distribution of the two types of
negation in the spoken and written samples was found. The proportions of wt-negation and
M-negation were almost exactly reversed in speech and writing. In speech, there was 66 percent
-rot-negation and 34 percent พ-negation, and in writing, there was 37 percent พt-negation and
63 percent พ-negation. This difference is significant, atp < .001 (Tottie, 1991, p. 321).
The reason for this discrepancy is presumably due to the fact that no-negation antedates
not-negation, and thus the older form is preserved in writing, which is more formal and
conservative than speech. When no-negation occurs, it is often in collocations such as see no
reason; no more, no less; no longer; in implicit denials in existential constructions (There is no
milk in the house), as compared to contrastive not-negation in explicit denials (No. There isn’t
any milk in the house); and in object NPs of high-frequency lexical verbs such as have (stative
possessive), make, give, and do (as a main verb)—for example, She has no excuse.
A contextual analysis of North American English by Tai (1995) bears outTottie’s (1991)
findings. Although they are trends, not absolutes, not any is more likely to occur in speaking and
explicit denials. Tai also found that the trends held for the distribution of not anything and nothing
(i.e., not anything tended to be found more in speaking and explicit denials), although the trends
were somewhat weaker. What was an additional factor with this pair, though, was syntactic
complexity. While not anything goes with shorter modifiers, nothing goes with long modifiers:
Most mail these days could consist of nothing that could truly be called a letter.
It's just as well, because we can't do anything with it. (Tai, 1995)
Chapter 10: Negation
199
AFFIXAL VER
The most pertinent finding in Tottie’s (1991) study on the usage difference between affixal
and nonaffixal negation was that affixal negation was far more prevalent in writing than
in speech. In fact, two-thirds of the negatives in the written sample were affixal negatives,
whereas two-thirds of the negatives in the spoken sample were nonaffixal. A great many of the
affixal negatives were prenominal adjectives, such as impossible. Tottie attributes this finding to
the fact that different discourse strategies are used in speaking and writing due to differences
in processing conditions: in conversation, there is time pressure from online production,
whereas in the writing process, there is more planning time. Because of the greater pressure
imposed on speakers, they tend to produce utterances where one idea follows another in a
fragmented discourse, whereas writers typically have more time to combine and superimpose
ideas and can, therefore, mold their thoughts into a more integrated discourse (cf. Chafe,
1982). The use of prenominal or attributive adjectives constitutes “the single most prevalent
feature of written language,” according to Chafe (1982, p. 42). Even when they use adjectives
as subject predicates (The situation is impossible) rather than as premodifiers, writers prefer to
use affixal negation, which is the more integrated option.
Another reason that affixal negation is favored in writing is that it is used in conjoined
structures (difficult and unbearable/*difficult and not bearable), and conjoined phrases and
complex clauses are more characteristic of writing than speaking.
co N T R ACT E D VE RS USUNCON TRACT E D NE GATIVES
We wrote of (pro)noun + auxiliary contraction (which includes the copula be) in Chapter 7
(e.g., He’s not here). As we pointed out then, and earlier in this chapter, it is also possible for not
contraction to take place (He isn’t here). Quite a lot of research has taken place attempting to
pinpoint when the not is contracted and when it occurs in its full form. One explanation pits
the Cognitive Prominence Principle against the Social Agreement Principle (Yaeger-Dror,
1997). It seems that the not is uncontracted when it is semantically focal, such as when there is
a disagreement in a debate; however, with a disagreement in a normal social interaction, the not
is contracted because to do otherwise is “face-threatening” and therefore dispreferred. Thus,
the difference between informational and interactional registers becomes a crucial factor.
In later research, Yaeger-Dror, Hall-Lew, and Deckert (2002) tackle the issue of
negative contraction and auxiliary contraction further. They conclude that aux-contraction
occurs in “unscripted” situations, meaning more informal ones. This makes sense. However,
interestingly, their research also showed a dialect difference, with not contraction being
favored in the northern part of the United States and aux-contraction being preferred in
the southern part. They also found’significant regional variation in the British data they
examined, although- according to Tagliamonte and Smith (2002), dialect differences are not
clear-cut. Contraction is also correlated with sentence type. Not contraction occurs readily in
interrogatives and imperatives, as we will see in later chapters.
NEGATIVE EQUATIVES	~~	~
Returning briefly to our discussion of the contrast between comparatives and negative
equatives, we should comment on their potential different uses. In general, it is considered
more tactful to use negative equatives rather than comparatives when the adjective has
negative polarity. For example, in the following, the negative polarity adjective dumb is very
200
The Grammar Book
rude in the comparative, whereas its positive polarity counterpart in a negative equative is
considered more indirect and less rude:
Moe is dumber than Curly.
Moe is not as intelligent as Curly.
USAGE-BASED NEGATION
This discussion of negation is a good time to revisit the point that we made in Chapter 1 about
lexicogrammatical constructions. Although what we have presented so far with the negative
(e.g., the position of not in a sentence) seems orderly enough to be characterized as rule-
governed, it is also the case that there are constructions that don’t quite fit any syntactic mold
conveniently, yet which are important. For purpose of illustration, we will briefly consider
the pattern not that (Delahunty, 2006; Schmid, 2013). Not that has a denying function; i.e., it
“instructs the addressees to reject a possible inference of what was said before...” (Schmid,
2013, p. 76). Schmid cites an example from the British National Corpus:
... [I'm] only working a few days but it's surprising the teaching days I do [pause]
really, that really does cut into my time at home, [pause] Not that I mind but it just
means... [XGB 1873]
Schmid (2013) takes US through the possible sequence of inferential steps: “if something
cuts into time spent at home, this is an unpleasant situation” > “we normally mind unpleasant
situations” > “I deny that I mind” (p. 99).
Schmid (2013) argues that the construction not that is not an elliptical version of a
more complete syntactic structure with a copula, e.g., it is not the fact that... because, among
other reasons, they are not mutually substitutable. Nevertheless, analyzing 1,759 exemplars
of this construction extracted from the BNC reveals that the environments they are in and
the functions they serve are patterned. Not surprisingly, in keeping with the observation that
not that gives US the speaker’s perspective, not that is used as a part of one speaker’s turn in the
large majority of occurrences in the spoken corpus, often with the pronouns, I, we, and you
functioning as topics and subjects.
The theoretical import of this discussion is that grammar need not be conceived of
as a rule-based system. Instead, the usage-based view is that speakers encounter and learn
frequently occurring patterns, which they subsequently draw on to make meaning appropriate
to contexts of use, and that these patterns constitute their grammar. Speakers may or may not
abstract generalizations from the patterns. While we find such theoretical positions attractive,
teachers cannot afford to be purists. As we said in Chapter 1, teachers need to work with
students on rules and patterns.12 The pedagogical point of this discussion is that there are
lexicogrammatical patterns that students will encounter, and some students will want or need
to learn to use them, what Nattinger and DeCarrico (1992) call “lexical phrases” and what
Wray (2008) calls “formulaic sequences.” While it would be beyond the scope of this volume
to list them comprehensively, being alert to their existence will be helpful.
FUNCTIONAL NEGATIVES
We conclude the use section of this chapter by pointing out that just as words need not be
marked affixally in order to convey negativity (cf. Jespersen’s inherent negatives), so, too, can
positive statements and questions have negative meaning, depending on the discourse context:
Joe·. Did you ace the final, Ray?
Ray: Are you kidding? I'm lucky I passed!
Chapter 10: Negation
201
In other words, although the question and statement in Ray’s response are formally
positive, they function as negatives.13
Conclusion
This chapter provides an introduction to the negation system in English. As you undoubtedly can
tell, because of the many words and structures that are included in the system, you will encounter
the topic of negation repeatedly in the chapters that follow. Beginning-level students will need
to practice the forms of negation—both the syntax and the patterns in a meaningful way. Issues
concerning the use of negation will arise for intermediate and advanced-level English students.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form. When students are first learning to place the negative particle not in its correct
position in sentences, it is useful for them to practice unscrambling sentences with
auxiliary verbs and the copula be. Write 12 to 15 sentences. Put one word of each sentence
on a card or slip of paper.
I GUY 11 MAY 11 NOT I [bê~| I going I [rol I FRANCE I |next 11 SUMMER I
IBUDI I [ไริ] I NOT I [ÃN~| I ENGINEER I
INORIKO I I HAS I I NOT I I VISITED I I CANADA I
Shuffle the cards for each sentence and give three sets of shuffled cards to each
small group of students. The students’ task is to unscramble each of the three sentences
and put them in grammatical order. When the groups are finished, they should mix
the cards for each sentence again and swap cards with another group. The procedure
should be repeated several times so that each group gets to practice unscrambling at least
12 sentences. Afterward, you can ask the students to make their observations concerning
the placement of not in sentences with auxiliary or be verbs.
2.	Form. Tell students that the sentences they made are accurate, but an English speaker
would probably not use the full form of the negative. Have students remove the card with
the not on it in each of the final set of three sentences they were working on, turn it over,
and write the contraction -n’t on the reverse side. Students should put the contraction
next to the verb to which it is attached, where that is possible (notice that in the sentence
with may, it is not possible). They should then read the sentences out loud. You can
correct their pronunciation of the contracted form as needed.
3.	Form. As a presentation activity, to introduce your students to the need for the operator
do, present the class with the following:
I JOHN I I CANI I SWIM|
Next, give the students-the words I NOT I and I DIVE I and ask students to change the
sentence using these two words. After practicing a few of these familiar sentences with the
be verb or other auxiliary verbs, you can introduce the do beginning with plural subjects
such as the following:
ICHILDREN I I LIKE I |CANDY I
202
The Grammar Book
Then change I CAN DY I to I HOMEWORK^ and give the students I DO I and I NOT I- Students
are asked where the new words go. You should help students see that the do verb is
carrying the tense and showing number agreement with the subject. This might become
clearer when you introduce the next sentence:
I CARLA I I SPEAK I [ริ] I SPANISH]
After I SPANISH I has been changed to I CHINESE I, students are again asked to put I DO I and
I NOT I in the right position in the new sentence. Then the [ริ] on I SPEAKS I is moved over
to follow I DO I (the first verb form in the sentence), at which point a newly introduced
form, I DOES I, can be substituted for I DO I and [ริ}. Students should have an opportunity to
practice several more of these sentences together before doing them on their own. Notice
that even when working on form, we don’t ignore meaning. By changing the sentence
from “John can swim” to “John cannot dive,” rather than “John cannot swim,” the truth
value of the negative is plausible.
4.	Meaning. Students can practice contradicting when you or other students deliberately
make statements about members of the class that are not true (along with a few that are
true). Students can be invited to do so after the teacher gives a few examples:
Teacher: Carla comes from China.
The class answers:
Students: No, she doesn't come from China. She comes from Argentina.
Teacher:The person behind Paulo is Jorge.
The class answers:
Students: No, it isn't Jorge. It's พน Min.
Teacher: Boris is married.
Students: Yes, Boris is married.
5.	Meaning. Show students two pictures that have differences between them. Ask students
to find the differences and use negative sentences to define them. In other words, they
have to say what is not in one picture as contrasted with another. Later, divide the group
into pairs and give each student a picture, which the students are not allowed to show
each other. Each student has to converse with his/her partner to discover the differences
between their pictures without showing the pictures. Encourage them to contract where
possible. For example:
A:The time on the clock is 12:00 in picture A.
B:The time isn't 12:00 in picture B; it's 2:00.
6.	Form. While students will need practice in producing all the contracted forms of negation,
one form that may give them special difficulty in listening is the colloquial English don't
in I da wanna go and I dunno. Another is can't, since English speakers distinguish He can
come from He can't come more from its rhythmic structure and vowel quality than from its
other segmental sounds.
He can come [hiy ksn kum]
He can't come [hiy kaen kum]
Give students practice listening to you say one or the other of these with regard to a
particular skill. You can hold up contrasting pictures and ask students to point to the one
that you describe.
Teacher: (holds up two pictures) He can play the piano.
(Students point to one of the pictures.)
Teacher: Yes. (holds up two new pictures) He can't swim.
(Students point to one of the pictures.)
Chapter 10: Negation
203
7.	Meaning. In practicing the difference between don’t have to and must not, students could be asked to make comparative statements about classroom manners in two countries. For example: เท Malaysia, you must stand when the teacher enters the classroom, but in the United States, you don't have to. เท Malaysia, you mustn't speak unless the teacher calls on you. That's sometimes true in the United States too.
8.	Use. Intermediate-level students can be taught to make tactful comparisons using negative equatives. They can be asked to bring in one or two pictures of famous people. Then, they show their pictures and make statements like the following: Madonna is not as talented as Meryl Streep. Tom Cruise's new movie is not as good as his last one.
9.	Use. For more advanced students, you might play a segment of a บ.ร. presidential debate (http://www.c-spanvideo.org/topic/PresidentialDebates). Yaeger-Dror, Hall-Lew, and Deckert (2002) suggest that in the Nixon-Kennedy debate, for instance, there are more full-form negatives because the information value of the negative is high and because there is a preference for disagreement in debates. See if your students find more full-form negatives than contracted ones and if they can figure out why this might be so.
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1.	Provide original example sentences to illustrate the following terms. Underline the
pertinent word(s) in your examples:
	a.	sentence-level negation	e. not contraction b.	phrasal negation	f. no determiner c.	affixal negation	g. negative equative d.	do support	b. negative indefinite pronoun
2.	For the following sentences, draw the trees and arrows to show where the do is inserted and how the not moves and is contracted, where applicable: a.	Alice doesn’t laugh at my jokes. b.	They have no children. c.	Meg is not about to listen to you. d.	I can’t understand the lyrics. e.	The boys aren’t playing football in the fall.
3.	In what way are the following sentences in each set related? How are they different? a.	Sam is not working these days.	c. Trudy doesn’t remember anyone. Sam’s not working these days.	Trudy remembers no one. Sam isn’t working these days.	d. I would say that is inadvisable. b.	Bill is shorter than Richard.	I would say that is not advisable. Bill is not as tall as Richard.
The Grammar Book
204
Test your ability to apply what you know.
4.	The students who have said the following, have communicated successfully, i.e.
we understand the meaning. However, they have not done so in terms of Standard
English norms. What would you tell them?
a.	"That hoy no like me.	d. I didn’t do nothing, (nonstandard)
b.	"I not understand.	e. "Not any students will come to school
c.	"Seth is very unpatient.	today.
5.	What is the difference between the following two sentences?
They might not have tried before.
They might have not tried before.
6.	A student tells you that he has been told that any is always used in place of some in a
negative sentence, but that he heard another teacher say the following: I can’t recall
some of their names. The student asks you if this is grammatical. What would you say?
7.	Many relatively advanced ESL/EFL students systematically refuse to contract the
negative particle in their speech. How would you help them understand the fact that
contraction is normally used in speech and informal writing?
8.	Early in this chapter, we listed some verbs that are inherently negative. Besides the
semantics of verbs like fail, what sort of syntactic evidence can you adduce that would
demonstrate their negativity?
Bibliography
REFERENCES
_____________________________________________________________
Anderwald, L. (2004). Local markedness as a heuristic tool in dialectology: The case of amn't. In B.
Kortmann (Ed.), Dialectology meets typology: Dialect grammar from- a cross-linguistic perspective.
Trends in Linguistics 153 (pp. 507-529). Berlin, Germany: Mouton de Gruyter.
Bailey, c. J. (1997). You and your English grammar. Kea’au, Hawaii: Orchid Land Publications.
Biber, D., Johansson, ร., Leech, G., Conrad, ร., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and
written English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ltd.
Bloom, L. (1970). Language development: Form and function in emerging grammars. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Cancino, H., Rosansky, E. J., & Schumann, J. H. (1978). The acquisition of English negatives and
interrogatives by native Spanish speakers. In E. M. Hatch (Ed.), Second language acquisition: A book of
readings (pp. 207-230). Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Chafe, พ. (1982). Integration and involvement in speaking, writing, and oral literature. In D. Tannen (Ed.),
Spoken and written language: Exploring orality and literacy (pp. 35-53). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Close, R. A. (1992). J teacher's grammar. Hove, England: Language Teaching Publications.
Delahunty, G. p. (2006). A relevance theoretic analysis of not that sentences: “Not that there is anything
wrong with that.” Pragmatics, 16(2/3), 213-245.
Eskildsen, ร. (2012). L2 negation constructions at work. Language Learning, 62(2), 335-372.
Givón, T. (1993). English grammar: A function-based approach. Amsterdam, Netherlands/Philadelphia, PA:
John Benjamins.
Han, C-H., & Kroch, A. (2000). The rise of i/o-support in English: Implications for clause structure.
Proceedings of the 30th North East Linguistics Society, GLSA, 311-325.
Chapter 10: Negation
205
Horn, L. (1989). A natural history of negation. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Huddleston, R., & Pullum, G. K. (2002). The Cambridge grammar of the English language. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Hudson, R. (2000). I amn’t. Language, 76(2), 297-323.
Jespersen, o. (1917). Negation in English and other languages. Reprinted in Selected writings of Otto fespersen.
London, England: Allen and Unwin.
Kallel, A. (2007). The loss of negative concord in Standard English: Internal factors. Language Variation and
Change, 19(f), 27-49.
Lee-Goldman, R. (2011). No as a discourse marker. Journal of Pragmatics, 43, 2627-2649.
Lieven, E. V, & Tomasello, M. (2008). Children’s first language acquisition from a usage-based perspective.
In p. Robinson & N. c. Ellis (Eds.), Handbook of cognitive linguistics and second language acquisition
(pp. 168-196). New York, NY & London, England: Routledge.
Nattinger, J. R., & DeCarrico, J. ร. (1992). Lexical phrases and language teaching. Oxford, England/New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.
Nelson, G. (2004). Negation of lexical have in conversational English. World Englishes, 23(2), 299-308.
Penka, D. (2012). Negative features on negative indefinites: Evidence from split scope. Journal of Semantics,
29, 373-402.
Perales-Escudero, M. (2011). To split or not to split: The split infinitive past and present. Journal of English
Linguistics, 39(4), 313-334.
Pitts, A. (2011). Exploring a ‘pragmatic ambiguity’ of negation. Language, 87(2), 346-368.
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, ร., Leech, G., & Svartvik, J. (1985). A comprehensive grammar of the English language.
London, England: Longman.
Schegloff, E. A. (2001). Squib. Getting serious: Joke^serious ‘no ? Journal of Pragmatics, 33, 1947-1955.
Schmid, H-J. (2013). Is usage more than usage after all? The case of English not that. Linguistics, 51(1),
75-116.
Snipp, K. (1992). Refusals in Japanese and English: A contrastive linguistic study of the language used in the
refusal of the requests of peer acquaintances (Unpublished independent professional project). School for
International Training, Brattleboro, VT.
Stevens, p. (1993). The pragmatics of‘NO!’: Some strategies in English and Arabic. IDEAL, 6, 87-112.
Tagliamonte, ร., & Smith, J. (2002). Either it isn't or it's not. Neg-aux contraction in British dialects. English
World- wide, 23(2), 251-281.
Tai, ร. (1995). A contextual analysis of NOT+ANY and NO in American English (Unpublished master’s thesis).
University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Thompson, ร. A., & Ono, T. (2014, March). Negative scope in English and Japanese. Presentation at the
Georgetown University Round Table on Languages and Linguistics, Washington, DC.
Tottie, G. (1991). Negation in English speech and writing: A study of variation. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Tottie, G., & Neukom-Hermann, A. (2010). Quantifier-negation interaction in English: A corpus linguistic
study of all...not constructions. In L.R. Horn (Ed.), The expression of negation (pp. 149-185). Berlin,
Germany: Walter de Gruyter.
Wray, A. (2008). Formulaic language: Pushing the boundaries. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Yaeger-Dror, M. (1985). Intonational prominence on negatives in English. Language and speech, 28,
197-230.
Yaeger-Dror, M. (1997). Contraction of negatives as evidence of variation in register specific interactive
rules. Language Variation and Change, 9, 1-36.
Yaeger-Dror, M., Hall-Lew, L., & Deckert, ร. (2002). It's not or isn't it? Using large corpora to determine
the influences on contraction strategies. Language Variation and Change, 14, 79-118.
206
The Grammar Book
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
For linguistic treatments of negation, consult:
de Swart, H. (2010). Expression and interpretation of negation: An OT typology. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer.
lyeiri, Y. (Ed.). (2005). Aspects of negation in English. Amsterdam, Netherlands/Philadelphia, PA: John
Benjamins.
For a historical perspective on English negation, see:
Chapman, D., & Skousen, R. (2005). Analogical modeling and morphological change: The case of the
adjectival negative prefix in English. English Language and Linguistics, 9(2), 333-357.
Larrivée, p., & Ingham, R. p. (2011). The evolution of negation. Beyond the Jespersen cycle. Berlin, Germany:
Walter de Gruyter.
Mazzon, G. (2004). yl history of English negation. London, England: Pearson Longman.
Wallage, p. (2012). Negative inversion, negative concord and sentential negation in the history of English.
English Language and Linguistics, 16(f), 3-3 3.
For cross-linguistic information on negation, consult:
Dahl, o. (1979). Typology of sentence negation. Linguistics, 17, 79-106.
Horn, L. R. (2010). The expression of negation. Berlin, Germany: Walter de Gruyter.
For usage-based/cognitive linguistic treatments, see:
Bybee, J. (2010). Language, usage, and cognition. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Croft, พ., & Cruse, D. A. (2004). Cognitive linguistics. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Langacker, R. พ. (2008). Cognitive grammar: A basic introduction. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Tyler, A. (2012). Cognitive linguistics and second language learning. New York, NY/London, England:
Routledge.
For pedagogical help with basic negative formation, see:
Badalamenti, V., & Henner-Stanchina, c. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 1 (4th ed.).
Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
O’Sullivan, J. K. (2007). Grammar connection: Structure through content 1. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage
Learning.
For pedagogical suggestions with negative equatives, see:
Wisniewska, L, Riggenbach, H., & Samuda, V (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form., meaning, and use 2
(4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
For suggestions on teaching some, not...any, no, and none, see:
Carlisi, K. (2008). Grammar connection: Structure through content 3. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Endnotes
1.	For example, in Bahasa Indonesia, bukan is used to negate a nominal; tidak negates verbs, adjectives, and
adverbiais; and belum negates a past action, event, or state and could be glossed as "not yet."
2.	A similar sort of pattern is the use of no-as an adjective-forming prefix as เท, for example, no-fault
insurance, no-wax floors, no-good rascal, no-win situation, and so on.
3.	Sometimes this assimilation is overgeneralized to other parts of speech where the same เท- is not used as
a negative prefix. For example, you may hear people say /imput/ instead of /input/ for input.
4.	Readers might expect to see none on this list. Actually, none is foremost a quantifier (see Chapter 17) and
only pronominal with appropriate ellipsis.
Chapter 10; Negation
207
ไเ
5.	Close (1992) identifies six such operations:
a.	To make negatives: I haven't done my homework.
b.	To make questions: Have you done your homework?
c.	To make negative questions: Haven't you done your homework?
d.	To make tag questions: You've done your homework/ haven't you?
e.	To emphasize: I have done my homework, (the operator is stressed)
f.	To substitute for the whole predicate: My brother hasn't done his homework/ but I
have, (in order to avoid repetition)
6.	And some are rarely if ever contracted; e.g., *mayn't, loughtn't. Horn (1989) argues that for this reason,
as well as for others, contracted auxiliary verbs should be analyzed as separate lexical items rather than
syntactic combinations of sentential not and the first auxiliary verb lp. 480). While Horn's contention
has theoretical merit, for ÊSL/EFL pedagogical reasons, it seems to make sense to treat the contracted
auxiliary verb as being syntactically derived from not + auxiliary verb.
7.	One exception is its use in stylized rhetoric. When John F. Kennedy was inaugurated as president of the
United States, he exhorted Americans: "Ask not what your country can do for you; ask what you can do
for your country."
It is also used in certain other formulaic utterances, such as / kid you not, or She loves me not.
8.	As Givón (1993) points out, it is possible for negation of a main clause or negation of a complement
clause to yield similar, if not identical, meanings:
I don't think that she came.
I think that she didn't come.
This is not true for all verbs, however. Common verbs that follow this pattern are believe, expect, feel,
imagine, intend, plan, propose, reckon, suppose, think, want, and wish.
9.	Old is perceived as positive and young as negative for age, in that we always ask, "How old are you?" See
the discussions in Chapters 20 and 34 for more on the polarity feature of degree adjectives,
10.	Stevens attributes this strategy to the fact that it is not culturally appropriate in Arab society for each
person to pay only for him/herself.
11.	These are British-English corpora, but the findings are believed to hold for American English as well, with
the possible exception that American English favors not-negation even more than British English.
12.	See, for instance, Huddleston and Pullum's (2002) examples of not as a marker of nonverbal negation:
not all, notone, noteven, not + affixially negated adjectives (e.g., not unattractive), certain adverbs (not
surprisingly), and others (pp. 807-810), some of which we take up elsewhere in this book.
13.	Conversely, some formal negatives function as ironic positive statements rather than negatives; for
example:
I can't believe it!
208
The Grammar Book
Λ'1
Yes/No
Questions
CHAPTER
Introduction
In this chapter, we begin our treatment of questions in English. English speakers have a
profusion of question types available. Here are some of them.
Question Type	Example
1. Yes/no question (sometimes called a polar ques tion)	Is dinner ready yet?
2. Statement-form question (statement syntax accompanied by rising intonation)	You come from Texas?
3. Negativeyes/no question	Shouldn't we send a card?
4. Focused question (with a stressed element)	Was it Nicole who won the Oscar?
5. Wh-question (which typically uses a wi1-question word—e.g., who, what, where—to seek specific information)	What movie is playing downtown?
6. Negative wh-question	Why doesn't he stop barking?
7. Question tag, negative tag	Traffic is heavy at this time of day, isn't it?
8. Question tag, affirmative tag	You didn't go, did you?
9. Alternative question (also called a choice question; it has a special intonation contour)	Would you rather live in the city or the country?
10. Rhetorical "question"	Haven't we had enough conflict?
11. Exclamatory "question"	Are you kidding!
12. Indirect question	I wonder if we should start.
Of course, it is questionable to call all of these questions in the interrogative mood sense
of asking someone something. Certainly, there are questions that don’t seek information,
and there are statements that do (de Ruiter, 2012). To prove this point and to deal with this
assortment of question types, we will spread our coverage over three chapters. The first four
types will be dealt with in this chapter; types 5 and 6 will be covered in Chapter 13; types
7-11 will be handled in Chapter 14; and type 12 will not be discussed much until Chapter 33,
when we take up other forms of indirect or reported speech. We begin with question type 1.
209
Many of the world’ร languages form yes/no questions simply by adding rising intonation
to declarative statements. English speakers do this, too (see type 2), but the unmarked form of
an Englishyes/no question, like (1), requires rising intonation and a different word order from
a statement—one that inverts the subject and the operator. Only a few languages other than
English use a word order different from that of statements in making questions—German,
for example; on the whole, most languages do not do so. Instead, as Ultan (1978) reports in
a typological study of 79 languages from various language families, most languages simply
use a distinctive intonation pattern for questions. The second most popular option among
the languages Ultan studied was the addition of a special interrogative particle to either the
beginning or end of the question or attached directly to a word that is being queried. Here is
a Chinese example from Zhu and พน (2011, p. 634):
ta shangxue + ma
He go school + question particle
'Does/did he go to school?'
At an early stage in the history of English, questions were made with the use of rising
intonation alone. Only much later did inversion come about in question formation. The
earliest form of this inversion was with the subject and the main verb:
Know you the way to Ipswich?
It took much longer for the rule requiring subject and operator inversion to become standard.
Todeva (1991) has pointed out the parallelism between the evolution of the English
language and the acquisition of English as either a first or second language: learners of English
are known to first use rising intonation; only after several more stages do they master inversion.
The following is a somewhat modified developmental pattern for untutored learners that we have
adapted from Pienemann, Johnston, and Brindley (1988) (as reported in Ortega, 2009, p. 35):
Stage	Example
1: Fragments + rising intonation	A hat?
II: Statements + rising intonation	You are tired?
III: Place question marker in front of statement	Is your daughter work here?
IV: Be inversion	Are you listening me?
V: Do support	Do you like ice cream?
VI: Other question types	Don't you see? 1 wonder why they left.
Of course, as with all second language (L2) data, these stages are not discrete, and within
each there is certainly individual variation. Also, from early on, learners make considerable
use of formulaic questions, such as “How are you?” Nonetheless, it can generally be said
that inversion is the initial learning" challenge for learners, and its mastery takes a while. The
challenge is no doubt made more difficult by the fact that English speakers frequently do not
use inverted questions in conversations; hence, the exemplars to which ESL/EFL learners are
exposed are inconsistent with regard to inversion. We return to this point later in this chapter.
As different as English question formation is from Chinese, Zhu and พน (2011) observe
that it is not necessarily the structural differences that cause learners difficulty. What is
problematic is the assumption that learners already know how questions function. For instance,
an apparently straightforward teacher question—Any questions?—can be multifunctional
(Waring, 2012). Even more dubious is the assumption that learners know how to respond
210
The Grammar Book
to questions. Replying is not as straightforward as it may seem. This is a problem, given
that it is well known that early interactions between learners and speakers of English are
replete with questions directed to the learners for the purpose of comprehension checks and
clarification requests, and these questions are adjusted to enhance learners’ comprehension,
which sometimes results in ungrammatical input (Long, 1981).
In this chapter, we begin by examining the inversion rule in English under the heading
of form. Other comments about form are directed to the intonation pattern ofyes/no questions
and to the structure of short answers. In order to help teachers guide students on how to
respond to questions, we also comment on the meaning ofyes/no questions and their variations.
In the section on use, we make some observations about short answers toyes/no questions. We
also discuss contraction in negative questions and the use of elliptical questions, questions
that take less than full form. We conclude this chapter by pointing out other functions that
yes/no questions can fulfill, not only in informal language use, but also in academic language.
The Form of Yes/No Questions
Yes/no questions are often defined as questions for which either “Yes” or “No” is the expected
answer:1
.	. Í Yes (I am).
Are you going to the party? \
[ No (I'm not).
Inverting the subject and operator gives rise to the characteristic syntactic form of
yes/no questions in English
SUBJECT-OPERATOR INVERSION
With an Auxiliary Verb
Consider the following questions:
1.	Will they be in Reno on Friday?
2.	Was she able to finish in time?
3.	Has Maricor gone home?
4.	Are you doing anything tomorrow?
Here is the tree for the first sentence:
ร .
sm
Q
ร
SUBJ		PRED	
NP	AUX	VP	ไร)VL
			
pro	M	cop	PrepP	PrepP
		1	
they	will	be prep	NP	prep	NP
		in	N	on	N
		Reno	Friday
Chapter 11: Yes/No Questions
211
'จฺ
The Q marker is treated as a sentence marker because its scope applies to the whole
sentence. Subject-operator inversion inverts the subject with the auxiliary verb will:
ร _
sm
ร
PRED
SÚBJ
Q
prep
on
inversion
ADVL
PrepP
NP
Friday
N
Reno
Notice that if this sentence had two auxiliary verbs—for example, if we were to add be + ing
to the will in question (1)—the operator is only the first auxiliary verb in the auxiliary string
Will they be gambling in Reno on Friday?
that is inverted with the subject. Furthermore, when the auxiliary has more than one element,
as it does with the phrasal modal in question (2), it is only the first of the elements in the
first auxiliary verb (again the operator) which, along with the tense marker (if there is one) is
inverted with the subject. Here are the trees for question (2) as an illustration of this last point:
ร^
sm
ร
Q
SÚBJ		PRED	
NP	AUX	VP	ADVL
pro	T	pm	y	PrepP
			
she	-past be able to	finish	prep NP
			in	N
			time
ร
ร
212
sm
The Grammar Book
With the Be Copula
As you saw in the previous chapter on negation, the negative particle not (a sentential adverb)
is placed after the first auxiliary verb. In this chapter, we see that it is also the first auxiliary
verb that is involved in question formation. Similarly, just as the not follows the be copula verb
when no auxiliary verb is present in negative sentences, so does the be copula verb serve as the
inverted operator when no auxiliary verb is present in yes/no question formation:
Pamela was a new student at the time.
Was Pamela a new student at the time?
	_____ร	
sm	ร
Q	SUB]""' ~~1pred NP	AUX	VP	ADVL N	T cop	NP	PrepP Pamela -past be det AP	N prep NP
a ADJ student at det N
new	the time
With Other Verbs
When a sentence has no auxiliary or be verb, a different condition occurs. Notice that we
cannot simply invert the subject and the verb, as we did with the be verb, to form a grammatical
question:
Arlene plays the organ on Sunday.
*Plays Arlene the organ on Sunday?
Although, as we have already noted, such forms were acceptable in historically earlier forms
of English, and their equivalents are grammatical in certain languages today (such as German
and the Scandinavian languages), the main verb in the sentence is not inverted with the
subject in Modern English.2
Chapter 11: Yes/No Questions
213
Once again, we can point to the parallelism between negation and yes/no question
formation. Recall that to make a sentence negative when it has no auxiliary verb or be copula,
the operator do is inserted. Likewise, in yes/no question formation, do is added to function as
an operator when there is no auxiliary verb or be copula verb to invert with the subject:
A _
sm
ร
Q
SUBJ
PRED
sm
NP
Arlene
SUBJ
NP
Arlene
AUX
-pres do
V
-pres play
T	ADVL
NP	PrepP
	
det	N	prep	NP
the	organ	on	N
	Sunday
do-support
VP	ADVL
	
V	NP	PrepP
1 XX	
play det	N	prep NP
the organ	on	N
	Sunday
sm
Do support is also needed for a few phrasal modals:
used to: Did you use to go skiing when you lived in Vermont?
have to: Does Brent have to work on weekends?
N
Q
ร
ร
N
ร
ร
214
The Grammar Book
In most cases, however, the first element in phrasal modals is the operator, which inverts
with the subject when subject-operator inversion is applied:
be to: Are you to report tomorrow?
In sum, whether or not you use explicit terminology with your ESL/EFL students, they
need to understand that in a yes/no question, the first auxiliary verb in the sentence should
appear before the subject. If there is no auxiliary verb, the be copula should be used before the
subject. If there is no auxiliary verb or be copula, then do must be introduced at the beginning
of the question and must mark the tense of the question.
INTONATION IN YES/NO QUESTIONS
In addition to inverted word order and sometimes the addition of the do operator, English
also uses intonation to mark yes/no questions. Yes/no questions typically display a raised,
nonterminal intonation.3 To understand how this is articulated, consider that statement
intonation in English usually rises on the last stressed syllable of the last content word and
then falls on that word in the sentence. For example:
® ๏๏
Mike is learning to use a corpputer
Unmarked yes/no question intonation typically rises through the same stressed syllable
and then stays high, what is called a “low rise contour” (Hedberg, Sosa, & Gõrgülü, to appear):
®	(3) (3)
Is Mike learning to use a computer?
We must quickly qualify this analysis, however. Couper-Kuhlen (2012) convincingly argues
that the intonation of questions depends on the local interaction and the nature of the
communicative activity. For instance, in her data from radio broadcasts, a higher proportion
of yes/no questions with rising intonation is used when conversational topics are being
introduced. Later, as the topics are being elaborated upon, more questions with falling
intonation are used, although they are still the minority. An additional factor is the epistemic
stance reflected in the question. For instance, if the questioner expects a positive response,
then he or she may well use a falling intonation rather than a rising one. All of this indicates
(as we stated in Chapter 1) that as with all decontextualized rules, they may well be useful as
“rules of thumb,” but they may not hold up in dynamic interactions.
SHORT ANSWERS TO YES/NO QUESTIONS
It is unlikely that the response to a yes/no question will be in the form of a full sentence:
Is Ramón an engineering student?
Yes.
He is
He's
an engineering student.
No. He isn't an engineering student.
Although these answers are possible, such complete replies may give the listener
the impression that the speaker is annoyed by the question. ESL/EFL teachers should be
aware of the possible negativity expressed by a full-sentence answer to a yes/no question
and not always insist on their students answering questions with full sentences, as teachers
Chapter 11: Yes/No Questions
215
sometimes do. A more common form of answer, although this too is restricted in its
distribution (as you will see in the section on use later in this chapter), is the short answer:
.0____._________.____.___.. .__4,	[Yes, he is.
Is Ramon an engineering student?	]	1 .
1 No, he isn t.
If the yes/no question begins with the copula be, as in our example sentence, the short
answer is formed with the same form of the be verb that appears in the question. Notice that
be cannot be contracted in an affirmative short answer. All affirmative short answers must be
followed by at least one other word, or else the full form of be must be used:
*Yes, he's.
Yes, he's studying electrical engineering.
Yes, he is.
When the yes/no question contains an auxiliary verb, that operator is used in the short
answer.
With a modal
With a phrasal modal
(the first element)
With perfect aspect
With progressive aspect
Can she go?
Is she able to go?
Has she gone?
Is she going?
Yes, she can.
No, she can't.
Yes, she is.
No, she isn't.
Yes, she has.
No, she hasn't.
Yes, she is.
No, she isn't.
If the sentence contains more than one auxiliary verb, the short answer may also contain
an auxiliary verb in addition to the operator, although when the second or third auxiliary verb
is some form of be, the speaker usually omits it; for example,
Will she have gone?
Yes, she will have.
No, she won't have.
(often pronounced with the "have" reduced to /sv/)
Will she have been worrying?
With modal and perfect
Yes, she will have (been).
No, she won't have (been).
With modal, perfect,
and progressive
If do is the operator in the question, it is also used in the short answer with the same
tense used in the question:
Does she go there often?	Yes, she does. No, she doesn't.
The Meaning of Yes/No Questions
Although not all linguists agree (cf. Bolinger, 1978), most feel that an acceptable paraphrase of
ayes/no question might be Is it the.ease that... ?, in which the speaker is asking for confirmation
or denial of a proposition. Such an analysis implies thatyes/no questions are neutral questions—
that is, there is no expectation regarding whether an affirmative or negative reply is likely.
Chalker (1984), for example, calls them “open questions” because the speaker has an open
mind about the answer. However, there are morphosyntactic and/or phonological variations
of such open questions, which are influenced by the speaker’s expectations. Such is the case
with negative yes/no questions.
216
The Grammar Book
NEGATIVE YES/NO QUESTIONS
Negative yes/no questions have a different orientation. In the following contrast,
Is Josh playing soccer this year?
Isn't Josh playing soccer this year?
the first question is neutral with regard to speaker expectations, but the negative question
signals that the speaker has reason to believe that something he or she had previously thought
was true might not be so. Here, in using the negative question, the speaker is signaling that he
or she expected that Josh would be playing soccer but, because of new evidence, now realizes
that this may not be true. The speaker may be hoping for a positive answer but not really
expecting one. Because the prior expectation tends to be aligned with the speaker’s wishes,
Quirk, Greenbaum, Leech, and Svartvik (1985) add that negative questions can express
disappointment or annoyance because the speaker’s earlier wishes or expectations now seem
not to be true any longer:
Aren't we going to the movies? (I thought we had planned to.)
Didn't you say that the test would be next week? (I thought that was what you had announced.)
Heritage’s (2002) study of news interviews finds that interviewers’ negative questions
are posed “under the auspices of an ideology of‘neutrality,’” (p. 1430), but in reality allow for
the interviewer to project an expected answer. Here is an example, adapted from Heritage,
from a presidential press conference on March 7, 1997, which took place between President
Bill Clinton and reporter Helen Thomas of บPI (2002, p. 1432):
Thomas: Mister President, in your zeal for funds during the last campaign, didn't you
put the Vice President and Maggie and all the others in your administration
top side in a very vulnerable position,
Clinton: I disagree with that. How are we vulnerable because...
President Clinton voices disagreement with Thomas’s question, indicating that he
interprets it not as a request for information so much as an assertion, which he rejects.
Admittedly, press conferences tend to be more confrontational than ordinary interactions,
but Heritage (2002) notes that in his data, such responses are recurrent in both British and
American English.
While not all negative questions are posed in an aggressive manner, responding to them
can create semantic problems for many ESL/EFL learners (Bevington, 1979). For example,
native speakers of most Asian and West African languages react to a negative yes/no question
in a literal manner in their own language—they agree or disagree with its form:
Don't you have bananas? \
[ No (we have bananas).
Speakers of English, on the other hand, react to negative yes/no questions as if they were
affirmative ones; i.e., as if they were disagreeing or agreeing with an implicit assertion:
Don't you have bananas? I y®s (พ6 d°>-
[ No (we don't).
While negative questions are not all that frequent in normal conversation, the
miscommunication that results from not understanding the underlying expectation may
warrant teaching ESL/EFL students how to reply to them. We should also mention that
Chapter 11: Yes/No Questions
217
Koshik (2002) showed that teachers’ questions do not have to be overtly marked as negative
to be interpreted as such. For instance, a teacher’s positive polarity question during a writing
conference with a student can be construed as a negative assertion; e.g., Is this the best way to
start your paper? Presumably, this “reverse polarity assertion” occurs elsewhere as well.
______________________________________________________________________________	...
FOCUSED yWoiíÊ^ "	~	"
So far we have been considering yes/no questions where the whole state, activity, or event is
being queried. Sometimes, however, yes/no questions can be more focused. A proposition may
be thought to be true in general, but one of its specific components—subject, verb, object,
adverbial—may be still in doubt. The uncertain element is then queried in a focused way.
Consider, for example, the following questions, where contrastive stress is used to mark the
focused elements (Given, 1993, pp. 247-248). Unlike unmarked yes/no questions, which are
open with regard to overall expectation, a focused question places an indeterminate element
in the focused position through the use of contrastive stress:
Did Megan play a practical joke on Pat? (or did someone else?)
Did Megan play a practical joke on Pat? (or only plan one?)
Did Megan play a practical joke on Pat? (or did she play something else, such as a trick?)
Did Megan play a practical joke on Pat? (or was it played on someone else?)
When an optional adverbial is present in the question, unless contrastive stress indicates
otherwise, the adverbial automatically attracts and focuses attention in yes/no questions
because of its final position in the clause. Thus, the following focused questions query the
adverbial:
,,,______1____. .1___1,. ....___,1.., 1 (or was it an accident?)
Did Megan play a trick on Pat deliberately! i ~ 1.,,	.
[ (*or did she not do it?)
_.J 11.______1____... ,___ท'., .	__,__, Í (or was it on Monday?)
Did Megan playa trick on Pat last Sunday? 17 ,.,1	,
7	'	[ (*or did she not do it?)
1-.,,,______1____. . ,____ . ...____Í (or was it somewhere else?)
Did Megan playa trick on Pat at the/no//?	1 7 1.,,	.
[ (*or did she not do it?)
That the interrogative focus is attracted to optional constituents is further supported by
the fact that when an optional adverbial is present, stressing the optional adverbial is natural.
In contrast, stressing another constituent in the clause is odd:
Did Megan play a trick on Pat deliberately? (or was it an accident?)
?Did Megan play a trick on Pat deliberately? (or did someone else do it deliberately?)
_____________________________________________________________
STATEMENT-FORM QUESTIONS__________________________________________________________
Subject-operator inversion does not always take place. In fact, uninverted statement-form
questions, marked simply with rising intonation, are common (Stivers, 2010). This type
of question is marked in the sense that the speaker who poses the question is anticipating
confirmation:
A: I just got back from San Francisco.
B: You had a good time there? (expecting confirmation)
B’s reply with accompanying rising question intonation suggests that B’s hunch was
that the answer would be “Yes.” Had B chosen instead to use the unmarked, neutral, inverted
question, we might assume that B had no expectation about what A’ ร reply would be:
218
The Grammar Book
A: I just got back from San Francisco.
ร: Did you have a good time? (uncertain expectation)
In addition, a negative uninverted question could reflect the fact that new information
has just been received that runs counter to an earlier expectation:
(Person A returns home early from a shopping trip)
ร: The stores weren't open late? (counter to earlier expectation)
A’s early return contradicts B’s expectation that A would be shopping until later.
Weber (1989) and Williams (1989) both report that uninverted questions are much more
common than one might suppose.4 In her analysis of face-to-face and telephone conversations,
Weber found that as many as 41 percent of all the questions in the data were either uninverted,
of the sort we have just considered, or nonclausal forms, such as the following (Weber, p. 181):
A·. I've got so much work that I don't believe it, so I'm just not thinking about that.
ร: เท school, you mean?
In this nonclausal example, B questions with a prepositional phrase plus the clause
tag you mean. Uninverted forms with rising intonation, with and without tags, serve as
comprehension checks, as we see in this example (Williams, 1990).
In addition to comprehension checks, nonclausal questions often function as “next turn
repair initiators” (Schegloff, Jefferson, & Sacks, 1977, p. 367). In conversation analysis, repair
refers to the efforts of participants to deal with trouble in hearing or understanding, and next
turn indicates that the repair occurs in the conversational turn after the “trouble source” turn.
Here is another example from Weber (1989, p. 170):
A·. What's the dark green thing?
ร: Pardon?
A·. What's this?
ร: That's Japanese eggplant.
In this example, B’s production of pardon, a next turn repair initiator, displays some
trouble with hearing or understanding A ร entire question. A recasts her somewhat modified
question. This time, its meaning is clear, and B responds to the question. Williams (1989)
contributes evidence from her own investigation that full clausal uninverted questions also
function as clarification requests.
One variation of a statement-form question is an echo question, which simply repeats, or
modifies in some minor fashion, a previous utterance with rising intonation. If the intonation
is rising, as it is for unmarked yes/no questions, then the purpose for using the echo question
would simply be to seek confirmation of the preceding speaker’s remark:
A·. My sister is going out with Lou.
ร: 1 s,ster ,s !■ going out with Lou? (seeking confirmation that the previous
L es J	remark has been understood)
If, on the other hand, the pitch of the intonation rises beyond the usual range, then
the echo question can express counterexpectation—surprise or disbelief (see VanderBrook,
Schlue, & Campbell, 1980, for further discussion):
(2)	(I (Zs
ร: Your sister is going out wjtfiLou?
Chapter 11: Yes/No Questions
219
_______________________________________________________.
SOME VERSUS ANY	'
The last point in our discussion of the meaning of yes/no questions has to do with the use
of the determiners some and any, a contrast that we encountered in the previous chapter on
negation. Many ESL/EFL grammar texts say that any is used in questions as well as negatives.
This is true with regard to open or unmarked questions such as:
Do you have any paper I can borrow?
However, we also saw in the chapter on negation that the weakly stressed some suggests a
positive quantity. It is, therefore, used in questions that in some way expect a positive answer,
such as with an offer:
(A waiter to a customer in a restaurant)
A: Would you like some dessert? (to encourage the answer "Yes")
Just as we mentioned in our discussion with negatives, we must be cautious, therefore,
about what we say about the distribution of some and any, as they can both occur with different
question types, depending on the meaning5 (partly based on Chalker, 1984, p. 15):
Is there some news? (expecting the answer "Yes")
Is there any news? (open or neutral question)
Isn't there some news? (Surely there is.)
Isn't there any news?	,____, K_______....
■1	, "___G>(| had hoped there would be.)
Is there no news? —'
Many of the issues that we have drawn attention to under the heading of meaning
relate to conducive questions and words that go with them, questions and words that convey a
questioner’s expectation or preference for a given answer. One word of caution is in order
here. When considering conduciveness, we are dealing with a context-based rather than
an absolute notion (Piazza, 2002). As Piazza advises in her study of the pragmatics of such
questions in academic discourse, to some extent the use of conducive questions can be
accounted for by the asymmetrical power balance in classrooms, where it is customary for
instructors to pose questions that have a preferred answer. The fact that we cannot regard
the use of conducive questions as purely a semantic matter leads US to a discussion on the
use of questions.
Issues of Use Concerning
Yes/No Questions
Recall that with use, we are attempting to answer the question: when speakers have two or
more question forms with the same meaning to choose from, which factors influence their
choice—that is, why do they prefer one form over another?
_______________________________________________________
THE USE OF^ÕRTÃNSWÍRS~~	~~~ ~
Earlier in this chapter, we discussed the form of standard short answers in English (Yes, it
is./No, it isn’t.). While these short-answer forms are worth teaching ESL/EFL students,
one should bear in mind that even these forms do not occur frequently as responses to yes/
no questions. In Richards (1977), replies to yes/no questions containing auxiliary or verb
repetition made up less than 20 percent of the written corpus and less than 10 percent of the
220
The Grammar Book
spoken English corpus. Similarly, in a discourse analysis of speech samples collected from a
wide variety of contexts, Winn-Bell Olsen (1980) found that standard short forms were used
rather infrequently by English speakers—in fact, only 8 percent of the time—as answers to
yes/no questions in her data (26 out of 329 instances).
Winn-Bell Olsen (1980) discovered that speakers were much more likely to answer
questions with a direct “Yes” (or its colloquial variants—e.g., Yup, Yeah, Uh huh) or a direct
“No” (or its variants—e.g., Nah, Nope, Uh uh, Not yet), each often followed by some sort of
expansion. Indirect affirmations, denials, or hedges (e.g., Does it make you uncomfortable to talk
about this problem? 1 guess maybe it does.) accounted for a rather large percentage of the answers
as well. Finally, a significant portion of the answers were formulaic sequences of confirmation
or denial (e.g., I doubt it). Since 23 out of 26 occurrences of standard short-form answers in
her data were found in conversations between strangers or in self-conscious speech, Winn-
Bell Olsen hypothesizes that the more distant the relationship between speakers or the more
uncomfortable the situation, the more frequently speakers tend to use standard short-form
answers.
STATEMENT FORM YES/NO QUESTIONS
The use of uninverted statement-form yes/no questions might also be said to relate to issues
of social familiarity or distance. Recall that uninverted questions are used when the speaker
expects confirmation. Using an uninverted question thus suggests that the person asking
the question knows the other person well enough to anticipate the other’s answer. Such
intimacy often may not exist, and the use of uninverted questions could then appear to be
presumptuous:
Worker to supervisor: You're going to the dance?
ESL students have been known to use uninverted questions with their teachers,
You're giving US a quiz on Thursday?
not realizing that their question can be seen to be presumptuous.
ELLIPTICAL QUESTIONS
At some point, teachers may want to teach their intermediate- and advanced-level students
about informal yes/no questions that occur without an initial operator. Such questions are
fairly frequent in informal conversations between speakers and are different from statement-
form yes/no questions, in that they are used with no expectation or no particular expression
of emotion:
(Are) You going to the movies?
(Has) She been feeling better?
(Do) You know Fred Callahan?
If you is the subject, it can also be deleted in most cases, along with the operator:
(Do you) Wanna study together?
In such questions, the operator and subject are optionally deletable because they are
recoverable from other grammatical and lexical information in the question and from the
discourse context. It would probably not be of high priority for your students to practice
using such elliptical yes/no questions, but they should develop comprehension of this form
and perhaps an ability to automatically supply the missing operator or operator and subject.
Chapter 11: Yes/No Questions
221
coNTRACTEFvERSUSllNCONTRACTÍFríÍGAflVEFlhrNEGAflVE QUESTIONS
In English negative yes/no questions, the negative may appear in both contracted and
uncontracted forms. Only the contracted form, however, may appear sentence-initially as
part of an operator:
Isn't it appropriate to ask?
Is it not appropriate to ask?
The question with the uncontracted negative after the subject is more formal than its
counterpart with a question-initial contracted negative.
In a usage study, Kontra (1981) has documented the occurrence in contemporary
English of uncontracted negative questions such as the following:
Is not linguistics a branch of psychology?
Here, the not appears before the subject in its uncontracted form. While such questions
do occasionally occur, we view this type of question as a stylistically formal and somewhat
archaic vestige of an earlier stage of English. Such a question, Kontra believes, is used when
the speaker is inviting the listener to agree with the speaker’s assumption that the expressed
proposition is self-evidently true. One example he cites is the following excerpt from a
discussion in the British Parliament (Kontra, 1993, p. 340):
Is not it an outrage that the Minister has not even tried to answer the question?...
Does not the Minister think that he has a duty to tell people the facts before they vote?
This word order would be unusual in North American English.
THE USE OF AREN'T AS A GAP-FILLER
A final note on contracted negative yes/no questions concerns the lexical gap that occurs in
the first person singular. All of the following are acceptable contracted negative questions and
short answers:
Isn't he/she/it?	He/she/it isn't.
Aren't we/you/they?	We/you/they aren't.
However, we cannot contract the verb be and the not in I am not unless we use the
nonstandard I ain’t. What speakers of English do in negative yes/no questions (but not in short
answers) is to substitute are for am and contract. Thus:
.	[I am not.
Aren 11?
I'm not.
This illogical gap-filler arose because there were strong social and educational stigmas
against the use of ain ’t. Aren’t I? is mainly a colloquialism, but it may puzzle ESL/EFL students
when they encounter it; so you should be prepared to explain why sometimes aren’t is used
with the first person singular pronoun in negativeyes/no questions.
SOCIAL FUNCTIONS	______________________________________________
Up to now, we have been dealing with questions whose function is primarily to seek new
information or to clarify or confirm given or shared information. Yes/no questions can perform
a number of other functions, of course. You have already seen in Chapter 8 how questions
with modal forms can be used in requests for assistance:
Can I get a ride home with you? (direct request)
222
The Grammar Book
As we also saw in the chapter on modals, the past-tense form of can softens this a bit:
Could I get a ride home with you? (less direct)
An even more polite form of request uses an embedded question (about which we have
more to say in Chapter 33):
I wonder if I could get a ride home with you. (least direct, therefore most polite)
You also saw in Chapter 8 \iow yes/no question forms could be used in making offers or
invitations:
Would you like to sit for a while?
They can also be used as directives:
Would you please stand up straight?
as reprimands:
Aren't you a little old to be doing that?
as complaints:
Have you ever stayed home all day with a two-year-old?
and many other functions. Clearly, the function of a yes/no question is going to depend on
the context and the speaker’ร intention, but it may also be clear why Heritage (2002) (see
also Raymond, 2003) called questions “a form of social action” (p. 1427). Systemic functional
linguistics, too, views questions as devices for expressing interpersonal meanings (Crawford
Camiciottoli, 2008, p. 1217).
IN WRITTEN ACADEMIC TEXTS ___________________________________________________
Of course, it is not just in oral discourse that students will encounter questions. According
to Thompson (2001), questions in academic texts assign readers and writers roles. 'Typically,
the questioner role is assigned to the reader, and the writer takes on the role of the answerer.
Questions are designed to draw readers into a text and to manage the flow of information.
Indeed, based on his corpus study, Hyland (2002) ascribes three functions to questions in
textbooks: “to frame the discourse (signaling the issues to be dealt with), to organize the
text (explicitly introducing new topics and often using metalanguage such as question or
topic), and to set up claims (stimulating thought and anticipating an affirmation)” (Crawford
Camiciottoli, 2008, p. 1218).
Conclusion
As we have indicated, a challenge for beginning ESL/EFL students is to learn about
inversion in yes/no questions—both the syntactic rules and the social conditions in which
they are appropriate. Because the do operator is not a morpheme with many equivalents in
the languages of the world, its use in yes/no questions may require some special attention.
Students may also need some understanding of how to respond to yes/no questions,
particularly negative yes/no questions. Finally, we should remember that not all yes/no
questions are inverted. As you have seen in this chapter, many conversationalyes/no questions
are uninverted, elliptical, or nonclausal in form. While you might not specifically teach
ESL/EFL students to produce these forms, students may be confused, and you may need to
help them comprehend their use.
Chapter 11: Yes/No Questions
223
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form. To expose students toyes/no questions before they are asked to form them on their
own, surveys can be used. Surveys in which students learn something about themselves
and their classmates work well. Depending on the ages and backgrounds of your students,
you can use various survey themes: for example, health habits (Do you exercise?), eating
habits (Do you eat rice for breakfasti), or learning strategies (Do you speak English with your
friends'?). You can give students a survey form that you have prepared or they can create
one with you. They then complete the survey themselves and ask the questions of one or
more other students.
2.	Form. To introduce inversion in sentences containing an auxiliary verb or be, you
can show students a sentence with each word written out on a card. Then substitute a
question-mark card for the period card and move the first auxiliary verb or be verb card
to sentence-initial position.
Later, in order to introduce students to the formation of yes/no questions without an
auxiliary verb or be, you will need to place a |DO| card at the front of a sentence after
substituting a question mark card for the period card. For example:
Next, you can explain to students that the do verb carries the tense for the question. This
can be demonstrated by replacing the I DO Icard with|pip|and the| ATE Icard with I eat] after
substituting the m for the m Thus:
® I DO I I JOHN I I ATE I I THE I I APPLE I Φ (D
๏ ซ้
I DID I	I EAT I
Cards could also be used to show that the do carries the tense and person markings with
the simple present tense:
(D IJOHN I IÊÃÊI [ริ] lAPPLES I 
(2)	Substitute m for the period'at the end of the sentence and introduce |DO I to the front.
(3)	Show that the m of eats gets moved to the initial I DO I by moving the m from its
position after I EATS I to a position following [do |. Immediately replace [do] โริ] with a new
card I DOES I explaining that rewriting do plus third person singular present as does is a
convention in English.
224
The Grammar Book
After several examples have been done, you might have volunteers come up and practice
forming questions by moving and substituting the cards. To give students additional
practice, prepare (or have students prepare) pieces of paper with the words, question
marks, and morphemes for pairs of students to manipulate at their desks. These can be
exchanged with other pairs for more practice.
z. Form. Guessing games can give students good practice in both asking and responding to
meaningful questions.
a.	For example, the game “Twenty Questions” provides an engaging way to practice
forming and answering yes/no questions. The rules are simple. Someone thinks of an
animal (including human beings), a vegetable (any living nonanimal), or a mineral
(anything inanimate). The other players then can use up to 20 yes/no questions in
an attempt to guess what the person is thinking of. If they can’t guess after using all
20 questions, the person wins.
A more concrete version for younger learners would be to have someone put
an object in a paper bag, out of sight of the other players. They then get 20 yes/no
questions to guess what is in the bag. For example:
Teacher: I have put something in this bag. Try to guess what it is, using questions that
can be answered only with a yes or no.
Student ไ: Is it round?
Teacher: Yes, it is.
Student2: Is it hard?
Teacher: No, it isn't.
students: Is it a ball?
Teacher: No, it isn't.
Student 4: Can we eat it?
Teacher: No, you can't.
The person who guesses correctly can be the person to hide the next object. If students
are in the early stages of learning to form yes/no questions, you may want to restrict
the questions to those with modals and the be verb. Also, if they are beginners, they
might need some help from you in accurately forming the questions they want to ask.
b.	Another guessing game that encourages the use of yes/no questions is “What’s My
Line?”, in which members of the class select occupations for themselves and the rest
of the class must try to guess the occupation.
c.	A similar game is one in which students play “Who Am I?”, where a class member
pretends to be a well-known contemporary or historical figure. The other members of
the class askyes/rao questions to guess the identity of the figure.
4. Form. Each student is given an assignment on a card. The assignment is to find someone
in the class who is characterized by the particular trait written on the card. For example,
one card might say, Find someone who can play the drums. Another might say, Find someone
who is a good cook. Students must ask each otheryes/no questions to find at least one person
in the class for whom the trait is true.
Chapter 11: Yes/No Questions
225
ร. Form. Getting students to ask each other questions about their backgrounds, academic
majors, hobbies, favorite foods, and so on can be useful for practicing questions and
helping students to get to know one another better. One of the techniques of the method
“Suggestopedia” that encourages fluency is to have a student pose a question and then
toss a large inflatable ball to another student. That student catches the ball, answers the
question (if possible with a contraction), poses another question, and tosses the ball to a
third student.
Student 1: Are you from Mexico? (tossing the ball to S2)
Student2: (catching the ball) No, I'm not. I am from Guatemala.
Student2: Do you study engineering? (tossing the ball to S3)
students: (catching the ball) Yes, I do.
students: Do you enjoy videogames? (tossing the ball to 54)
Student 4: (catching the ball) No, I don't.
For students with a low level of proficiency in English, this same activity can be done in
a chain-drill form, in which the same question is asked of and answered by every student
in the room, one by one, thereby creating a chain; for example:
Student 1: Are you from Mexico?
students: No. I'm not. I am from Guatemala.
students: Are you from Vietnam?
students: No, I'm not. I am from Laos.
students: Are you from Morocco?
Student 4: Yes, I am.
Working on questions with third person subjects would also be valuable. You might teach
some formulaic responses at the same time. For example:
Teacher: Is he from Mexico?
Student 1:1 don't know./l think so./l don't think so.
6.	Form. Sometimes reciting verse or poetry can be a pleasant way to practice the
intonation and grammatical form of yes/no questions. Of course, the verse would have
to be something that could be made comprehensible to students. Several of Christina
Rossetti’s poems make repeated use of yes/no questions. They lend themselves to reading
aloud in pairs or groups—one can ask the question, the other can answer it.
7.	Meaning. Ίο give students the necessary practice in asking and answering negative
yes/no questions as native speakers of English do (responding to the presupposition, not
the form), you can tell students a short story twice. During the second telling, change a
few of the details. The students’ task is to listen to the story intently and, after you have
told each versionfonce, to use focused negative yes/no questions to ask about details in the
second telling that did not coinside with the first. For instance:
(First story)
Teacher: A man walked out the front door and tripped over his son's wagon. He scolded
his son and told him to put the wagon in the garage. The boy did this. A while
later, the man went into the garage and tripped over his son's wagon again.
(Second story)
Teacher: A man walked out the back door and tipped over his son's bicycle. He scolded
his son and told him to put the bicycle in the shed. The boy did this. A week
later, the man went into the shed and tipped over his son's bicycle again.
226
The Grammar Book
Student ไ: Wasn't it the front door?
Teacher: Yes, it was.
Student2: Wasn't it a wagon?
Teacher: Yes, it was.
students: Didn't the father trip over the wagon?
Teacher: Yes. he did.
Student 4: Wasn't it a day later?
Teacher: No, it wasn't.
Students will need to make up and tell their own versions of two stories to receive practice
in answering the focused negative yes/no questions of their classmates.
8.	Use. To give students practice in using yes/no questions in making polite requests, have
students write down five requests they would like to make. They should each then make
the request of another student in the class. The second student should agree to comply
with the request only if it is in a polite form. For example:
Student ไ: Hey, Pablo, can I have some scrap paper?
students: Sorry. No.
Student ไ: Pablo, could I borrow some scrap paper, please?
students: Sure. Here's some.
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1.	Provide original example sentences that illustrate the following concepts:
a. unmarked yes/no question	g. focused yes/no question
b. negative yes/no question	h. standard short-form answer
c. some in a yes/no question	i. formulaic short answer
d. uncontracted negative	j. yes/no question with phrasal
yes/no question	modal and do
e. yes/no question with do	k. echo question (showing surprise)
f. statement-form question	1. elliptical yes/no question
2.	Draw the trees and arrows for the following guestions:
a.	Was she in class on Friday?	c. Will her brother come to the party?
b.	Did he write the letter?	d. Have you been living in Tampa?
3.	What rules have been violated as the following guestions were formed?
a.	*Do she went?	c. *Runs he fast?
b.	*Could have he gone?	d. *Do they be happy?
4.	What do negation and yes/no question formation have in common?
Chapter 11: Yes/No Questions
227
Test your ability to apply what you know.
5.	An ESL/EFL student has said one of the following. You can understand the meaning
they intend. What guidance could you give concerning the form?
a.	*Saw you the movie?	c. *Is not she intelligent?
b.	*Did you threw the ball?	d. A: Do you like ice cream? B: *Yes, Hike.
6.	We have chosen to place the chapter on negation before this chapter on yes/no
question formation. Some ESL/EFL student materials do not do this. What are some
arguments for teaching them in the order that พ6 do here? Also, brainstorm ways to
get students to ask questions. It is not as easy to do because it is usually teachers who
do the asking.
7.	You have a student who never inverts yes/no questions but simply uses an uninverted
question with question intonation. When you tell him that he should invert, he replies
that he often hears native speakers use uninverted questions. What would you say to
this student?
8.	An old joke arises from the fact that yes/no questions can serve more than one
function. A wants to know the time and sees that B is wearing a wristwatch.
A: Do you have a watch?
B: Yes. (and keeps on walking)
Explain the misunderstanding.
Bibliography
REFERENCES	'
Bevington, G. (1979). On being a negative ESL teacher. TESOL Newsletter, 13(2), 20-22.
Bolinger, D. (1978). Yes/no questions are not alternative questions. In H. Hiz (Ed.), Questions (pp. 87-105).
Dordrecht, Netherlands: Reidel.
Chalker, ร. (1984). Current English grammar. London, England: Macmillan.
Crawford Camiciottoli, B. (2008). Interaction in academic lectures vs. written text materials: The case of
questions .Journal of Pragmatics, 40, 1216-1231.
Couper-Kuhlen, E. (2012). Some truths and untruths about final intonation in conversational questions. In
J. p. de Ruiter (Ed.), Questions. Formal, functional, and interactional perspectives (pp. 123-145). Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Cruttenden, A. (1986). Intonation. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
de Ruiter, J. p. (Ed.). (2.Q12). Questionsะ Formal, functional, and interactional perspectives. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Givón,T. (1993). English grammar: A function-based approach (Vol. 2). Amsterdam, Netherlands/Philadelphia,
PA: John Benjamins.
Hedberg, N., Sosa, J. M., & Gõrgülü, E. (To appear). The meaning of intonation in yes-no questions in
American English. A corpus study..Qorpus Linguistics and Linguistic Theory.
Heritage, J. (2002). The limits of questioning: Negative interrogatives and hostile question content. Journal
of Pragmatics, 34,1427-1446.
Heritage, J., & Raymond, G. (2012). Navigating epistemic landscapes: Acquiescence, agency, and resistance
in responses to polar questions. In J. p. de Ruiter (Ed.), Questions: Formal, functional, and interactional
perspectives (pp. 179-192). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
228
The Grammar Book
Heritage, J., Robinson, J., Elliott, M., Beckett, M., & Wilkes, M. (2007). Reducing patients’ unmet concerns
in primary care: The difference one word can make. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 22, 1429-1433.
Hyland, K. (2002). What do they mean? Questions in academic writing. Text, 22, 529-557.
Kontra, M. (1981). On English negative interrogatives. In J. E. Copeland & p. พ. Davis (Eds.), The seventh
LACUS forum 1980 (pp. 412-431). Columbia, SC: Hornbeam Press.
Kontra, M. (1993). Do not people say such things? In V Becker Makkai (Ed.), The twentieth LACUS forum
1993 (pp. 333-344). Chapel Hill, NC: The Linguistic Association of Canada and the United States.
Koshik, I. (2002). A conversation analytic study of yes/no questions which convey reversed polarity
assertions .Journal of Pragmatics, 34, 1851-1877.
Long, M. (1981). Questions in foreigner talk discourse. Language Learning, 31(1), 135-157.
Ortega, L. (2009). Understanding second language acquisition. London, England: Hodder Education.
Piazza, R. (2002). The pragmatics of conducive questions in academic discourse. Journal of Pragmatics, 34,
509-527.
Pienemann, M-, Johnston, M., & Brindley, G. (1988). Constructing an acquisition-based procedure for
second language assessment. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 10, 217-243.
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, ร., Leech, G., & Svartvik, J. (1985). A comprehensive grammar of the English language.
London, England: Longman.
Richards, J. (1977). Answers to yes/no questions. English Language Teaching Journal, 31(2), 136-141.
Raymond, G. (2003). Grammar and social organization: Yes/no interrogatives and the structure of
responding. American Sociological Review, 68(6), 939-967.
Schegloff, M., Jefferson, G., & Sacks, H. (1977). The preference for self-correction in the organization of
repair in conversation. Language, 33(2), 361-382.
Stivers, T. (2010). An overview of the question-response system in American English conversation. Journal
of Pragmatics, 42,2772-2781.
Thompson, G., (2001). Interaction in academic writing: Learning to argue with the reader. Applied
Linguistics, 22, 57-78.
Todeva, E. (1991). Language change factors in a broader perspective. In N. Boretzki, พ. Enninger,
B. Jebing, & Th. Stolz (Eds.), sprachwandel undseine Prizipien (pp. 71-85). Bochum, Germany:
Universitatsverlag Dr. N. Brochmeyer.
Ultan, R. (1978). Some general characteristics of interrogative systems. In J. H. Greenberg (Ed.), Universals
of human language (Vol. 4, pp. 211-248). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
VanderBrook, ร., Schlue, K., & Campbell, c. (1980). Discourse and second language acquisition of yes-no
questions. In D. Larsen-Freeman (Ed.), Discourse analysis in second language research (pp. 56-74). Rowley,
MA: Newbury House.
Waring, z. H. (2012). “Any questions?”: Investigating the nature of understanding-checks in the language
classroom. TESOL Quarterly, 46(4), 722-752.
Weber, E. (1989). Varieties of questions in English conversation: A study of morphosyntax in declarative and
nonclausal forms (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Williams, J. (1989). Yes/no questions in ESL textbooks and classrooms. IDEAL, 4, 149-156.
Williams, J. (1990). Another look at yes/no questions: Native speakers and nonnative speakers .Applied
Linguistics, 11(2), 159-182.
Winn-Bell Olsen, J. (1980, February). In search ofY/N S-AUX:A study of answers to yes-no questions in English.
Paper presented at the 6th Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society, Berkeley, CA.
Zhu, c., & พน, X. (2011). A study of yes/no questions in English and Chinese: With special reference to
Chinese EFL learners’ understanding of their forms and functions. Journal of Pragmatics, 43, 632-647.
Chapter ใ ใ ะ Yes/No Questions
229
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
For discussion of interrogativos in other languages, see:
Saddock, J. (2012). Formal features of questions. In J. p. de Ruiter (Ed.), Questions-. Formal, functional, and
interactional perspectives (pp. 103-123). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
For a discussion of whether subject-auxiliary inversion is purely a form-based rule or is instead motivated by
semantic or pragmatic factors, see:
Borsley, R. D., & Newmeyer, F. (2009). On subject-auxiliary inversion and the notion “purely formal
generalization.” Cognitive Linguistics, 20(f), 135-143
Goldberg, A. (2006). Constructions at work: The nature of generalization in language. Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press.
Goldberg, A., & Del Giudice, A. (2005). Subject-auxiliary inversion: A natural category. Linguistics Review,
2(4), 411-428.
For a functional classification of questions, see:
Tsui, A. (1992). A functional description of questions. In M. Coulthard (Ed.), Advances in spoken discourse
analysis (pp. 89-110). London, England: Routledge.
For pedagogical activities, see:
Firsten, R. (2008). Grammar connection: Structure through content 2. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
O’Sullivan, J. K. (2007). Grammar connection: Structure through content 1. Boston, MA: Heinle,
Cengage Learning.
Wisniewska, I., Riggenbach, H., & Samuda, V (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 2
(4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Endnotes
1.	However, there are many other ways to answer a yes/no question. See, for example, Heritage and
Raymond (2012).
2.	It can be done, though, in British English with the main verb have, as in Have you the time? and in some
lexicalized sentence stems in American English, such as Have you any idea... ?
3.	It should be acknowledged that there is no unique question intonation, although some tones may be
more common in questions than others (Cruttenden, 1986, p. 59).
4.	Of the 637 questions in Weber's data, 108 were uninverted forms and 153 were nonclausal forms.
5.	We single out some and any as determiners in this section in order to correct a misapprehension about
some being used only in statements and any only in questions. The same point that we are making here
applies also to related forms; e.g., in pronouns (Has anybody/somebody seen the keys?) and in adverbs
(Areyou going anywhere/somewhere?). Indeed, Heritage, Robinson, Elliott, Beckett, and Wilkes (2007)
report that patients are more likely to Report their health concerns when medical practitioners ask them,
"Is there something else you would like to address in the visit today?" than if something is replaced by
anything.
230
The Grammar Book
Introduction
In Chapter 2, we introduced the three main moods for English sentences: declarative
(sometimes called indicative), interrogative, and imperative. In Chapter 5, we examined the
basic word order of declarative sentences, and in Chapter 11, we did the same for yes/no
questions, one form associated with the interrogative mood. Obviously, there is a great deal
more to say about these two main sentence moods; however, before we do this, it is time to
introduce the final main sentence mood—the imperative. In Chapter 2, we also made the
point that there are a number of syntactic ways that the communicative function of “getting
someone to do something” can be accomplished; nevertheless, the sentence type that is
normally associated with the imperative mood is the command:
Sign here. Take a seat.
Although not all languages have separate imperative types for commands (Aikhenvald,
2010), those languages in the world that do, tend to display a number of common properties
(Jary & Kissine, 2014). For instance, all languages allow null or zero subjects in imperatives
(Mauck & Zanuttini, 2005).
Indeed, when we examine imperatives in English, we are struck by the fact that there
is no obvious (overt) subject noun phrase. While it is not impossible for imperatives to have
subjects, as we will see later in this chapter, sentences without subjects would seem to be in
violation of one of our fundamental phrase structure rules, which indicates that every English
sentence must have both a subject (i.e., an NP) and a predicate.
Another idiosyncrasy of imperatives is that they are tenseless and take no modals. Notice
that to capture this fact, our phrase structure rule for the auxiliary offers a choice between
tense/modal and -imper:
AUX —» |M
(pm) (-perf) (-prog)
-imper
This rule also indicates that -imper occurs with no pm, -perf, or -prog. While this is true
for the most part, it is possible, though not common, to have an imperative with progressive
aspect:
Be watching tomorrow night for the conclusion to the show.
We must also address the question, “When is it appropriate to use imperatives in
English?” The traditional answer to this question, offered in many ESL/EFL texts, is that
231
imperatives are used when there is a status difference between the speaker and listener such
that the speaker has the power to order or command the listener to do something. For
example, the military officer is often portrayed as “barking commands” at service personnel
of lesser rank, using imperatives such as “Listen up!”
Given our attempt in this teacher’s course to be comprehensive, we intend to show
that the status difference between speaker and listener is not the primary factor that
determines when imperatives are used. The late rock idol Elvis Presley’s plea “Love me
tender” seems a far cry from a military bark; nonetheless, his plea and the military order
above share a common syntactic form. Sociolinguistic factors and corpus linguistic results
governing the meaning and use of imperatives are investigated, following our analysis of
their form.
The Form of Imperatives
You have just seen how the fact that most imperatives are subjectless presents US with a
dilemma as far as our phrase structure rule for a sentence goes. Of course, we could modify our
phrase structure rule for a sentence by putting parentheses around the รบBJ, thus signifying
its optionality. However, our intuition tells US that a subject actually does underlie imperative
sentences; it’s just that it does not usually get expressed.
Traditional grammarians have referred to the underlying subject of imperative sentences
as the “understood you.” In other words, the subject of an unmarked form of an imperative is
the second person singular or plural subject pronoun, you:
(You) listen up!
While such an explanation is intuitively satisfying, we can go even further and use
syntactic evidence to corroborate the traditional grammarians’ assertion that an understood
you is the subject of an imperative. Although we do not fully examine reflexive pronouns
until Chapter 16, suffice it to say here that the object of a reflexive verb must be identical in
reference to the subject of the same sentence; that is, in the following sentence, Aท'ท and the
reflexive pronoun herself are co-referential—they refer to the same person:
Ann prided herself on her accomplishments.
Now notice the form of the reflexive pronoun when it occurs in object position in an
imperative:
Watch yourself!	Watch yourselves!
Thus, this syntactic evidence supports our intuition that the subject of imperative
sentences is you. Mauck and Zanuttini (2005) broaden the subject category a bit by stating
that subjects of English imperatives refer to an addressee or a group containing the addressee, a
point to which we return later in this chapter.
Recall also that our phrase structure rule draws a sharp distinction between imperative
and nonimperative sentences baseTon the contention that imperative sentences are “tenseless.”
The strongest evidence in favor of this analysis are those imperatives formed with the copula be:
You be quiet! Be on time!
If these sentences had a “present tense” instead of an -imper auxiliary in their basic
structure, we would expect to find the second person form of the copula be:
*Are quiet.
Since such strings do not occur as imperatives, we can assume that imperatives do not contain
a tensed auxiliary. Most do not have an overt subject either, but since some do, we will posit
232
The Grammar Book
“you” as tie subject of imperative sentences, which in most cases, gets deleted. Here is the
tree for Be quiet.
Be quiet.
SUBJ
fip
ร
PRED
AUX
VP
-imper
pro
F
—subject deletion
cop
be
AP
AÓJ
quiet
The copula be used in affirmative imperatives is not really stative because here, it means
something like “become” (e.g., Be strong.) or “act like” (e.g., Be a dear and get me something to
drink.). We cannot use copula be with its stative meaning in imperatives (e.g., *Be thin.). Other
normally stative verbs can be used in the imperative mood when they have a more dynamic
meaning and when the subject can be seen to be an agent of the action, such as Love it or leave
it or when they are in the negative: “Don’t believe that pack of lies” (Bolinger, 1977, p. 166).
NEGATIVE IMPERATIVES
With Do
Negative imperatives are somewhat more complicated than their affirmative counterparts.
Three types of negative imperatives occur:
1.	Don't you run! (contracted negative; subject present)
2.	Don't run! (contracted negative; subject absent)
3.	Do not run! (uncontracted negative; subject absent)
A fourth combination, with an uncontracted negative and subject present, does not occur:
4. *Do
not you
you not
run!
With Be
In a departure from our earlier observation in the chapter on negatives, and again in the one
on yes/no questions, we note here that, in contrast, imperatives with be require the addition of
the operator do:
1.	Don't you be late!
2.	Don't be late!
3.	Do not be late!
4. *Do
not you
you not
be late.
Chapter ใ 2; Imperatives
233
A final observation is that it is also possible to produce a negative imperative by using
the preverbal adverb of frequency, “never,” in initial position without the do verb:
Never be late again! (Don't you ever be late again!)
THE SUBJECT OF IMPERATIVES.· ITS RETENTION AND ITS DELETION.....
Earlier in this chapter, we made the case for imperatives having second person subjects; that
is, the command is directed at some “you” the speaker is addressing.1 Here, we want to be
specific about when to use you in English imperatives—and when not to.
As you have seen, when we use an imperative without a subject, we might be addressing
one or more persons. If we want to make it clear that we are speaking to someone in particular,
we can add an unstressed you (e.g., You take care.'). For the same reason, you is also often
retained when one is giving instructions to a particular child and wants to be explicit, such as
saying, “You come here” (with a gesture to indicate which child). To further reduce ambiguity,
a vocative (the addressee’s name in this example) can also be used before the imperative, such
as, “Mr. Holmes, you sit over there.” Notice that you is still the subject of this imperative,
with Mr. Holmes having the distinctive rising-falling intonation of English vocatives. It is also
possible to move the vocative to the end of the sentence, “You sit over there, Mr. Holmes.”
Unlike these other examples, if the you subject is being stressed, annoyance is conveyed; for
example: “You cut that out!”
Related to the issue of addressee is a special kind of imperative called the diffuse imperative.
Diffuse imperatives are directed at anyone and everyone who is present:
Somebody open the door, (somebody = one of you here)
Don't anybody leave! (not + anybody = none of you here)
Note that diffuse imperatives would be inappropriate if two people were conversing.
A lone speaker, however, who is addressing an imaginary or wished-for audience can use a
diffuse imperative (e.g., Somebody help me!). Note that diffuse imperatives are different from
more specific imperatives that begin with a vocative, which gives the name of the person
being addressed:
Mac, open the door.
In such cases, you can also occur, as we have just seen:
Mac, you open the door.
However, this cannot be done with diffuse imperatives because their subjects are indefinite
third person pronouns, not the definite second person pronoun:
"Somebody, you open the door.
ELLIPTICAL IMRERAT^	~
As in other constructions that you have seen, imperatives can be used in truncated fashion
in normal conversational interaction. Kuehn (1993) reported the following for three hours
of transcribed conversation among employees and between the supervisor and employees
in a dishwashing room of a small-town college: of the 2 5 imperatives that occurred, fewer
than half (11) were in their full form. For the 14 others, verbs or objects were deleted.
Deletion was especially prevalent where an object was being held or something was being
demonstrated.
234
The Grammar Book
Kuehn (1993) offers the following examples:
Trays! (Put your trays on the conveyor belt.)
These two. (Put these two trays together.)
Switch! (Switch garbage disposal covers with me.)
As Kuehn points out, for workers in a noisy work environment with a fairly standard work
routine, even elliptical imperatives with such deletions would be quite clear.
The Meaning of the Imperative
Using a cognitive linguistics approach, Takahashi (2012) proposes a schema that accounts for
the English imperative. In cognitive linguistics, a schema is an abstraction that is compatible
with all instances of the category it defines. Takahashi suggests for the English imperative, the
schema is very abstract: hypotheticality, second person subject, non-past, and a varying degree
of force exertion. The hypotheticality is especially evident in this example that Takahashi cites
from a newspaper article discussing the previous day’s baseball game (p. 3):
Put Randy Johnson on the mound, give him nine runs, and the Arizona Diamondbacks
become about as unbeatable as a team can get. (International Herald Tribune, April 25,2001)
In other words, the writer is not suggesting that this really be undertaken. The writer
is being hypothetical. As for the force exertion part of the schema, the degree of force is
calculated and interpreted in a particular context. According to Takahashi, only prototypical
imperatives manifest a high degree of force toward the addressee. In some cases, the directive
force is mild to say the least, e.g., answering someone’s request for directions. In other cases,
imperatives communicate just the opposite of a directive (Go ahead. Throw it. I dare you.—
said to someone holding a snowball). And, in still others, the conditional imperatives (e.g.,
Do that and you will be in trouble, it is clearly the case that the imperative can also evoke
non-directive meaning.
VERBS IN IMPERATIVE SENTENCES
Continuing along this same line of thought, we note that many of the verbs frequently used
in imperative sentences manifest a low degree of force exertion. In their study of verbs used
in imperative sentences in the ICE-GB corpus (the British component of the International
Corpus of English), Stefanowitsch and Gries (2003) found that there were certain verbs that
were most often used in imperatives. The five most common verbs were let, see, look, listen,
and worry, with worry appearing exclusively in the negative, i.e., Don’t worry. A consideration
of the semantics of these five verbs suggests that the imperative may be less often used to
direct others to do something for the sake of the speaker and more often as advice given by
the speaker to benefit the listener, or as Stefanowitsch and Gries put it, to ensure the future
cooperation and interaction of the speaker and listener (p. 233). Adding to this observation,
the list of verbs that Takahashi (2012) compiled overlaps somewhat with that of Stefanowitsch
and Gries. Takahashi extracted verbs from a corpus of American fiction and found that the
following verbs were most frequent: let’s, tell, let, and look. In order of frequency, these were
followed by: come, get, take, be, go, give, do, forget, listen, wait, and make. Given the prevalence of
let’s and let, we turn to consider these verbs next.
Chapter 12: Imperatives
235
LET'S	_
In addition to the imperatives discussed previously, grammarians describe an inclusive
imperative, an imperative that includes the speaker with the addressee(s):
Let's be quiet now.
Collins (2004) cites Ervin-Tripp’s (1976) observation that inclusive Zet-imperatives seem to
adopt a less authoritarian tone than an ordinary imperative, thereby reducing the latter’s
face-threatening nature:
Let's be quiet, (cf. Be quiet.)
Examining almost 10 million spoken and written words of British, American, Indian, New
Zealand, and Australian English, Collins reports that the inclusive let-imperatives exhibit a
number of distinctive grammatical properties, compared with ordinary imperatives:
•	They can be negated in two ways, without any apparent difference in scope:2
Let's not go.	Let's don't go.
•	Unlike ordinary imperatives that take the tags will you or won’t you, they take shall we as
a tag:
Let's think about the present, shall we? (LLC SI 0.1,707)
•	Let us is almost always contracted as let’s (97 percent in speech; over 60 percent in
writing).
Collins (2004) identifies another type of imperative with let, which he calls open let-
imperatives person (accounting for 83.6 percent of tokens):
But let it be clearly understood, the secret is inviolable. (ACE 802,321)
In this case, the proposition expressed by open let-imperatives defines a situation or event
which the speaker simply hopes for or presents as desirable or necessary.
Of these two special let-imperative constructions, inclusives are more than six times as
frequent as the open type. Furthermore, the former’s register distribution is very different,
with the inclusive construction more than three times as frequent in speech as in writing, and
the open construction more than three times more often in writing.
Collins (2004) identifies several functions of these two let-imperatives and ordinary
imperatives with let.
Expository Directives. These are typically used to guide the reader through an argument.
Presumably, they reduce the authoritarian tone of the imperative without let:
But let me remind you again how much more different things were in Russia. (LOB 368,85)
Remember again how much more different things were in Russia.
The expository directive นร^ was particularly common with inclusive let-imperatives
with uncontracted accounting for 61.4 percent of all tokens in the written corpora:
Now let us consider a few relatively common predators. (WC E04,207)
Fiat. In this category, let acts as a full lexical verb with the meaning of “allow”; i.e, an “ordinary
imperative” in Collins’s taxonomy:
Let A denote the operator cm L2 with domain D (A) and action. (ACE 321,4887)
Collins refers to Swales, Ahmad, Chang, Chavez, and Seymour’s (1998) summary: “such
imperatives are used to formulate hypotheses, to begin the establishment of a model, to start
the definition of a process, or to begin the statement of a theorem” (Swales et al., 1998, p. 106).
236
The Grammar Book
In Collins’s study, they accounted for 84/414, or 20.3 percent, of all ordinary imperatives with
let in the written corpora, occurring dominantly in the learned/scientific category (80/84, or
95.2 percent).
Hedges. A tactic used to buy the speaker more time to think:
UM (coughs) now let me see—well I'm quite fond of Durrell (LLC S3.1,177)
In the spoken corpora, this use accounted for 49/348, or 14 percent, of all ordinary imperatives
with let.
Comparing frequencies among the corpora, Collins (2004) found inclusive let’s to be
used most often in American writing and least in Indian, with British, Australian, and New
Zealand writing between the two extremes. On the other hand, open Zet-imperatives have
been in decline in written English in recent decades, with the sharpest decline occurring in
American English.
Collins (2004) attributes some of these changes to the linguistic process known
as bleaching—in which a word begins to lose its semantic meaning and take on more of a
grammatical role. In other words, in contrast to ordinary imperatives with let where let means
“allow,” the let in the other two imperatives mark either collaborative activity (inclusive let)
or a wish (open let).
IMPERATIvlT+l)EaARATIV^
Scontras and Gibson (2011) discuss a special imperative construction that consists of an
imperative clause followed by a declarative clause marked for the future, with the two clauses
joined in a single sentence with and:
Study hard, and you will pass the class.
It is also possible to have such a conjoined sentence with no imperative meaning:
Ignore your homework, and you will fail the class.
Assuming that failing a class is an undesirable outcome, the second statement cannot
be construed as a command to ignore homework. Instead, its meaning is that of a basic
conditional: If you ignore your homework, you will fail the class.
The two constructions, one with the meaning of an imperative and the other with that
of a conditional, behave differently. Scontras and Gibson (2011) recommend treating them as
grammatically distinctive or giving a pragmatic account of their differences.
The Use of Imperatives
FORM AND FUNCTION _____	~	~
At the risk of redundancy, we once again acknowledge that the form and function link between
imperatives and directives is not categorical—that is, one can command or, less forcefully,
request without using an imperative form:
Imperative: Help me, please.
Declarative: I need some help. I wonder if you could help me out.
Interrogative: Could/Can you give me a hand?
According to Takahashi (2012), the choice among these forms depends on the balance
between cost and obligation. Imperatives tend to be avoided if the cost to the addressee is
perceived to be too great or if the addressee is not obligated to comply (p. 11). Conversely,
Chapter 12: Imperatives
237
the following list illustrates some of the functions in addition to commands that imperatives
can be used for, depending on the situational context:
Offers: Have another biscuit.
Suggestions: Let's go to a movie tonight.
Requests: Close the door, please.
Advice: Don't forget Mother's Day.
Directions: Go left at the next corner.
Prohibitions: Do not pick the flowers.
Warnings: Watch out!
Procedures: Add a teaspoon of baking powder to the flour.
Invitations: Come in.
Threats: Don’t push your luck.
Wishes: Have a great day!
POLITENESS AND THE USE OF THE IMPERATIVES
With regard to the imperative mood, what advice might we be able to give ESL/EFL
students on when to use imperative sentences to give commands or to make requests and
when to use other forms? Carrell and Konneker (1981) found considerable agreement
among speakers and learners of English as to which forms were considered the most polite
in making requests. The forms varied among three dimensions: sentence mood (declarative,
interrogative, and imperative), presence or absence of a modal, and the tense used. Here is
their hierarchy of politeness, around which there was considerable native-speaker/nonnative-
speaker consensus:
Least Polite (most direct) A V Most Polite (least direct)	Imperative—elliptical	A glass of water.
	Imperative	Give me a glass of water.
	Declarative—no modal (พant/.need)	1 want a glass of water.
	Declarative—historically present tense modal3	I'll have a glass of water.
	Declarative—historically past tense modal	I'd like a glass of water.
	Interrogative—no modal	Do you have a glass of water?
	Interrogative—historically present tense . modal	Can you give me a glass of water?
	Interrogative-^rhistorically past tense modal	Could you give me a glass of water?
According to the subjects in Carrell and Konnecker’s (1981) study, sentence mood
contributes the most to the order of the politeness hierarchy: interrogative—most polite;
declarative—next most polite; imperative—least polite. Presence of modals contributes next
to politeness: modals don’t add much to the politeness of the already-very-polite interrogative,
but they do contribute more to the politeness of the not-as-polite declarative. Finally, if the
modal is in historically past tense, this adds a small additional degree of politeness.
238
The Grammar Book
Increasing the Politeness
While Carrell and Konnecker (1981) did not explicitly examine the politeness contribution
of please, it could be noted that the effect of adding please to an imperative does contribute to
its being more polite. Compare, for example,
Give me a glass of water.
to
Please give me a glass of water, or Give me a glass of water, please.
Notice that if there is a you subject, the addition of please seems odd:
"Please you give me a glass of water.
?You please give me a glass of water.
?You give me a glass of water, please.
Kindly can also be used to make an imperative more polite:
Kindly hand me the flashlight.
Another way to enhance the politeness of imperatives when they are used as offers,
wishes, or invitations is to use the do auxiliary verb, which makes the wish or offer more
emphatic:
Have a good time.	Come in.
Do have a good time.	Do come in.
In contrast to polite imperatives with please, imperatives with just add affect that can be
used with negative [as in Just (you) wait and see.], or positive (as in Just be patient; everything
will work out) imperatives.
On Politeness and Rudeness
To provide some balance here, we must also acknowledge that although we want to help
our students to be as polite in English as they want to be, we do not want to give ESL/EFL
students the impression that they should always opt for the most polite form possible. Beebe
(1996), for instance, advises teaching students how to be rude so that they can deal with
people appropriately when the situation calls for it—for instance, when they feel they are
being taken advantage of. Moreover, undue politeness can have a distancing effect of its own.
However, as Usó-Juan and Martinez-Flor (2008) have argued, given the face-threatening
nature of imperatives, it remains crucial to teach ESL/EFL students pragmatic norms as
well as appropriate mitigating devices when they use imperatives. Again, as we mentioned in
Chapter 1, whether the students use these depends on them.
We are not teaching conformity to uniformity—as if this were even possible—but we
do think that students should have information on which to base their decisions concerning
language use. Perhaps the rule of thumb here should be the principle that Ervin-Tripp (1982)
laid out with respect to the use of imperatives. It is not so much that a power differential
between speaker and listener conditions the use of an imperative; it is more the case that
imperatives are used when “cooperation is assumed.” For example, it can be assumed that a
private in the army will cooperate with an officer; accordingly, an imperative is appropriate. If
the cooperation of one’s peers can be assumed, imperatives are also appropriate. For instance,
telling someone to “Pass the catsup” at the dinner table is perfectly acceptable because there
is no reason to assume lack of cooperation. Of course, the use of please is almost always
appropriate (as parents are forever telling their children). To cite another example, when
giving a warning (such as Watch out!), cooperation can certainly be assumed. Most people
would prefer to receive such a warning in the shortest possible form, rather than a longer one
with all the politeness markers intact!
Chapter 12: Imperatives
239
THE USE OF IMPERATIVES IN ACADEMIC WRITING
Academic writing involves persuasion, which is often accomplished with the use of directives.
As we observed earlier, directives do not only take the form of imperatives. They can be
declarative statements with modals such as should and must. In addition, they can be constructed
with copula + predicative adjective (e.g., It is essential). They all are used by writers to direct
their readers to participate in the text in some way or perform some action outside it.
Hyland (2002) analyzed directives in a 2.5-million-word corpus of published articles,
textbooks, and L2 student essays. He identified three functions of directives:
•	Direct readers to some part of the text:
Refer to example 2.
•	Instruct readers to perform a physical act:
Set the sliding amplitude at 30 mm traveling distance.
•	Steer readers to certain cognitive acts (e.g., lead them through a line of reasoning):
Consider the Achilles paradox, (article on philosophy)
Note that B is dimensionless... (Mechanical engineering textbook)
By far, the most frequent in the textbook and research article categories, according to
Hyland’s (2002) analysis, were instances of the last one, from the cognitive category. It is also
noteworthy that the directives in the textbooks were often less imposing, using the inclusive
imperatives we will and let’s or let us:
Now, we'll look at some ways that retailing has changed. (Marketing textbook)
Let us multiply both sides of the equation by the Planck constant. (Physics textbook)
A further observation that Hyland (2002) made is that the use of directives differed across
disciplines and genres somewhat. For instance, in the “hard sciences” (e.g., physics), readers
are positioned through the use of directives to some cognitive act, using, for example, suppose,
consider, and note. Hyland attributes their use to the need for precision, tight space constraints,
and highly formalized argument structures, characteristics of the physical sciences,
offering scientists an economical way to cut to the heart of the matter (Swales et al., 1998).
The soft disciplines tended to use directives more for textual reference, although biology, a
hard science, also did this to a considerable extent. A study of term papers written by university
students also found a disciplinary bias, with students’ use of imperatives mirroring that of the
journal articles and research monographs in the respective disciplines (Neiderhiser, Kelley,
Kennedy, Swales, & Ver gar o, 2014).
Conclusion
Except for negative imperatives, the form of imperatives is perhaps less challenging than for
other moods because students need not concern themselves about typical verb morphology
problems such as tense/aspect and subject-verb agreement. Nevertheless, the subtle
distinctions among English imperatives suggest that students need guidance in using the
forms appropriately. Giving students help with understanding commands might be important
as well..Considering the variety of forms that are used to give a command, it is not surprising
that learners might not always understand them. Kuehn (1993) cites the example of the
nonnative speaker of English who did not recognize “Can you take this and load it?” as a
command from his supervisor, to which the nonnative replied that he didn’t know how. While
the worker was no doubt speaking honestly, Kuehn notes that the supervisor’s question was
240
The Grammar Book
not really a question, as this young and inexperienced employee seemed to think it was, nor
was it a polite request, as demonstrated by the fact that the supervisor next said, “Better learn! ”
Regarding use, helping students be as polite as they want to be without appearing obsequious
or standoffish is no easy feat. Whatever help ESL/EFL teachers can provide their students will
be valuable, whether in the form of direct instruction or feedback on their performance.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form. Asher (2009) has developed a methodology for teaching a second language
that he calls “Total Physical Response.” Within this methodology, the second language
learner carries out commands issued solely in imperative form in the target language by
the teacher. By gradually building up a repertoire of such constructions, the learner is
increasingly able to respond appropriately. We find that when students act out commands
as a first step in learning imperatives, it helps them associate the construction with an
action. Commands such as “Stand up,” “Turn around,” “Turn left,” “Turn right,” “Point to
the board,” “Sit down,” and so on could be taught from the very earliest days of instruction.
Later, to get practice in production, students can give commands with which the teacher
and the other students are asked to comply.
2.	Form. For practice in using both affirmative and negative imperatives, the class can play
a modified version of the children’s game “Simon Says,” in which students have to do
whatever is commanded unless the negative is present (note that the pace must be quick
in order to make this a bit of a challenge). Here’s an example:
Teacher: Simon says,"Stand up."(Students stand up.)
Teacher: Simon says, "Turn around." (Students turn around.)
Teacher: Simon says, "Don't sit down."
Anyone who sits down after this third command is eliminated from the game, which
continues until the class has one or two “winners” remaining.
This game can also give students practice in forming negative imperatives. After
students become more proficient in forming negatives, students can lead this modified
version of “Simon Says.”
3.	Meaning. To practice comprehension and then production of imperatives, the teacher can
ask students to follow certain procedures; later, students direct similar procedures. The
following exemplifies steps in an “operation” (a sequence of steps involving a tool or device):
a.	The teacher models a chain of commands and accompanying actions that perform an
operation. For example, an operation might be to use an ATM: “Insert your debit card
into the ATM; enter your PIN; select your language; enter the amount of money you
want; take your money; take your card; don’t forget the receipt.”
b.	The teacher repeats the operation once again, pantomiming the steps and giving the
commands.
c.	Students then perform the operation in response to commands from the teacher.
d.	Students give the directions to the teacher.
e.	Students give the directions to each other.
4.	Use. As we have pointed out in this chapter, students will need to learn when a request
is being made of them. This is particularly challenging when the syntactic form of the
Chapter 12: Imperatives
241
request seems to suggest that some other function is being communicated. To begin to
address this challenge, teachers might read a list of sentences (including interrogatives
and imperatives) to their students. After each one, students should respond not to the
form but to the function of the sentence. For example:
Teacher: Felipe, do you have a pen I can use?
Felipe should learn, of course, that this is a request to borrow a pen, not a request for
information. Thus, in this exercise, he should offer a pen to the teacher.
Teacher: Miguel, how do you like the weather here in Winnipeg?
Miguel needs to recognize that this is a request for information and respond accordingly—
“It’s cold.”
Teacher; Somebody, turn off the lights.
Here, everyone should attempt to comply—or at least those sitting near the light switches.
Teacher: Phiang, should you be chewing gum in class?
Phiang needs to know to take the gum out of his mouth.
ร. Use. To give students practice with polite commands, ask students to pair up, and give
each member of each pair a task that he or she will ask the other member of the pair to
do. Also assign each a role. For example, in the first pair, A is told that B is her friend and
that she wants B to help her with her homework. B is told that she is A’s friend and that
she would like A to give her a ride home after school.
The pair of students then role-play this simple interaction. Students are told to agree to
the other’s request only when they are satisfied that the other has been sufficiently polite.
For example:
A: Help me with my homework, please.
β; Sorry. I can't.
A: I need some help with my homework.
B: Sorry. 1 can't.
A: Could you please help me with my homework?
B;AII right/Okay/No problem/Certainly/Of course.
Notice that this sort of exercise also gives students practice in responding to the requests
that others make.
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1.	Provide original example sentences that illustrate the following concepts. Underline
the pertinent word(s) in your examples.
a. imperative
(i.) affirmative
(ท.) negative
d. let-imperative as an expository
directive
b. inclusive let-imperative
c. diffuse imperative
e.	elliptical imperative
f.	you retention
g.	imperative with please
h.	emphatic do to add politeness
242
The Grammar Book
2.	Draw tree diagrams for the following imperatives:
a.	Take a break.	b. Mix the dry ingredients in a bowl.
3.	Why are the following sentences ungrammatical?
a.	*She go away.	c. "Leaves the room.
b.	"Don't angry.	d. "Do not you take offense.
Test your ability to apply what you know.
4.	Review the syntactic arguments for claiming that imperatives are tenseless. Do
likewise for the syntactic arguments that underlying imperatives has an understood
you. See if you can explain these arguments in your own words.
5.	As you saw in the chapter on yes/no questions and as Schaffer (1993) points out, a
number of different types of sentences in colloquial, spoken English are subjectless,
such as the following:
Nice day.	(It's a nice day.)
Going to the party?	(Are you going to the party?)
Got too much work to do.	(I've got too much work to do.)
What is the difference between these subjectless sentences and the subjectlessness of
the imperative in English?
6.	Sometimes ESL/EFL teachers have difficulty convincing students to use imperatives
because the students believe that they are rude. What would you do to convince your
students that imperatives are often appropriate?
7.	We have discussed a number of ways through which imperatives can be made
more polite. List those that we have already mentioned, and then see if you can add
any more.
Bibliography
R E F E R E N c ES	~
Aikhenvald, A. Y. (2010). Imperatives and commands. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Asher, J. (2009). Learning another language through actions: The complete teacher's guidebook (7th ed.). Los
Gatos, CA: Sky Oaks Productions.
Beebe, L. (1996, November). Loose language: Pragmatic strategies for responding to rudeness. Paper
presented at the New York State TESOL Convention.
Bolinger, D. (1977). Meaning and form. London, England and New York, NY: Longman.
Carrell, p., & Konneker, B. (1981). Politeness: Comparing native and nonnative judgements. Language
Learning, 57(1), 17-30.
Collins, p. (2004). Let-imperatives in English. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 9(2), 299-319.
Ervin-Tripp, ร. (1976). Is Sybil there? The structure of some American English directives. Language in
Society, 5,25-66.
Ervin-Tripp, ร. (1982). Ask and it shall be given to you: Children’s requests. In H. Byrnes (Ed.), Georgetown
University round table on languages and linguistics (pp. 232-245). Washington, D.C.: Georgetown
University Press.
Hyland, K. (2002). Directives: Argument and engagement in academic writing. Applied Linguistics, 23(2),
215-239.
Chapter ไ 2: Imperatives
243
Jary, M., & Kissine, Μ. (2014). Imperatives. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Kuehn, K. (1993) Requests and commands in the workplace (Unpublished Linguistics 5741 term paper).
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
Mauck, ร., & Zanuttini, R. (2005). The subjects of English imperatives. In c. Brandstetter & D. Rus
(Eds.), Georgetown University working papers in theoretical linguistics (Vol. 4, pp. 53-85). Washington, DC:
Georgetown University Department of Linguistics.
Neiderhiser, J. A., Kelley, p., Kennedy, K. M., Swales, J. M., & Vergaro, c. (2014). “Notice the similarities
between the two sets ..Imperative usage in a corpus of upper-level student papers. Applied Linguistics
(advanced access), doi:10.1093/applin/amu017.
Schaffer, K. (1993). Subject omission in written English (Unpublished Linguistics paper). University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
Scontras G., & Gibson, E. (2011). A quantitative investigation of the imperative-and-declarative
construction in English. Language, 87(4), 817-829.
Stefanowitsch, A., & Gries, S.Th. (2003). Collostructions: Investigating the interaction between words and
constructions. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 8(2), 209-243.
Swales, J. M., Ahmad, บ., Chang, Y.-Y., Chavez, D., & Seymour, R. (1998). Consider this: The role of
imperatives in scholarly writing. Applied Linguistics, 19(1), 97-121.
Takahashi, H. (2012). ฟ cognitive linguistic analysis of the English imperative: With special reference to Japanese
imperatives. Amsterdam, Netherlands/Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Usó-Juan, E., & Martinez-Flor, A. (2008). Teaching learners to appropriately mitigate requests. English
Language Teaching Journal, 62(4), 349-357.
Zanuttini, R. (2008). Encoding the addressee in the syntax: Evidence from English imperative subjects.
Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, 26(1), 185-218.
SUGGESTIONS ΓοΙΤρΐίΐτίΓΪΠΕΑΈΕΑΡΠΪΟ^
For comparative language information with regards to imperatives, see:
Aikhenvald, A. Y. (2010). Imperatives and commands. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Jary, M.J & Kissine, M. (2014). Imperatives. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Kaufman, M. (2012). Interpreting imperatives. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer.
For additional ideas on using "operations" to practice imperatives, see:
Nelson, G., Winters, T, & Clark, R. (2004). Do as I say. Operations, procedures, and rituals for language
acquisition. Brattleboro, VT: Pro Lingua.
For classroom exercises on recognizing appropriate commands and requests, see:
Badalamenti, V, & Henner-Stanchina, c. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 1 (4th ed.).
Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Carlisi, K. (2008). Grammar connection: Structure through content 3. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
O’Sullivan, J. K. (2007). Grammar connection^tructure through content 1. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Endnotes
1.	There are, however, several other possible addressees for imperatives (see Zanuttini, 2008).
2.	Compare these with ordinary imperatives using let as a lexical verb (e.g., Don't let them vote and Let them
not vote), where the scope and the meaning of the negative is different.
3.	Carrell and Konnecker did not test for any distinction among the modal verbs themselves since the
hierarchy was based on syntactic rather than semantic markers. For the same reason, the use of please
and other lexical distinctions were also omitted from the hierarchy.
244
The Grammar Book
JW-Questions
Introduction
แ^-questions are important constructions to learn. They are used to request specific
information, so the need to use them arises often. For instance, ๗-questions are used in
social interaction (What’s your name?), for getting directions (Where’s the post office?), in
seeking explanations (Why is the plane late?), for learning vocabulary (What’s this?), and so
forth. Notice that while yes/no questions query an entire proposition, wh-questions are used
when the speaker is missing a specific piece of information:
Did someone walk the dog? (general query about the truth of the proposition)
Who walked the dog? (speaker is asking for the name of the person who walked the dog)
The missing information can warrant more than a simple reply, however. Fox and Thompson
(2010) distinguish between specifying ๗-questions, which we have just illustrated, and “telling”
๗-questions (What did you do today?), which may involve an extended reply. The nature of the
missing piece of information conditions the selection of the question word, which most often
begins with ๗: what, who, whose, which, when, why, where, and how (how being the exception when
it comes to spelling, although notice that who, whose, and how all begin with the /h/ sound).
Second language acquisition research tells US that English wh-questions, despite their
usefulness, are not acquired especially early. This is presumably due to their variety and to the
fact that English has two basic structures for ๗-questions—one requiring inversion and one
not. Thus, students struggle with inversion, and questions such as * Where you are going? are
common even at intermediate stages of proficiency.
It is also true, however, that some wh-questions are formed accurately by beginning language
learners, presumably because learners have encountered and internalized frequently occurring
questions as formulas or lexicalized units (e.g., How are you? Where are you from?). Because of
their usefulness and their frequency, we feel that wh-questions should be taught from the very
beginning of instruction, even if formulaically at first. Another challenge for ESL/EFL students is
comprehending wh-questions, an issue that we treat in the meaning section of this chapter. We also
address the use of questions in classroom discourse, a topic worthy of consideration by teachers.
The Form of kkh-Queslions
As we stated previously, there are really two fundamental issues to be aware of regarding the
form of ๗-questions. The first has to do with the variety of constituents that can be queried
with ๗-questions. The second has to do with the two basic word orders characteristic of
unmarked ๗-questions.
245
VARIETY OF CONSTITUENTS
Consider the following sentence:
Lee wrote an angry memo to his boss before he quit.
A variety of constituents in this sentence can be queried in a '๗-question:
Subject NP: Who wrote an angry memo to his boss before he quit? (Lee)
Object NP: What did Lee write to his boss before he quit? (an angry memo)
Object of the preposition: To whom did Lee write an angry memo before he quit?
(his boss)
Who(m) did Lee write an angry memo to before he quit?
(his boss)
Verb phrase: What did Lee do before he quit? (He wrote an angry memo to his boss.)
Determiner: Whose boss did Lee write an angry memo to before he quit? (his)
Adjective: What kind of memo did Lee write? (an angry memo)
Adverbial: When did Lee write the angry memo to his boss? (before he quit)
As can be seen, the scope of what is being asked for can range widely—from a whole verb
phrase, for instance, to one part of a noun phrase as small as a possessive determiner, for example. In
fact, we might almost say that ๗-questions are statements with an information gap. The fact that
English ๗-questions have the same intonation pattern as statements supports this contention:1
He’s going to the^o^.
Underlying a ๗-question is the assumption that some event or action has taken place
or some state of affairs exists. The proposition expressing this assumption forms the basis
for the tree. For example, the tree structure for a question where the information gap is
represented by the subject is as follows, with the Q marked ๗ to reflect its more limited
scope, as compared wixhyes/no questions:
Who wrote a memo to his boss before he quit?
Q -๗ SUBJ
V-.
PrepP
who
NP
-past write det N
prep NP
adv sub
AdvCl
a memo
to det N
before SUBJ
PRED
his boss
NP
AUX VP
pro
-past quit
246
The Grammar Book
Here’ร another one, where the information gap for this question exists in the object NP:
What did Lee write to his boss before he quit?
ร
sm
ร
Q-wh SUBJ
NP	AUX	VP	ADVL	ADVL
N		V NP	PrepP	AdvCl
Lee	-past	write what	prep to det N his boss	adv sub	ร before SUBJ PRED NP	AUX	VP pro	T	V he	-past	quit
TWO BASK WORD^iRlSFRsT^irBJifcT^i^QilJIESTIONS^
VERSUS PREDICATE ^QUESTIONS
Notice the fundamental difference between the two previous example questions. The first
one is straightforward. Since it is the subject that is being queried, and since the subject is
already in the initial position in a sentence, no syntactic operations need to take place:
Who wrote a memo to his boss before he quit?
It is a different story with the second question, where it is the object NP that is being
queried. In this tree, we see that the information gap is in the predicate; thus, the ivh-
question word is not in the sentence-initial position that it normally occupies in English. In
order to deal with this matter, we will have to move the question word to the front of
the sentence:
Q-wh SUBJ	PRED
pro T	V
he	-past quit
Chapter 13:Wh-Quest/ons
247
248
Furthermore, you will note that every question we formed concerning Lee, save the
subject-based W^-question, contains the do operator. This is because of the requirement in
English that we invert the subject and operator if we have moved a wh-พord from a position
in the predicate to initial position. If there is no operator present, one must be added by
means of i/o-support:
Q-wh
PRED
what
SUB J
NP
N
Lee
AUX	VP V^^NP	ADVL	ADVL
t\\		PrepP	AdvCl
-past c d	0 write A )-	prep	NP to det N	adv sub	ร before SUBJ PRED
support		his boss	NP	AUX	VP pro	T	V he	-past	quit
Then subject and operator can be inverted:
sm
Q-wh
ร
ร
SUBJ
ADVL
ADVL
PrepP
AdvCl
NP
N
what -past do Lee
subject-operator
write 0
prep NP
adv sub
ร
to det N
before SUBJ
PRED
inversíòn		his boss	NP	AUX VP
			pro	Τ V
			he	-past quit
The Grammar Book
Here’s another example of a tree where the gap occurs in the predicate position in the
underlying proposition—the adverbial of time is being queried:
When did Lee write a memo to his boss?
sm	ร
Q-ivh SUBJ	PREP 	.
NP	AUX	VP	ADVL ADVL
N	T	V /NP^	PrepP	when
Lee	-past write det N	prep NP a memo to det N
his boss
sm	ร
Of course, if an operator is already present, then it will move when subject-operator
inversion is applied. It will carry the tense, and ώ-support will be unnecessary:
Chapter 13:Wh-Quest/ons
249
Where are you going?
In sum, then, '๗-questions in which some constituent in the subject is being queried
are simpler syntactically than those in which something in the predicate is being queried.
The former requires merely selecting the appropriate '๗-question word (as discussed later
in the chapter), given the focus of the inquiry. The latter involves fronting the '๗-พord from
the position where the information gap occurs, adding the operator do if no other operator is
present, and inverting the subject and operator.
We are not suggesting that English speakers go through all these steps to produce
wh-questions online. As we stated at the outset of this chapter, ๗-questions are often
acquired formulaically. D^browska (2008) claims that many of the questions in the spoken
section of the British National Corpus are formed with the subject you, the verbs think or
say, and the operator do. From a usage-based perspective, then, this seems to suggest that
what is acquired is a kind of adjustable template, and it may make sense for teachers to work
with their students on certain prototypical questions composed of these elements, at least
at the beginning. However, teachers may later want to provide explicit guidance to their
students regarding the syntactic formation of ๗-questions. Indeed, the difference between
questions that result from a gap in the subject versus questions that result from a gap in
the predicate has consequences for the processing and comprehension of ๗-questions
(Lee, 2009).2 Lee found that Korean students processed English subject-based questions
more readily than predicate-based questions, presumably because of the greater distance
between the ๗-question word and the location of the gap in predicate-based questions.
Lee also showed that this performance asymmetry was true for students at all levels of
English proficiency.
SPECIAL CASES INVOLVING เพ/-FRONTING
If a determiner or adverb intensifier is the focus of a ๗-question word, the constituent it
modifies must be moved to the front of the string. This can be seen in the following question:
250
The Grammar Book
Whose boss did Lee write the memo to?
Because it is the possessive determiner that is being queried, the corresponding wk-
question word is whose, and both whose and the constituent it modifies (here, the head noun
boss') must be moved to the front of the sentence with wk-fronting. Then zfo-support and
subject-operator inversion would be needed.
Two constituents must also be moved to the front when it is an adverb intensifier that
is being queried:
How diligently had Lee worked at the firm?
sm	ร
Chapter ใ 3:Wh-Questions
251
The adverb diligently moves along with the ADV (intensifier) being queried (i.e., how),
through ๗-fronting. Notice also in this question that there is no need for rfo-support since
the auxiliary verb have (from perf) is there to serve as operator for subject-operator inversion.
Another special case exists when the object of the preposition is the unknown element.
When ๗-fronting is applied, the preposition may either be left behind (linguists call this
preposition-stranding) or be moved to the front of the string along with the NP (linguists call
this pied-piping, based on the fairy tale “The Pied Piper of Hamelin”). While this choice is
syntactically optional, you will note a difference in register depending on its application, with
the first option below being more formal than the second, especially when ๗0 rather than
whom is used as the ๗-question word (we will say more about this choice later):
To whom did Lee write an angry memo before he quit? (with pied-piping)
Who(m) did Lee write an angry memo to before he quit? (with preposition stranding)
Finally, we occasionally encounter a ๗-question where the question word is the object
of a preposition within another prepositional phrase:
By virtue of what authority did Lee do that?
In such a case, the entire prepositional complex must be fronted; the preposition of or
the words by virtue of cannot be left behind when ๗-fronting takes place.
พ//·QUESTIONS WITH THE COPULA BE
Before concluding our analysis of major ๗-question types, let US also consider this example:
What is that object?
You may think at first that the subject NP is being questioned. However, you should
ask yourself what the underlying proposition is—that is, whether it more closely resembles
proposition a or b:
a.	That object is a stethoscope.
b.	A stethoscope is that object.
The answer, of course, is a; the predicate noun, not the subject noun, is being questioned.
The correct tree for this question is:
252
The Grammar Book
There is no need for do-support here, for we know that the copula be can serve as an
operator.
๗-fronting
The point is that one must always folly reconstruct the underlying proposition when
analyzing the form and meaning of a ๗-question.
The Méaning of IM-Questions
CHOOS! N6TÍÍW--QUESTÍÕÍÍwÕRD~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~	___
A major clue to meaning is which ๗-question word has been chosen. The choice, of course,
depends on the gap/focus.
Gap/Focus		พท-Question Word	Example	
Subject NP [+ human]	—>	who	Who did it?
Subject NP [- human]	—>	what	What went wrong?
Subject Predicate [+ human]	—>	who	Who is that?
Subject Predicate [- human]	—>	what	What is that?
Object NP [+ human]	—>	who(m)-	Who(m) did you tell? To whom did she tell the story?
Object NP [- human]	—>	what	What did she say?
det [possessive]	—>	whose + NP	Whose idea was it?
det [demonstrative]	—>	[which + NP	Which excuse did they give?
		[what + NP	What alibi did they use?
Chapter 13:Wh-Que5f/ons
253
det [quantifier; -count!	—>	how much + (NP)	How much (money) did they get?
det [quantifier; + count]	—>	how many + (NP)	How many thieves were there?
det [quantifier] + measure	—»	how long	How long did it take them?
word4			
ADJ [quality]	—»	how	ไ	How did they look?
		what... like J	What did they look like?
ADJ [type]	—»	what kind5 of (NP)	What kind of masks did they
			wear?
ADJ [color, size, nationality]	—»	what + NP	What color were the masks?
ADV [intensifier]	—>	โ how + ADJ	How calm did they seem?
		_how + ADV	How fast did they work?
VP	—>	what... do	What did they do next?
ADVL [means]	—>	how	How did they get away?
ADVL [direction]	—>	where	Where did they go?
ADVL [position]	—>	where	Where did they hide?
ADVL [time]	—»	when	When were they
			discovered?
ADVL [manner]	—»	how	How did she take
			the news?
ADVL [reason]	—>	why	Why did they confess?
ADVL [purpose]	—>	what ...for	What did they do that for?
ADVL [frequency]	—>	how often	How often does it end this way?
Several observations need to be made about this list. First, these are general '๗-พords.
It is also possible to ask very specific '๗-questions about the same semantic domains. For
instance, if we want to make a general query about the time of a specific event, we could ask,
When is the concert?
but we could also ask about the time of a specific event, using more specific ๗-questions:
What date is the concert?
Which day is the concert?
What time is the concert?
Similarly, we could ask a question about direction using where, but we could also ask a
more precise question using which way.
Where did they go?
Which way did they go? "*·
The same is true at the clausal level. We can ask a very general “telling” ๗-question
about an event:
What happened?
254
The Grammar Book
or we can ask specifying questions about the event:
What did the thieves do?
or even just about the action—that is, the verb:
What did the thieves do to the bank teller?
Stivers (2010) collected 350 questions recorded in American English conversations
and categorized them by question type. Among the ^-questions, she found that the most
common were the what questions, mostly involving questions about prior talk (e.g., What do
you mean?). The second-largest number of questions asked about objects (พhat's this?) and
events (พhat'd you do?). The next most common ^-questions involved the question word
how, with most of these involving inquiries about personal/event states (.How are you? How was
it?). Another subset concerned quantity, and the rest involved questions about manner and
length.
UNINVERTED ^// QUESTIONS
As with yes/no questions, it is also possible to use uninverted wh-questions. These questions
do not require พ^-fronting and subject-operator inversion. Sometimes these are just “echo”
questions, in which the listener is signaling to the speaker that he or she didn’t hear a part of
what was just said:
A: I expect to be going to Hawaii for the holidays.
B: You expect to be going where for the holidays?
A: To Hawaii.
Alternatively, just the question word can be used as a repair to signal that something
was not heard (Weber, 1989):
A: I expect to be going to Hawaii for the holidays.
B: Where?
A: To Hawaii.
However, if B’s reply had been said with pitch above the normal range (especially on
where), then A would have interpreted B’s uninverted question as expressing surprise or
disbelief:
A: I am going to Hawaii for the holidays.
B: You're going where for the holidays?
A: I know. Lucky me!
It is even possible to mark more than one constituent Q-wh (e.g., Who said what to
whom?) in uninverted ^-questions.
ΕΜΡΪΪΑΤΪ€θΰ^ΤΪθΝ^ΪΪΠΤ^	7
English speakers use -ever with ^-question words to make them emphatic. Such questions
express a variety of emotions:
Dismay: Wherever did you get that idea?
Admiration: However did you manage it?
Perplexity; Whatever does she see in him?
and we often put heavy stress on its first syllable in spoken questions:
Wherever did you pick that up?
Chapter 13:Wh-Qt/esr/ons
255
NEGATIVE IV//-QÍÍÊSTÍÕNS
We have already seen the semantic difference between negative and affirmative yes/no
questions. Such can be the case with '๗-questions as well. Negative questions are influenced
by the speaker’s expectation, such as a teacher realizing that she still has one paper in hand,
as here:
Who hasn't gotten their assignment back?
As with negative yes/no questions, negative ๗-questions can be used for a negative
assertion:
(accusing the interlocutor of an omission)
(commenting on the lack of omission)
What did John say? (an unmarked neutral question)
What didn't John say? (implying that he talked a great deal or that he withheld information)
Why didn't you answer when I called?
Why haven't I been invited?
Where didn't you go? (You seemed to go everywhere.)
What didn't happen? (Everything seemed to happen.)
Notice also, as with yes/no questions, there are two acceptable forms of negative tie-
questions depending on whether not has been contracted:
When isn't it a good time?
When is it not a good time?
The Use of l/l/h-Questions
YES/NO QUESTIONS VERSUS O-QUESTIONS
As mentioned in the introduction, yes/no questions query an entire proposition, and ๗-
questions query a specific part of the proposition. In other words, the pragmatic context for
using most ๗-question words is one in which the speaker already assumes that the listener
knows the proposition. If this knowledge cannot be assumed, the speaker would use a yes/no
question to establish the proposition. Once this is done, ๗-questions would be employed to
elicit specific details:
A: Did you go to the concert last night?
B: Yeah.
A: How was it?
Notice that if A had incorrectly assumed shared knowledge of the proposition, and
thus began with a. ๗-question, a communication breakdown might have occurred. Had A
assumed too much, this would have necessitated some sort of communicative repair:
A: How was the concert?
B: What concert?
256
The Grammar Book
____________________________________________________________________________________
SOCIAL USES _____________________-____________________________________________________________	________
Of some pedagogical import is the fact that certain fixed formulaic ๗-questions serve social
functions. These would certainly seem to be candidates for teaching. Among them are certain
combinations with how and what:
Introductions: How do you do? What do you do?
Greetings: How are you? How have you been? What's new? What's up? What's happening?
Eliciting personal reactions: How was the X? (e.g., How was the test?)
and one with why + not:
Making suggestions: Why don't you X? (e.g., Why don't you ask?)
A subset of these formulaic questions might be called truncated '๗-questions (Schonbeck,
1982) because they are actually question fragments, which appear to be used for particular
functions in informal conversations. While they are not used exclusively for these functions,
the following are common:
Making a suggestion: How about X? (e.g., How about a movie?)
Responding positively to a suggestion: Why not?
Expressing exasperation: What now? or Now what?
Seeking another's opinion: How about you?
Challenging another's opinion: How come? What for? Since when?
Expressing perplexity: What to do?
________________________________________________________________________
UNINVERTED O-QUESTIONS ________________________________________________________________
In Chapter 11, we made the point that uninverted yes/no questions can seem offensive because
they imply a certain level of social familiarity. Anecdotal evidence suggests that caution would
be in order when using uninverted wh-questions as well. One ESL teacher told US that he had
taught uninverted '๗-questions to his students. One of them was called to the dean’s office
soon thereafter. The dean talked about something he had done recently, and the student
asked for clarification with “You did what?” The dean told the student that he was being rude
by asking the question this way, and the ESL teacher reports that the student returned to class
feeling somewhat betrayed!
______________________________________________________________
ELLIPTICAL QUESTION^" ~
In very informal conversations, it is also possible to encounter ๗-question fragments that
focus on the predicate and have a deleted auxiliary, such as these:
Question	Deleted Auxiliary
Where you been hiding?	(have)
What you (Whatcha) doing?	(are)
How we going to (gonna) do that?	(are)
Like the elliptical yes/no questions, these '๗-questions have auxiliaries that are
recoverable from other information in the sentences. In very informal contexts, redundant
function words such as auxiliaries can be deleted, and other phonological reductions and
assimilations often take place.
Chapter 13: พ h-Questions
257
_______________________________________________________________
ANSWERS TO o QUESTIONS	____________ ______________
At the opposite end of the continuum from reductions in ๗-questions are full clausal answers
to ๗-questions. Fox and Thompson (2010) examined all instances of wh-questions in their
collection of American English conversations among friends and family members. They make
the point that most answers to such questions are phrasal. Here is an excerpt from one of their
examples, in which Molly is asking Felicia directions to Felicia’s home:
Molly: How far up the canyon are you?
Felicia: Ten miles.
Phrasal answers, such as Felicia gives here, provide the precise information being sought
by the questioner. Thus, when a full clausal answer is given, Fox and Thompson (2010)
suggest that the question may be perceived as problematic in some way. Again, here is an
excerpt, adapted from one of their examples. The numbers in parentheses indicate the length
of a pause in seconds:
Teresa: What time did we get home?
(0.4)
Setty. We got home at one thirty.
(0.9)
The fact that Betty’s response to Teresa’s question follows a pause, contains the same
words as the question, which further delays delivery of the information being sought, and is
followed by an even longer pause suggests that Betty sees the question as problematic for
some reason, according to Fox and Thompson (2010). Their interpretation is supported by
the fact that Betty’s answer shows rising intonation, instead of falling intonation, which Fox
and Thompson say is due to its defensive nature. Fox and Thompson conclude that their
data support the hypothesis that full clausal responses to ๗-questions are given when the
responder treats the question as problematic.
It seems to US that ESL/EFL teachers may wish to heed the lesson here and not insist
on their students giving full clausal answers to ๗-questions, which may be interpreted
differently from what the student intended.
WH0/WH0M	__
Earlier, we noted that who is the ๗-question word that queries the subject and that whom
queries the object. While this is prescriptively correct, ESL/EFL students will likely encounter
who being used for both foci:
Who asked? (subject focus)
Who did you tell? (object focus) .
However, when the wh-question word is querying the object of a preposition, and the
preposition has been fronted through ๗-fronting with pied-piping, whom should be used:
To whom was the message delivered?
*To who was the message delivered?
__________________________________________________________________________
QUESTIONS IN~lri<l^^LASSROOftr~^
The final topic that we take up in this chapter has to do with the role of questions in the
classroom. First of all, the IRF (or initiation-response-feedback) pattern in classroom discourse
is well known. Teachers pose a question, a student answers, and the teacher gives the student
258
The Grammar Book
feedback on the response. On a related note, it has been frequently observed that teachers
pose display questions to their students. In contrast to referential questions (or genuine questions)
that teachers do not know the answer to, display questions are posed so that teachers can elicit
answers from their students to assess students’ comprehension:
Teacher: What does the word "inert" mean?
Sometimes these display questions take the form of uninverted 'ZPÃ-questions:
Teacher: So this story is about what?
Koshik (2002) shows how teachers can skillfully use questions in eliciting self-repair
from students. By employing “designedly incomplete utterances,” repeating a portion of a
student’s utterance with rising intonation, the teacher can encourage the student to focus on
the trouble spot. Display questions can, of course, also take the form of inverted W^-questions:
Teacher: Why might we want to use a transition word here?
a common form of display questions used in writing conferences (Hilder, 1997).
This is perhaps also an opportune time to discuss unwarranted questions (Borge, 2007).
According to Borge, “A question is unwarranted if the person asking the question is not in a
position, formally or informally, to rightfully inquire into whatever is the subject matter of
the question and thus is not in a position to expect an honest answer or any answer at all”
(p. 1690). While teachers’ questions would not normally be unwarranted, of course, there are
times when ESL students may be reluctant to disclose personal details in a classroom for fear
that they might jeopardize their immigrant status or because the circumstances that forced
them to become refugees are too painful to report. Obviously, sensitivity is called for on such
occasions. Of course, students themselves may also ask questions that are acceptable in their
culture, but not usually so in the English-speaking world (e.g., How old are you? How much did
your purse cost'?'). Helping students learn about cultural differences in what one can politely ask
of those who are not close friends might be useful.
Concluding this section on a more upbeat note, we can point to Ko’s (2014) research
into the dynamic and interactive nature of language use in classrooms. Ko makes the sensible
observation that students’ multiple responses to teachers’ questions, when the teacher
addresses the question to the whole class, can provide an opportunity for students to share
participation and to learn from each other.
Conclusion
We started out in this chapter by making the claim that W^-questions should be taught early
on to ESL/EFL students, even if only formulaically. Aside from problems with inversion,
we expect beginners to have few problems in acquiring some rudimentary questions and
in learning to reply to certain others. Ironically, intermediate students, who have mastered
inversion, sometimes make the mistake of inverting in questions where subject-operator
inversion does not occur. Such is the case with indirect questions. Chan (2010) reports EFL
students saying, "I don’t know where is it,” or in other words, overgeneralizing inversion to
indirect wh-questions. We will have more to say about indirect questions in Chapter 33, but
for now, let us recommend systematically introducing more advanced students to marked
forms such as negative, uninverted, and elliptical w^-questions. For them, the challenge lies in
mastering their meaning and use. Finally, it is worth pointing out that while we are expressly
treating grammar, it is also the case that someone’s gaze and body language, the sequence
of their turns, and their role (e.g., student or teacher) will also explain why turn types that
do not conform with the syntax of interrogative questions are still understood as questions
Chapter 13: Wh-Quest/ons
259
(Belilah, 2012). Clearly, there are many and varied semiotic resources available to language
users besides lexicogrammar.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form. When working with beginning students, it is advisable to do some early work with
subject NP focus in tró-questions so that they can become familiar with some common
wZf-words without worrying about subject-operator inversion at the same time:
Who is writing on the board?
What happened?
One way of practicing such questions is to ask everyone in the room to keep doing
something different from the others. The teacher can then establish the pattern with the
present progressive:
Teacher: Who is opening the windows?	Teacher: Who is tapping her pencil?
Students: Ramon (is).	Students: Michele (is).
Then the students can take over the activity:
Student ไ: Who is drawing pictures?	Student2; Who is sleeping?
Student2:M\ (is).	student3: Yen-Mai (is).
2.	Use. As we have said in this chapter, students at the beginning levels of instruction will
probably learn inverted questions as lexicalized units or formulas. Useful questions of this
type to teach are those that students can use to further their knowledge of English. We
have in mind such questions as these:
What is the meaning ofx? or What does X mean?
How do you spell X?
How do you pronounce X?
How do you say Y in English? (where Y = a word or phrase in the student's L1)
A teacher might give students practice with these by giving each student in class a
vocabulary word and its definition on a card. Students have to circulate and ask questions
and take notes on each other’s vocabulary items. For example:
Student ไ: What is your word?
Student 2: Butcher.
Student ไ: How do you spell "butcher"?
Student 2: B..u..t..c..h..e..r.
Student ไ: What does"butcher'Arhean?
Student2: Aperson who sells meat.
3.	Form. The easiest and mosffrequent ช^-questions involving subject-operator inversion
contain the be copula. To facilitate practice of this pattern, the teacher can bring in
several bags of kitchen utensils and gadgets. Each small group of students is given a bag.
Beginning-level students will not likely have full control of the vocabulary. Students can
work in small groups, and individuals can ask others in the group questions such as:
Student ไ: What's this? (holding up something he or she has picked from the bag)
Student2: A can opener.
Student2: (selecting something else) What's this?
260
The Grammar Book
students: A funnel.
Student 3: พhat are these?
Student4: Measuring spoons.
If no one in the group can identify one or more items, they will need to ask other
groups for assistance. They should identify all the objects in the bag that they can and
then get together with another group to teach them the names of things they might not
know and to ask them for help with the names of things they have not yet identified.
4.	Form. The biggest problem for beginning students—and often intermediate students
too—is forming a ๗-question that requires subject-operator inversion with a main verb
other than the be copula.
N. Reed (personal communication) has developed a useful strategy for relating
information students have already learned about subject-operator inversion in yes/no
questions to the generation of ๗-questions. She asks students yes/no questions and then
follows up each yes/no question immediately with a more specific '๗-question structurally
related to thtyes/no question. Here’ร an example:
Are you studying at NYU
Yes.	\ —
Teacher:
Student:
Teacher: |what| |are you studying I ?
Student:
Law.
Teacher:
Student:
Will you be a lawyer somedayj?
Teacher:
Student:
Teacher:
Student:
Teacher:
Greenwich Village.
Did you take the English placement test
Student:
Teacher:
Student:
Yes.
Teacher:
When
did you take it ?
Student:
September 15.
Next, Ms. Reed cues a student to ask another student a yes/no question, which he or
she then follows with an appropriate '๗-question that the teacher can cue if necessary.
Eventually, the students are able to carry on such dialogues without cues, and they get a lot
of practice using '๗-questions that require subject-operator inversion and, where needed,
the addition of do. The relationship between yes/no questions and these types of '๗-questions
has been made explicit, and the recurrence of common questions such as *What you are
doing? can thus be reduced.
Chapter 13:Wh-Quest/0rts
261
5.	Meaning. Information-gap activities are ideal for working with the meaning of a variety
of wh-question words. The teacher prepares a class information sheet with the names
of categories on the horizontal axis and the names of some students on the vertical axis.
Some of the cells of the grid are completed, but not all of them. One half of the class is
given this sheet. A similar sheet is prepared for the other half of the class. On this sheet,
the cells missing the information on the first sheet are completed, but other cells are
empty. In pairs, students have to ask and answer questions in order to complete their class
information sheets. For example:
Sheet A
Student	Native Country	Native Language	How long studying English	Major
Ketut Sudha	Indonesia	1	1	10 years	I	I
1	1	Mexico			Nursing
LU	1	Japan	Japanese	ใ 2 years	I	I
Sheet B				
Student	Native Country	Native Language	How long studying English	Major
1	1	1	1	Indonesian	I	I	Biology I	I
Nina Rojas		Spanish	8 years	
Eiko Watanabe	1	1	1	1		Music
Student irWhat language does Ketut speak?
Student2: Indonesian. Where does Nina come from?
Student 1: Mexico. Who comes from Japan?
Student2: Eiko. How long has she been studying English?
6.	Meaning. Write a number of wÃ-questions down the left side of a piece of paper and
their answers down the right side. Cut the paper apart vertically so that the answers
are separate from the questions. Now cut the answers up and scramble them, and do
the same with the questions. Have each student take one slip of paper from each pile.
The students must go around the room asking the question on their pieces of paper to
each other until they find an answer that matches. When a student has found a match
for both the answer and question, he or she should come to you and get a new pair. Do
this until all of the questions and answers have been matched (adapted from Ur, 2009).
7.	Use. Role plays are helpful for practicing the social use of truncated Ώ^-questions. For
example, a teacher might set up a situation where three friends are trying to decide what
to do that evening. We might expect language of the following sort to be used:
A: How about a movie?	r'Λ
B: Sounds good to me. How about you, c?
C: Sure. Why not? What aboútthe one at the Paramount?
A: I have seen it already. Why don't we try the First Cinema?
262
The Grammar Book
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1. Provide original example sentences that illustrate the following concepts.
a.	wh-question focusing on the subject b.	wh-question focusing on an object of a preposition (Give both versions.)	d.	uninverted wh-question e.	negative wh-question: (i.) contracted
c. wh-question focusing on a determiner:	(ii.) uncontracted
(i.) possessive	f. formulaic wh-question (lexicalized unit)
(ii.) demonstrative	g. wh-question with ellipsis of the
(iii.) quantifier	auxiliary
2.	Draw tree diagrams, put in the arrows, and label the arrows to form each of the
following wh-questions:
a.	How is your father?	d. What did you understand?
b.	Who(m) should we invite to the	e. Where does your brother study
party?	physics?
c.	How long is the table?
3.	Why are the following sentences ungrammatical?
*Which did he buy car?	*Whose did he steal handbag?
4.	The general พh-question word for ADVL [position] is where.
Where do you live?
What are some more specific wh-questions we use to ask about position?
Test your ability to apply what you know
5.	Diagnose the issues with the following questions, made by ESL/EFL students:
a.	"Where you are going?	c. "To whom did he say that to?
b.	"What you want?	d. "Where Benny?
6.	ft has been suggested that why, what. . . for, and how come are พh-question words
that all may be used to ask the same question.
Why did he say that? What did he say that for?	How come he said that?
What are some differences in form, meaning, and use among these expressions? Cite
cases where they cannot be used to paraphrase one another.
7.	The following wh-questions have been written on the blackboard of an ESL/EFL
classroom. The object of the class is to review wh-questions in the simple past.
a.	What did you do yesterday?	d. Who went with you?
b.	Where did you go?	e. When did you get home?
c.	What happened?
Chapter 13: Wh-Quest/ons
263
One of the students asks the teacher why three of the questions have a did
while the other two do not. If you were the teacher, how would you answer this
student’s question?
8.	A student asks you why there are two do verbs in What do you do? How would you
answer?
Bibliography
R E F E R E N c ES	โ--".โ''
Belilah, H. (2012). You know Arnold Schwarzenegger? On doing questioning in second language dyadic
tutorials. Applied Linguistics, 53(1), 21-41.
Borge, ร. (2007). Unwarranted questions and conversation. Journal of Pragmatics, 39, 1689-1701.
Chan, A. (2010). Toward a taxonomy of written errors: Investigation into the written errors of Hong Kong
Cantonese ESL learners. TESOL Quarterly, 44(2), 295-319.
Cheng, L. L.-S., & Corver, N. (Eds.). (2006). Moving on. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Couper-Kuhlen, E. (2012). Some truths and untruths about final intonation in conversational questions. In
J. p. de Ruiter (Ed.), Questions. Formal, functional, and interactional perspectives (pp. 123-145). Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
D^browska, E. (2008). Questions with long-distance dependencies: A usage-based approach.
Cognitive Linguistics, 19(3), 391-425.
Fox, B. A., & Thompson, ร. A. (2010). Responses to ๗-questions in English conversation. Research on
Language and Social Interaction, 43(2), 133-156.
Hilder, J. (1997). Problem identification in ESL writing conferences: Instructor questions and student responses
(Unpublished master’s thesis). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Ko, ร. (2014). The nature of multiple responses to teachers’ questions. Applied Linguistics, 33(1), 48-62.
Koshik, I. (2002). Designedly incomplete utterances: A pedagogical practice for eliciting knowledge
displays in error correction sequences. Research on Social Interaction, 35, 277-309.
Lee, J. H. (2009). A subject-object asymmetry in the comprehension of ๗-questions by Korean learners of
English. Applied Linguistics, 31(1), 136-155.
รchonbeck, G. (1982). Other questions (Unpublished English Applied Linguistics term paper). School for
International Training, Brattleboro, VT
Stivers, T. (2010). An overview of the question-reponse system in American English conversation. Journal of
Pragmatics, 42, 2772-2781.
Ur, p. (2009). Grammar practice activities. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Weber, E. (1989). Varieties of questions in English conversations: A study of the role ofmorphosyntax in declarative
and nonclausal forms (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING	____________________________
For useful linguistic descriptions of ιν/1-questions, see:
Bolinger, D. (1957). Interrogative structures of American English: The direct question. Publication 28 of the
American Dialect Society. Tuscaloosa, AL: University of Alabama Press.
Chisolm, พ., Jr. (Ed.). (1984). Interrogativity. Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Ginzburg, J., & Sag, I. (2001). Interrogative investigations. CSLI Lecture Notes 123. Stanford, CA: CSLI
publications.
264
The Grammar Book
For suggestions on how to teach wh-questions, see:
Abbott, G. (1980). Teaching the learner to ask for information. TESOL Quarterly, 14(1), 21-38.
Firsten, R. (2008). Grammar connection: Structure through content 2. Boston, MA: Heinle, Gengage Learning.
Pennington, M. (Ed.). (1995). New ways in teaching grammar. Arlington, VA: TESOL.
พ!รทieพska, I., Riggenbach, H., & Samuda, V (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 2
(4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Gengage Learning.
Endnotes
1.	Recall, though, when we discussed the intonation of yes/no questions, we mentioned Couper-Kuhlen's
(2012) research. She found that some พ/?-questions have final rising intonation. Her explanation for
this finding is that intonation contours are affected by the context of use, and no decontextualized
pronouncements are going to hold for all occasions.
2.	This is a much studied area because of its implications for linguistic theory. See Cheng and Corver (2006)
and Lee (2009) for discussion.
3.	See the discussion of who/whom in the section on the use of พ/?-questions later in this chapter.
4.	Other common measure words in combination with how are deep, old, high, long, big, and far. Answers to
such questions would be in the appropriate unit, such as feet, years, and miles.
5.	Kind is not the only word that occurs here: type and sort also are used in this construction.
Chapter 13:Wh-Que5t/on5
265
Tag, Alternative,
Exclamatory, and
Rhetorical Questions
H A p T E R
Introduction
In this chapter, we discuss four constructions that look like questions but that function differently
from the yes/no and ^-questions we have examined in Chapters 11 and 13, respectively.
The four constructions are tag questions, alternative questions, exclamatory questions, and
rhetorical questions. Despite the “question” label, these constructions are not necessarily used
to seek information. They are common enough, though, that ESL/EFL students should learn
to recognize and respond to them appropriately. Indeed, these structures may cause as many
problems for ESL/EFL students in comprehension as they do in production.
Tag Questions
AN ANALYSIS OF THE FORMOF TAG (^ESTIONS
Why the Form of Tag Questions Is Problematic
The prototypical tag question includes two parts: a short question form, called the “tag,”
appended to a clause, called the “anchor.” The tag generally contrasts in polarity with the
anchor; that is, when the anchor is affirmative, the tag is negative, and vice versa:
Your aunt is coming today, isn't she?
Your aunt isn't coming today, is she?
While most other languages have a construction equivalent to the English tag question, the
equivalent tag is often invariant. For example, French has n’est-cepas, German has nicht wahr,
Swedish has inte sant and elle hur, Standard Arabic has alaysa kathaleka, and Mandarin Chinese
has ma (a particle spoken with a rising tone). Consequently, speakers of such languages have
been known to overgeneralize one frequently occurring tag in English:
*She's coming today, isn't it?
In some languages, the tag-formation convention consists merely of adding to a clause
the equivalent for no or yes with rising intonation. Translated literally into English, this
convention produces utterances like the following, which are not uncommon among ESL/
EFL learners:
*We don't have homework today, yes?1
267
Then, too, not all languages use clause-final tags. For example, tag-question particles may
appear before the clause in Polish, after the first constituent of the clause in Ute, or after the
focused constituent in Russian (Weber, 1989).
The Syntax and Morphology of Tag Questions in English
In English, tags are normally sentence final, following clausal anchors. In written form, a
comma separates the anchor from the tag. If a tag is sentence medial, commas set off the tag,
and the terminal punctuation is still a question mark:
It's human, isn't it, to hope that peace among all people in the world is possible?
Anchors may also be subjectless phrases (Kay, 2002), though such phrases can usually be
related to full clauses:
Nice house, isn't it? [It's a nice house, isn't it?)
Tags are syntactically like abbreviated unmarkedyes/no questions, in that they require subject-
operator inversion:
They can't do that, can they? (*they can?)
He's the one you wish to speak to, isn't he? (*he isn't?)
When there is no auxiliary verb or be verb in the anchor, then a do verb must be introduced
in the tag as an operator to carry the tense.2
She assigned homework, didn't she!
Unlikeyes/no questions, however, additional steps must be taken to form tags. First of all, most
tag questions have reversed polarity—that is, if the anchor is affirmative, the tag is negative;
if the anchor is negative, the tag is affirmative. (Tags with constant polarity are discussed later
in this chapter.) The anchor can be negative by virtue of having a negative preverbal adverb
of frequency (see Chapter 25), such as never:
Budi has never seen snow, has he?
According to Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad, and Finegan (1999), tag questions
with affirmative anchors and negative tags are much more common than tag questions with
negative anchors and affirmative tags, although in their large-scale corpus study, Tottie and
Hoffman (2006) found that American English speakers were more likely than British English
speakers to use negative anchors with affirmative tags. Overall, however, tag questions were
more common in British English than in American English.
Of the four registers examined by Biber et al. (1999), tag questions appeared primarily in
conversation, though there were also many examples from fiction and others from newspaper
language and academic prose. See Tottie & Hoffman (2009) for the use of tags in writing.
Negative tags have two forms. By far, the more common is the contracted form. It is also
syntactically possible, although stylistically formal, to have a full, uncontracted negative form;
in this case, however, the negative particle not must be separated from the verb:
You have misled a lot of practices, haven't you!
You have missed a lot of practices, have you not?
*You have missed a lot of practices, have not you!
Another difference between anchor and tag can be seen in the subjects of each. If the subject
of the anchor is not a pronoun, it must be pronominalized in the tag.
Megan is quite a basketball player, isn't she? ("isn't Megan?)
The only word that can be used as the subject in the tag that is not a personal pronoun is the
nonreferential there (see Chapter 23).
There are a lot of social events at this time of year, aren't there?
268
The Grammar Book
Tottie and Hoffmann (2006) found that the five most frequently used tags in American
English are isn’t it, don’t you, do you, is it, and doesn’t it.
Idiosyncratic Tag Questions
One further note should be made here with regard to the form of tag questions. Certain tags
are idiosyncratic. The verb in a tag might not correspond to the verb in the anchor, or the
anchor may be imperative instead of declarative:
Let's go, shall we?	I am going, aren't I?
We ought to go, shouldn't we? Open the door, won't you?
Also, numerous unsystematic lexical-type tags are used informally:3
You aren't going, right?	You are going, O.K ?
You aren't going, huh?	You are going, no?
Responding to Tag Questions
As we hinted in the introduction to this chapter, it may be more important for ESL/EFL
students to know how to reply to tag questions than to be able to produce the full form
accurately. It is worth noting, then, that tag questions are rarely responded to with short
answers. In other words, the following response to a tag question is somewhat unusual:
A: She's a brilliant chess player, isn't she?
B: Yes, she is.
Out of 80 tag questions in her corpus of oral and written data, Brown (1981) found only
three instances of such a short answer, and only one of these consisted simply of a yes or no
and the short form. In her corpus, 30 percent of the tag questions received no answer at all.
Others received affirmative answers, such as That’s right, or some reply in which additional
information would be offered:
A: Science is your favorite subject, isn't it?
S.’Has been since I was five. (Carterette & Jones, 1974, p. 262, cited in Brown, 1981)
When listeners disagreed with the speaker, they would give an explanation for the
disagreement:
A:... They can't get that big, can they, Wendy?
B: Well, when they stretch, yes.
English speakers can also employ other confirmers, including complete sentences:
A: The moon is supposed to be full tonight. Isn't that right!
ร.* Yeah, that's right.
Speakers apparently use full-form confirmers when they want explicit confirmation that
what they said is correct. All the full-sentence confirmers in Brown’ร corpus were answered,
compared with the 30 percent of the tags in Brown’ร corpus that went unanswered.
THE MEANING OF TAG QUESTIONS
The meaning of tag questions is reflected in their form: A tag question is a question
attached to a statement. In other words, something is being asserted to which the listener
is invited to respond. Celce-Murcia, Brinton, and Goodwin with Griner (2010) distinguish
between tag questions confirming facts or eliciting agreement and those signaling
uncertainty. Intonation is key in making this distinction. Tags with falling intonation
call for confirmation of or agreement with the assertion in the anchor. In contrast, tags
with rising intonation signal some uncertainty about the information in the anchor.
Chapter 14: Tag, Alternative, Exclamatory, and Rhetorical Questions
269
Celce-Murcia et al. compare tags with falling intonation to prototypical statements and
tags with rising intonation to prototypical yes/no questions.
Compared withyer/ho questions, tag questions express a greater degree of either negative
or positive certainty with regard to the truth of the underlying proposition:4
Strongest bias toward negative certainty
iเ Sally didn't finish her report, did she? (falling intonation)
Sally didn't finish her report, did she? (rising intonation)
Did Sally finish her report?
Didn't Sally finish her report?
Sally finished her report, didn't she? (rising intonation)
V Sally finished her report, didn't she? (falling intonation)
Strongest bias toward positive certainty
Marked Tag Questions
Although far less common than their unmarked counterparts, marked tag questions, instead
of having a polar contrast in the affirmative-negative or negative-affirmative marking of
the anchor and tag (with reversed polarity), have an anchor and tag that are nonpolar, or
noncontrasting (constant polarity):
affirmative	affirmative
You're an accountant, are you?
You call yourself a writer, do you?
negative negative
So I can't, can't I?
To make sense of these nonpolar tags in North American English, we interpret them as
conveying some additional nuance of meaning. For example, the first could be a confirmation
check expressing some doubt or reservation; the second might be sarcasm; the third could be
a dare.Thus, it seems that marked tags in North American English have emotional overtones.5
THE USE OF TAG QUESTIONS
Pragmatic Types
In their study of tag questions in oral discourse, Tottie and Hoffmann (2 006) classified examples
from their corpus into six different pragmatic types (p. 300-301). Since they used corpora
where intonation was not marked, they were not able to report the intonation for the six
types; however, their classification is partially based on Algeo (1990), who indicates intonation
contours for some of these functions, and where they are available, we report them here.
1.	Informational (The speaker makes a genuine request for information.) (rising
intonation) ,
You know my friend Marie, don't you?
2.	Confirmatory (The speaker wants confirmation that what he/she said is correct.)
(falling intonation)
We have to leave by 8:00, don't we?
3.	Attitudinal (The speakerไร emphasizing a point and does not expect a response.)
Nothing stays the same, does it? We always have to be prepared for change.
4.	Facilitating (The speaker is certain of the truth of the statement but wants to involve
the listener.)
That IS a problem, isn't it?
270
The Grammar Book
5.	Peremptory (The speaker closes discussion and discourages the listener from
responding.) (falling intonation)
He was a mean person, wasn't he? Let's just forget about him.
6.	Aggressive (The speaker insults or provokes the listener.)
You don't even know how to tell the truth, do you?
Tottie and Hoffman report that of these six pragmatic types, confirmatory, facilitating,
and attitudinal account for 90 percent of their data. Idiosyncratic tags may have different
functions. For example, tags can be added to imperatives to soften them or to make them
more like requests or invitations (e.g., Come in, won't you?).
Brown (1981) also found that tag questions seem to be a way that the speaker has of
seeking confirmation of his or her assertion. This explains why there are more negative than
affirmative tags in Brown’s data: speakers use negative tags to invite correction. Another
fact about form that this function helps explain is the infrequent use of the first person.
A person is the best source of information about opinions or inferences about himself or
herself; consequently, he or she would generally not seek confirmation of such information
from another, although people occasionally add tags like the following, perhaps inviting
disconfirmation:
I'm being silly, aren't I?
Alternative Questions
YES/NO VERSUSALTERN/^ —
Variously referred to as an alternative question, a choice question, and an or-question, this
questionlike construction offers listeners a choice between two or more alternatives:
A: Would you rather study physics, biology, or chemistry next semester?
B: Chemistry, I think.
While the syntax is that of a yes/no question, the intonation pattern is not. A yes or no answer
would thus be inappropriate, yet this is often the response given by ESL/EFL students.
A: Would you like regular or decaf?
B: *Yes, please.
Of course, the listener may choose to reject the options and propose different ones:
Yes/No Question with Or	Alternative Question
A·. Do you take creanyoQmilk in your coffee? A: Do you take crearrior rpillyin your coffee?
S: Actually, neither. But do you have any
soy milk?
To distinguish between both types of questions, ESL/EFL students need to learn the intonational
contours for each. Whereas a yes/no question generally rises in intonation at the end, an
alternative question rises on each of the alternatives (or the first if there are only two) but falls
on the last one.
Yes/No Question with Or __	Alternative Question
A: Would you like coffeepa/tea?	A: Would you lik^offee oi/iec^
B: Yes, please.	B: Coffee, please.
Chapter 14: Tag, Alternative, Exclamatory, and Rhetorical Questions
271
However, we need to understand that decontextualized generalizations about intonation offer
no reason—only a rule. Couper-Kuhlen (2012) helps here by commenting on the intonation
pattern of alternative questions:
...questions are produced in conversation as parts of courses of action carried out in real
time and in this sense are interactional achievements. เท fact, the rising pitch on the first
alternative followed by falling pitch on the second (or last) alternative is not just some
abstract rhetorical pattern but is motivated by differing degrees of epistemic certainty
concerning the states of affairs under consideration, (p. 134)
In other words, even as a question is being posed, the certainty that a speaker has about
an anticipated outcome can change. If there is no immediate response to the speaker’s proffer
of the first alternative with rising intonation, the speaker may propose the second alternative
with more certainty (hence the falling intonation). Understanding the reason for this pattern
may help ESL/EFL students to interpret it and respond correctly.
Lest we leave readers assuming that only near-identical alternatives can be conjoined,
consider the following alternative question with different subjects:
Did you buy it, or did someone give it to you?
And even clauses with different tenses and subjects can appear as alternatives:
Did you buy it, or am I going to have to?
It is also possible to have an alternative question where the second of the two alternatives
is an elliptical negative clause:
Did you buy it, ornotl
In alternative questions, the degree of speaker irritation appears to increase with the
amount of redundancy expressed in the second alternative:
Did you buy it, or not?
Did you buy it, or didn't you?
Did you buy it, or didn't you buy it?
Did you buy it, or did you not buy it?
According to Huddleston and Pullum (2002), “the less elliptical the form, the greater the
emotive meaning is likely to be”(p. 871).
ALTERNATIVE IWf-QUESTION COMBINATIONS
While probably few ESL/EFL students will speak languages that have alternative questions
of the type that we have just examined, they will likely be familiar with the kind that takes the
form of a ^-question combined with an elliptical alternative question:
What would you like—coffee, tea, or milk?
Where do you live—in Queens or Brooklyn?
In many languages of the world, only this form of alternative question is permitted. Perhaps
introducing this alternative ใฝ^นestion hybrid first will ease students into the new forms of
alternative questions that they will encounter most frequently in English.
Exclamatory Questions
An exclamatory question is not used for inquiry. Instead, it expresses surprise, delight, anger,
exasperation, or other emotions. In writing, this type of “question” is usually punctuated with
an exclamation point rather than a question mark. In other words, exclamatory questions
272
The Grammar Book
are associated with the exclamatory mood, not the interrogative mood. It is referred to as an
exclamatory question because it undergoes subject-operator inversion, so its syntax is the same
as a yes/no question:
Can she sing!
Was it hot!
According to Quirk, Greenbaum, Leech, and Svartvik (1985), exclamatory questions are
like tag questions in that they invite confirmation (p. 811). Many exclamatory questions take
the negative form, and they too convey the speaker’s expectation of confirmation:
Isn't that amazing!
However, as Tsui (1992) notes, it is also possible to use exclamatory questions that do
not seek confirmation:
Am I hungry!
Since such exclamations report a personal experience, they would be only acknowledged
(e.g., Dinner 'พill be ready soon.), not confirmed. Intonation at the end of an exclamatory yes/no
question may rise or fall, although, according to Goedecke (1997), a rising intonation contour
is more typical of North American English.
Another kind of construction is the exclamative, which resembles a พ#-question, but
which differs in several important ways. One is its syntax; it does not take subject-operator
inversion. Second, in contrast to a พ#-question, the exclamative only begins with how or with
what. According to Huddleston and Pullum (2002), how may modify an adjective, an adverb,
a degree word, or a verb, and what occurs with NPs:
How kind you are to help!
How quickly things change!
How much effort we wasted!
How they hated each other!
What a lucky person you are!
What lucky people they are!
What luck you have!
Quite frequently, exclamatives are elliptical: What fun! How cool! As with a พ#-question,
the intonation contour falls at the end of an exclamative. Of course, the most important
difference between an exclamative and a พ#-question is that, as with the exclamatory question,
the exclamative is not interrogative; rather, it manifests the exclamatory mood, as is obvious
from the way it is punctuated.
Rhetorical Questions
Rhetorical questions, both yes/no and wh-, are similar to exclamatory questions in that they
are interrogative in form but not in function. They do not call for a response. According to
Koshik (2005), such questions occur in a variety of conversational settings, ranging from news
interviews to second-language writing conferences. What the questions in her data have in
common is “that they are not asked, and are not understood, as ordinary information-seeking
questions but as making some kind of claim or assertion, an assertion of the opposite polarity
to that of the question” (p. 2):
Just because you've failed the first test, is that any reason to give up?
The speaker’s message here is Surely, no—that is no reason to give up. The assertion is clearly
negative. To make an affirmative assertion, a speaker would use a negativeyes/no question. For
Chapter 14: Tag, Alternative, Exclamatory, and Rhetorical Questions
273
example, to encourage people to protest, an activist might pose the question, “Isn’t it time to
do something?”
Hie (1999) comments on the different functions of rhetorical questions in spoken
discourse. In political speeches, they are used to manipulate opinion; in cross-examinations
in courtroom trials, they tend to contribute to power manipulation when used by counsel and
power challenging when used by witnesses; and on talk shows, they are mostly used to shape
arguments and influence public opinion. Schaffer (2005) offers an additional, less weighty,
function of rhetorical questions, what she calls the “rhetorical question as retort pattern.” In
this pattern, the rhetorical question is a retort or answer to someone who has just posed a
referential question; it answers the referential question in a way to emphasize that the answer
should have been obvious. This use of rhetorical questions can be quite amusing, as in this
retort, a yes/no rhetorical question indicating a negative answer:
Do chickens have lips?
Schaffer (2005) observes that ๗-rhetorical questions as retorts are rarer, but here are
two tokens from his data responding to A’s question, and again conveying a negative answer:
A: How reliable is he?
B: How shallow is the ocean? How cold is the รนท?
In written discourse, Frodesen and Eyring (2007) point out that rhetorical questions can
be used by a writer to introduce or shift a topic or to focus on a main point:
How much longer can we ignore climate change?
Because of their similarity in form, rhetorical questions can be confused with interrogative
questions. Making students aware of the different question types may be helpful in this regard.
Conclusion
By comparing tag questions with alternative questions, exclamatory questions, and rhetorical
questions, we have come full circle in our discussion of other structures that look like questions.
Admittedly, some of these (e.g., alternative questions and question tags with rising intonation)
are more interrogative in their function than others (e.g., question tags with falling intonation,
exclamatory questions, and rhetorical questions). Nevertheless, they all share certain syntactic
features with the yes/no questions and ’พh-questions that we discussed earlier.
We conclude by pointing out that ESL/EFL students will at least need to recognize
the fact that although these structures look like questions, they do not necessarily function as
queries; having learned the difference, students will be able to respond to them appropriately.
As we saw in Chapter 11, analyses of foreigner talk discourse (Long, 1981) have revealed
that questions are very commonyin native speaker conversation with nonnative speakers
of English. In the analysis of his data, Long discovered that whereas statements made up
83 percent of the discourse amoiig native speakers, questions of all types dominated foreigner
talk discourse, where they accounted for 66 percent of all t-units.6 Elis analysis reveals that
native speakers addressing nonnatives used significantly more alternative questions than they
did with other native speakers.
Presumably, native speakers in conversations with nonnative speakers used more
questions in an attempt to lighten the nonnative speakers’ interactional burden. However,
from examples such as the following (excerpted from Long’s data),
Native speaker: Aha. Do you study?
or	Nonnative speaker: No.7
do you work?
274
The Grammar Book
it is clear that ESL/EFL students will need practice in learning to recognize what the
speaker’s intention is and in responding more appropriately on a pragmatic level to speakers’
questions.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form. After introducing your students to the concept of tag questions, you might
focus their attention on the variety of tag question forms that exists in English. One
way to do this is to divide the class into small groups. Give each group an envelope
containing 40 pieces of paper. On 20, of them, you have written anchors, and on
the other 20 you have written tags. Students have to match the anchor with the
correct tag. Be sure to include a variety of anchors and tags with both negative and
affirmative forms.
2.	Use. Tag questions are typical of conversation, so one way to have students practice
their use is in dialogues. By working with dialogues, students will also become
acquainted with responses to tag questions. In constructing such dialogues, it would be
wise to keep in mind some of the form-frequency patterns that Brown (1981) found in
her study. Tag questions are overwhelmingly in the present tense, and they occur most
often with the copula be or with the operator do. Most subjects are third person singular
or second person, and 7 5 percent of all tag questions have an affirmative statement with
a negative tag.
Hal: Hi, Sue. Good to see you again. It's a nice day today, isn't it?
Sue: Hi, Hal. It sure is. Say, you look good. You've lost some weight, haven't you?
Hal: I'm trying hard. What have you been up to?
Sue: I've been studying for my midterm exams in economics and calculus.
Hal: Wow! You take tough courses, don't you?
Sue: Yeah, but I enjoy the challenge.
3.	Form/Meaning. To help your ESL/EFL students become familiar with the intonation
pattern of alternative questions and to make them aware of the contrast between it
and the intonation of syntactically similar yes/no questions, you can give your students
a worksheet with 10 pairs of answers. Next, read a question and ask your students to
circle the letter of the appropriate answer. In order to answer correctly, your students
will have to recognize whether the question you are giving them has the intonation of
an alternative question or a yes/no question. Here’s an example:
Teacher reads out loud:	Are you studying EngliyKor his/ory?
Students circle correct reply: A. Yes, I am.
(8)1 ust English now.
4.	Meaning. You can give your students practice in producing alternative questions by
giving them “breakfast menus” that you have prepared. For each category, there might be
two or three items from which to choose; for example:
Cold Beverages: Orange juice . Hot Beverages: Coffee
Grapefruit juice	Tea
Entrees: Scrambled eggs	Side Dishes: Hash brown potatoes
Pancakes	Bacon
Oatmeal	Ham
Chapter 14: Tag, Alternative, Exclamatory, and Rhetorical Questions
275
Pairs of students take turns role-playing servers and restaurant customers. The server
might ask a yes/no question, such as
Would you like a cold beygrage?
or
Would you like orange juice or grapefrujtjuice?
or an alternative question:
Would you like oryr^e juice or grapefrqitjuibe^
Depending on the type of question, the customer would give an appropriate answer. For
instance, if it was theyes/no question, the customer would reply,
Yes, please. I'll have orange juice.
If, on the other hand, the server used the intonation of an alternative question, the
customer would answer:
Orange juice, please.
5.	Use. After explaining what rhetorical questions are and providing a number of examples,
ask your intermediate or advanced ESL/EFL students to find and bring to class one
example of a rhetorical question from an advertisement, a published speech, or a transcript
of an interview. Ask the class to decide why the speaker or writer used a rhetorical question.
See if the students can figure out the implied answer for any rhetorical question that the
speaker or writer does not answer.
6.	Use. If possible, ask each student to record a conversation between him or her and a
native speaker of English. Have the student pick out and categorize the different questions
the native speaker uses. Are they all questions, or are some of them the constructions
discussed in this chapter that only look like questions?
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1.	Provide original example sentences that illustrate the following terms. Underline the
pertinent word(s) in your examples.
a.	tag question	b.	alternative question
(i.) unmarked,	confirming	c.	alternative พ.h-question combination
(ii.) idiosyncratic	d.	exclamatory “question”
(iii.) marked	e.	rhetorical question
2.	Why are the following sentences ungrammatical?
a.	*John wants to go, didn’t he?	c. *He left, did not he?
b.	*Susan never laughs, doesn’t she? d. *Is not that wonderful!
3.	What would the complete form of these utterances be?
a.	Is Janet blue-eyed, or-not?	c. Was it Bill or was it Bob who wrote
_	fhíç; IpttpT?
b.	Looking forward to vacation, aren’t you?
276
The Grammar Book
Test your ability to apply what you know.
4.	The following have been produced by an ESL or EFL learner. What would you tell
the learner?
a.	*พe’re going, isn’t it?
b.	*This is nice music, yes?
c.	Native speaker: Would you like cpffee QiXe\?
ESL/EFL student: *Yes.
5.	Under what circumstances might an English speaker utter question 2 rather than
question 1 in the following pairs? Discuss both options in your response.
a.	1. It is going to rain, isn’t it?	2. It isn’t going to rain, is it?
b.	1. Do you want to go, or not?	2. Do you want to go, or do you not want to go?
c.	1. You did, didntfryou?	2. You did, did ydu?\_____
d.	1. There isn’t much to dp/is there?	2. There isn’t much to do, is thfffe)\
e.	1. Isn’t thatzgood?	2. Isn’t that gpgáhy
f.	1. Max sings well, doesn’t he? 2. Max sings well, don’t you think?
6.	Explain why rhetorical questions such as Do you really want to be like everyone else?
and Don’t you have better things to do? are used in advertising.
7.	If an ESL/EFL student asks you what the difference is between the following, how
would you answer?
Open the door, won't you?
Open the door, will you?
Bibliography
_________________________________________________________________________________
REFERENCES___________________1_____________________________________________________
Algeo, J. (1990). It’s a myth, innit? Politeness and the English tag question. In c. Ricks & L. Michaels
(Eds.), The state of the language (pp. 443-450). Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Allerton, D. J. (2009). Tag questions. In G. Rohdenburg & J. Schlüter (Eds.), One language) two grammars?
Differences between British and American English (pp. 306-323). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Biber, D., Johansson, ร., Leech, G-, Conrad, ร., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and
written English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ltd.
Brown, c. (1981, March). What discourse analysis reveals about tag questions. Paper presented at the
International TESOL Conference, Detroit, ML
Carterette, E., & Jones, M. (1974). Informal speech. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Celce-Murcia, M., Brinton, D., & Goodwin J. (with Griner, B.). (2010). Teaching pronunciation: A course book
and reference guide (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Couper-Kuhlen, E. (2012). Some truths and untruths about final intonation in conversational questions. In
J. p. de Ruiter (Ed.), Questions. Formal)functional) and interactional perspectives (pp. 123-145). Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form) meaning) and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Chapter 14: Tag, Alternative, Exclamatory, and Rhetorical Questions
277
Givón, τ. (1993). English grammar: A function-based introduction. Amsterdam, Netherlands/Philadelphia,
PA: John Benjamins.
Goedecke, p. (1997). Exclamatory questions: An analysis of intonation in context (Unpublished master’s thesis).
Central Washington University, Ellensburg, WA.
Huddleston, R., & Pullum, G. K. (2002). The Cambridge grammar of the English language. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Hie, c. (1999). Question-response argumentation in talk shows. Journal of Pragmatics, 31, 975-999.
Kay, p. (2002). English subjectless tagged sentences. Language, 7<9(3), 453-481.
Kimps, D. (2007). Declarative constant polarity tag questions: A data-driven analysis of their form,
meaning, and attitudinal uses .Journal of Pragmatics, 39, 270-291.
Koshik, I. (2005). Beyond rhetorical questions: Assertive questions in everyday interaction. Amsterdam,
Netherlands/Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Long, M. (1981). Questions in foreigner talk discourse. Language Learning, 31(1), 135-157.
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, ร., Leech, G., & Svartvik, J. (1985). A comprehensive grammar of the English language.
London, England: Longman.
Schaffer, D. (2005). Can rhetorical questions function as retorts: Is the Pope Catholic? Journal of Pragmatics,
37(4), 433-460.
Tottie, G., & Hoffmann, ร. (2006). Tag questions in British and American English. Journal of English
Linguistics, 34(4), 283-311.
Tottie, G., & Hoffmann, ร. (2009). Tag questions as markers of stance in written language. In R. Bowen,
M. Mobãrg, & ร. Ohlander (Eds.), Corpora and discourse—and stuff. Papers in honour of Karin Aijmer
(pp. 305-315). Gothenburg, Sweden: Acta Universitatis Gothoburgensis.
Tsui, A. (1992). A functional description of questions. In M. Coulthard (Ed.), Advances in spoken discourse
analysis (pp. 89-110). London, England: Routledge.
Weber, E. (1989). Varieties of questions in English conversation: A study of the role of morphosyntax in declarative
and nonclausal forms (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
SUGGESTIONS Foin^^	___________
For the historical development of tag questions in English, see:
Hoffmann, ร. (2006). Tag questions in early and late Modern English: Historical description and
theoretical implications. Anglistik, 17(2), 35-55.
Tottie, G., & Hoffmann, ร. (2009). Tag questions in English: The first century. Journal of English Linguistics,
37(2), 130-161.
For a corpus study of the difference in tag question use between fictional dialogues and conversation, see:
Axelsson, K. (2011). Tag questions in fiction dialogue (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of
Gothenburg, Sweden.
For exercises on intonation of tag questions and alternative questions, see:
Celce-Murcia, M., Brinton, D., & Goodwin, J. (with Griner, B.). (2010). Teaching pronunciation: A course book
and reference guide (2nd ed.). NewWork, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Wisniewska, L, Riggenbach, H., & Samuda, V (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 2
(4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
For pedagogical suggestions on how to work with rhetorical questions, see:
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
278
The Grammar Book
Endnotes
1.	It is possible in informal English to use no as a tag with an affirmative anchor: e.g.. We have homework
today, no? but not yes with a negative anchor.
2.	Allerton (2009) notes that the traditional British use of have in a tag following an anchor with the
possessive have (Chérie has a chance, hasn't she?) is no longer favored by younger speakers ("those
under 60!"), who prefer to use do in the tag (Chérie has a chance, doesn't she?).
3.	Dialect-specific lexical-type tags include the Canadian eh and the British innit.
4.	This scale has been adapted from Givón (1993).
5.	เท her corpus study, Kimps (2007) found that in British English, tag questions with constant polarity most
frequently questioned or challenged new or unexpected information (57 percent), though they also
commonly sought verification (40 percent).
6.	A t-unit is an independent clause and any subordinate clauses or nonclausal structures associated with it.
7.	Utterances by two speakers printed on the same line indicates an overlap.
Chapter Ί 4: Tag, Alternative; Exclamatory'1 and Rhetorical Questions
279
Articles
Introduction
The English articles (i.e., definite the, indefinite a/an, and unstressed some/som/—as well as the use
of no article at all) are part of a larger system of reference and determination that we continue to
discuss in the next chapter. However, because of the learning difficulty and frequency of the articles,1
we treat them as a separate topic before taking on the larger systems in which they function.
Articles are understandably problematic from a cross-linguistic perspective: most Asian
and Slavic languages and many African languages have no articles. Even those languages that
do have articles or article-like morphemes (e.g., French, Spanish, Farsi, the Scandinavian
languages, and the Semitic languages) often use these morphemes in ways different from
English. For example, many of these article-using languages mark the generic use of an
abstract noun with their equivalent of the definite article. Thus, instead of saying Beauty is
truth, as the English poet Keats did, the literal equivalent of this sentence in many of these
languages would be *The beauty is the truth.
Errors in article usage are common among ESL/EFL learners and often persist among
learners at higher levels of proficiency. Research on ESL writing has found inaccurate article
use to be one of the most frequent errors committed (e.g., Bitchener, Young, & Cameron,
2005; Chandler, 2004). Teachers should be ready to encounter article errors of omission
(e.g., blue pen over there is mine) and substitution (e.g., Yesterday I heard the good joke) from
their students. A great deal of attention has been paid to these two basic types of errors, and
a range of explanations for why they are made has been put forth (for a concise overview of
patterns within these two error types, see Trenkic, 2009).
Articles not only present a challenge for learners, they also present a challenge
for teachers. It may be easy to spot article errors, but it is no simple task to explain their
corrections. Choosing the correct article is often based upon an intuitive judgment that is
hard to explain. Although many ESL/EFL textbooks present guidelines and rules of thumb
for article use, a teacher often does not have to wait long before one of his or her students has
found an exception to a rule.
By presenting information on article form, meaning, and use, this chapter aims both to
familiarize teachers with basic article guidelines and to prepare teachers for making sense of
what look like exceptions to those guidelines. We begin with structural facts about articles.
After examining their forms of pronunciation, we consider the classification of nouns upon
which choices of article form depend. We also briefly consider the syntax of articles in relation
to other determiners. We then explore the core meanings associated with the articles. Finally,
we discuss a variety of article uses and connect these back to the core meanings.
281
Form: Structural Facts about Articles
PRONUNCI AT I ONOfW	แ ——__
Although the definite article has an invariant spelling, the, it has four different pronunciations. The
two pronunciations that are most frequent and occur in normal speech in unstressed form are:
/ds/before a consonant sound2	/di/before a vowel sound (/ddValso occurs)
the book	the apple
the unit	the orange
the song	the elephant
Emphatic use of the definite article is pronounced as stressed /Qi/ะ
Citation:	The word the has four pronunciations, (stressed /S/v/or /hi/)
Emphatic:	I met THE Julia Roberts, (the actress, not someone else with the
same name) (stressed /hi/)
For the two forms a and an, the ท sound in the second reflects the historical relationship
of the indefinite article with one. The indefinite article realizes the form a before a word with
an initial consonant sound and the form an before a word with an initial vowel sound:
/a/before a consonant sound3	/an/before a vowel sound
a book	an apple
a unit	an idea
a student	an ear
The stressed form of the indefinite article is /e/ and is usually a citation form:
The indefinite article is most frequently realized as ต {lei).
However, this stressed form may also occur as an emphatic or contrastive form in natural
speech, as in the Peanuts cartoon script we cite later in this chapter (Not “A” dog ... "The" dog).
The plural or uncountable counterpart of a/an is generally unstressed /s อ!ท/ when used
as an article, as in the following sentence:
I went to the store and bought some apples and some rice.
This article function should be distinguished from three other determiner functions of some
that are stressed:
Partitive/quantifier: Some of the people left early. (some = part of the set)
Emphatic: That was some party!
Preservative: Some guy came to the door and tried to sell me a vacuum cleaner.
(some = a certain one and often conveys negative affect.)
It should be noted that the regular unstressed pronunciation of articles poses a significant
challenge for learners, who find It difficult to perceive articles, even though corpus studies
have shown that the and a (an) are among the five most frequently occurring words in the
English language, ranked first and fifth, respectively (Sinclair, 1991). For example, Pierce and
Ionin (2010) found that LI speakers of Korean and Mandarin made a number of transcription
errors on a task where participants were able to listen to the same sentences multiple times.
There was a tendency for the to be inserted in noun phrases in subject position and for articles
to be omitted in noun phrases in object position.
282
The Grammar Book
CLASSIFICATION OF NOUNS
Most of the strictly form-based information about English articles depends on the English
noun classification system. All English nouns are classified as either common nouns
(e.g., a boy, a country, a planet) or proper nouns (e.g., Bob Robertson, Denmark, Saturn). In
addition, all common nouns can be further classified as noncount nouns (e.g., water, clothing.,
luggage) or count nouns (e.g., /Z beverage, /7 shirt, z? suitcase). Noncount nouns, sometimes called
พ nouns, are singular in number for purposes of subject-verb agreement but cannot take
the indefinite article and the plural inflection as common count nouns do:
Noncount	Count (singular)
"a water, *some waters	a beverage, some beverages
"a luggage, "some luggages	a suitcase, some suitcases
Noncount nouns and plural count nouns do, however, share the possibility of taking the zero
article (i.e., no article at all) or indefinite some:
Noncount	Count (plural)
water	suitcases
some water	some suitcases
Proper nouns are a special case: like common noncount nouns, they usually take the zero
article and do not take the indefinite article; however, like common count nouns, they
sometimes appear with the plural inflection. In the plural, they require the definite article to
retain proper noun status:4
America, "an America, the (two) Americas l— North and South)
Mr. Wil so ท, "a Luke Wilson, the (two) Wilsons (— Luke and Owen)
While most singular proper nouns appear without an article, there are examples of some that
do take the definite article, such as the Mediterranean (Sea) and the Amazon (River).
A summary of English noun classifications and the article forms they may take are
shown in the following chart, where 0 represents the zero article:
Nouns
Proper (are inherently definite)
Common
	Count sg.	pl.		Noncount	sg-	pl.
DEFINITE	the	the	the	0	the
INDEFINITE	a/an	some/#	some/#		
The Count-Noncount Distinction
As noted above, the lexical classification of English common nouns into count and noncount
nouns is an important step in making proper article choices. The conceptual distinction is
problematic for ESL/EFL learners in that many languages make use of similar concepts;
however, what is countable (and thus either singular or plural) and what is uncountable is
somewhat arbitrary and varies to some extent from language to language. For example,
information and furniture are noncount nouns in English but count nouns in French and
Spanish, and chalk is a noncount noun in English but a count noun in Japanese. Also, even
within English itself many nouns can be used either as count or noncount nouns, which is
something we will discuss.
Chapter ไร:Articles
283
At a basic conceptual level, count nouns may be viewed as referring to objects, and
noncount nouns as referring to substances. Radden and Dirven (2007) identify boundedness
and internal composition as important criteria for distinguishing objects from substances.
An object tends to be perceived as having discrete boundaries and a heterogeneous internal
composition made up of different parts. If we take an apple, for example, we see a round shape
and different parts (e.g., skin, fruit, stem, core, seeds, etc.). Substances, lik& juice, lack inherent
boundaries and have a homogeneous internal composition. There are, however, noncount
nouns in English that appear to violate the criterion of homogeneity. Category terms, like
furniture or jewelry, although comprised of different objects or parts, are noncount nouns.
Radden and Dirven remind US that it is possible to change our perspective on entities so
that substances may be viewed as objects and objects may be viewed as substances. Pelletier
(2010) speaks of a universal packager, which turns noncount into count nouns, and a universal
grinder, which turns count into noncount nouns as in the following two sentences:
I'll have a juice.
When trying to make applesauce, we ended up with smashed apple all over the kitchen.
In the first sentence, the substance of juice has been packaged, given boundaries by a container
(perhaps a glass). In the second sentence, the individual objects (i.e., apples) have been ground
up, yielding a substance of indistinguishable parts.
Accepting that nouns can be count in one context and noncount in another is something
learners are known to struggle with (Amuzie & Spinner, 2013; Butler, 2002; Yoon, 1993). An
emphasis on perspective makes it easier to make sense of nouns that regularly appear as count
nouns and as noncount nouns. Abstract nouns (e.g., beauty, truth, crime, law, education) often exhibit
this flexibility. As noncount nouns, these nouns refer to abstract, general notions; as count nouns,
they refer to a specific instance of the general notion. Consider the following uses of the noun life·.
Life can be beautiful, (noncount)
The quick-thinking police officer saved a life, (count)
In the section on article use, we will see more examples of shifts in countability.
THE SYNTAX
The definite article, like demonstratives and possessive determiners, is considered a core
determiner and thus can optionally be preceded by one predeterminer and followed by one or two
postdeterminers (recall that the upper limit on total number of determiners seems to be three):
Predeterminer	Core	Postdeterminer	Head Noun
all	the	other	boys
the first, three cars
The indefinite article a/an has amore idiosyncratic distribution because it derives from
a number (one). The following are some common patterns involving the co-occurrence of
a/an with other determiners (see also Chapters 16 and 17):
1.	In measurements, in the sense of each, every, per.
60 miles an hour
twice a day	X
2.	After what and such and before singular nouns in exclamations:
What a day!
Such a nuisance!
284
The Grammar Book
z. Before the quantifiers few and little to impart a positive rather than a negative sense of
quantity:
Jake has (a) few friends.
(A) little money was missing.
4. A necessary part of lot of number of great/good deal ofwhen these are used as quantifiers:
a lot of energy
a (large) number of boats
a great deal of money
Meaning: Core Meanings of Articles
THE ΜΕΑΝΗ1θΊρ1ρ¥ΗΪΈΕηΝΪΤΕΑΊΒΤΓΐΉΈ~^^^^^^
The signals definiteness. Yet, there is disagreement as to what exactly definiteness is. Some
accounts, following Russell (1905), emphasize the idea of a unique referent while other
accounts, following Christophersen (1939), stress the speaker’s and listener’s familiarity with
the referent. Use of the definite article in the following sentence (uttered in a kitchen as two
people are preparing to bake cookies) expresses both uniqueness and familiarity:
Hand me the mixing bowl.
We can assume that there is one unique mixing bowl in this particular kitchen and that the
person to whom this utterance is directed is familiar with that bowl. There are, however, uses
of the definite article that are not so easily explained by uniqueness and familiarity. We will
explore some of these later in the chapter.
Hawkins (1978) provides a useful perspective on definiteness. His “location theory”
proposes that the serves as an instruction from the speaker/writer to the listener/reader
to locate the referent in the same shared mental set of objects. In the example above, the
speaker and listener share a set comprised of mental representations for distinct objects in
the kitchen. From this set, it is possible for the listener to locate the one mixing bowl. Thus,
the is a grammatical signal to identify a particular referent. Lyons (1999) defines definiteness
as “the grammaticalization of identifiability” (p. 278).
According to Bolinger (1975), “the definite article . . . single[s] out (makefs] definite)
the thing mentioned against the background of a more inclusive whole” (p. 181). Of course, an
important question arises as to what the “more inclusive whole” is. Against what background is
the referent to be identified? As pointed out by Halliday and Matthiessen (2014), the definite
article “will not tell you how to identify it [the referent] - the information is somewhere
around, where you can recover it” (p. 367). We will see that referents can be located against
a variety of backgrounds. For example, the necessary information might be found in the
immediate situation (as with the mixing bowl in the kitchen above) or it might be found
against the backdrop of ongoing text (e.g., has the referent been mentioned previously in
the conversation?). In the section on uses of the definite article, we will discuss these and
other possible backgrounds for identification. What is consistent, however, is that the signals
that a referent should be uniquely identified by the listener/reader. Under this account,
both uniqueness and familiarity are relevant factors: the referent should be unique against a
background with which the speaker/writer and listener/reader จxe. familiar.
Hawkins (1978) notes a further aspect of meaning when the definite article is used with
plural and noncount nouns. Inclusivity is the idea that reference is “to the totality of objects
Chapter 15: Articles
285
or mass” (p. 160). For example, in the following sentences, all of the chairs in the front row
should be turned and all of the snow should be removed from your boots:
Please turn the chairs in the front row.
Be sure to remove the snow from your boots.
This is sometimes called the maximality principle (Munn, Miller, & Schmitt, 2006).
The emphasis on identifiability reflects the origins of the definite article. The derives
from the demonstrative signaling distance (i.e., that), where the demonstrative serves a
deictic (or pointing) function. White (2010) suggests that once we identify an appropriate
background, we can conceptualize the as maintaining a pointing function. Again, we will see
examples of various backgrounds in the section of this chapter on uses of the definite article.
THE MEANING OF THE INDEFINITE ARTICLES
Rather than signaling identifiability, a/an signals the classification of a referent (Master, 1990).
The listener/reader does not need to locate the unique referent among a shared mental set of
objects. Instead, the indefinite article prompts the referent to be conceptualized as a member of a
larger class. Consider the following sentence (uttered in the same kitchen previously mentioned):
Get me a spoon.
It is not important that the listener and speaker have the exact same referent in mind.
The listener is free to choose any one spoon from the kitchen. With the above statement,
the speaker is signaling that he wants one member from the class of spoons. Given the
absence of unique identifiability, we can say that the referent is indefinite. That the indefinite
article indicates a quantity of one reflects its historical origins from the numeral one.
When unstressed some is used with plural count nouns and with noncount nouns, we see
the same function of classification:
Get me some eggs and some flour.
It is the class of eggs and the class of flour that are signaled by the choice of some. Notice that
there is no inclusivity or maximality. Instead, a “fuzzy” quantity is implied. When unstressed
some is used with plural count nouns, the meaning is somewhere between less-than-all and
more-than-one; with noncount nouns, the meaning is an unspecified amount (Radden &
Dirven, 2007).
The main distinction between a/an and some lies in the conceptualization of the referent.
For a/an, an entity is conceived of as an object within a larger class of such objects. For some,
an entity is conceived of either as a group of objects within a larger class of such objects or as
a portion of a substance.
THE meaningI^I^^erOrticle^	~
We have seen that the indefinite*and definite articles foreground referents against different
backgrounds. A/an and some signal a background of like entities (i.e., a larger class). The
signals a background of distinct entities (such as objects in a kitchen) from which the unique
referent can be identified. According to White (2010), the zero article signals no background
at all. Such a รนi generis conceptualization can lead to interpretations of both indefiniteness
and definiteness.
When used with noncount nouns and plural count nouns, the zero article, in the words
of Christophersen (1939), gives the “impression of something continuous with indefinite
limits” (p. 36). This impression is evident if we compare the following two sentences:
286
The Grammar Book
I need water.
I need some water.
Use of some in the second sentence imposes a limit on the quantity of water needed,
even though the precise amount remains unspecified. The first sentence, however, sets
no limits. There is no linguistic signal placing boundaries around the substance of water.
The focus is on the quality of the noun, and the quantity is irrelevant (Christophersen,
1939). Both some water and water are indefinite, as the listener/reader is not required to
uniquely identify the referents against a background of distinct objects shared with the
speaker/writer.
Proper nouns appearing with the zero article are interpreted as definite. This traditional
view is often based on the idea that proper nouns refer to unique individuals and that such
uniqueness is sufficient for identifiability (see Lyons, 1999 for discussion of this point). If
they refer to individuals and not sets, proper nouns do not need indefinite articles because
there is no need to classify them within a larger set. If by definition they are unique, proper
nouns do not need definite articles to signal that they are uniquely identifiable. The utterance
“Michael Jordan” both implies a unique individual and fails to evoke a larger class of Michael
Jordans. Just as with indefinite noncount and plural count nouns, 0 used with proper nouns
prompts no foregrounding against a background. The referent is รนi generis, or unto itself.
The Use of Articles
Article use is not simply an independent decision made by the speaker/writer, but rather a
reflection of shared knowledge between the interactants in any act of ongoing communication.
The speaker/writer must assess the interlocutor’s background knowledge and make a series
of assumptions regarding the information that he or she shares (or does not share) with the
interlocutor. Pica (1983) notes that in the sentence-level examples given in grammars and
textbooks, a and the can often be interchanged without any loss of grammaticality; however,
in natural data, she notes that communication breaks down when articles are used with
reference to items that exist in one participant’s experience but not in the other’s. Here is an
example we have found of the phenomenon that Pica discusses:
A: Where's the dessert?
B: What dessert?
A: You were supposed to bring the dessert.
Differences in the perspectives or experiences of participants can also be a source of humor:
"Peanuts" cartoon:
Frame 1: Girl standing at front door with Snoopy says:
There's a dog here who wants to come in.
Frame 2: Snoopy thinks:
Not "A" dog... "The" dog!
USES OF THE_____________________________________________________________
Hawkins (1978) originally identified eight uses of the definite article for nongeneric reference.
Liu and Gleason (2002) consolidate this classification scheme to include four uses: situational,
textual, cultural, and structural. Their scheme was validated by García Mayo (2008), and we
will adopt it here.
Chapter 15: Articles
287
Situational Use
We have already seen an example of situational use, in which two interlocutors standing in a
kitchen are able to identify one mixing bowl. Because of unique identifiability, speakers are
able to use the definite article with the first mention of a common noun. Imagine a family
sitting around the dinner table. One person says to another:
Pass me the salt, please.
The background for identification here is the set of things that are immediately perceptible.
The listener can identify or single out the salt from other things that are sitting on the table: the
pepper, the bread, the water jug, etc. At times, the referent may not be immediately perceptible:
Don't go in there. The dog will bite you.
In this situation, the listener may not be able to see the dog (and may not have previously
known about it). Yet the use of the definite article alerts the listener that the present situation
contains one potentially dangerous dog, which can be uniquely identified against the
background of things that are in there.
Textual Use
Here the speaker/writer assumes that it is not the immediate situation, but rather the text or
the ongoing discourse that allows for a referent to be uniquely identified. Textual use of the
includes cases of anaphoric reference:
Fred left an important book on his desk this morning. He returned home in the
afternoon to get the book.
The background for identification here is the set of things that have been mentioned in the
prior text. The listener/reader is able to identify or single out the book from other things that
have been mentioned: Fred, his desk, this morning. In traditional narratives, it is common to
introduce participants with an indefinite article and to use the definite article or a personal
pronoun for subsequent mentions of the same participant. As noted by Ariel (1990), the
decision between the and a pronoun is one of accessibility. Speakers use pronouns for that
which they consider to be more accessible to their interlocutors. Consider these examples
from Epstein (2002):
1.	There's a cat in the yard. It's eating a mouse.
2.	There's a cat in the yard. ?The cat is eating a mouse.
3.	There's a cat and a dog in the yard. The cat is eating a mouse.
The second sentence in (1) is preferred, but the second sentence in (2) sounds odd because
a cat has just been mentioned, making the referent highly accessible. This referent is less
accessible in (3) because two entities have been introduced in the discourse. A pronoun in
(3) is not appropriate because it would be unclear whether reference was to the previously
mentioned cat or dog.
Textual use sftso includes cases of associative anaphoric reference:
I gave Fred a new book. He láter told me the author was not his favorite.
We see the use of the definite article with a noun that is mentioned for the first time. The
background for identification here is more than the referents in the previous text (I, Fred, a
new book); the background includes things associated with those referents. Mention of a new
book triggers the schematic notion that a book has a cover, pages, an author, a publisher, etc.
The listener/reader is expected to identify or single out the author from among these things.
Epstein (2002) considers uses of the with first-mention nouns that do not exhibit
anaphoric or associative anaphoric reference. For example, he notes the beginning of a
conversation:
288
The Grammar Book
M: Did you hear about the fight?
A: What fight?
M: Between Bob and Grandpa...
Rather than referring back to something that has already been mentioned, the fight seems to
refer forward to something that will be explained in the ensuing conversation. Epstein posits
that such first-mention use of the “trigger [ร] the interpretation that a discourse entity is highly
prominent, i.e., that the entity plays an important part in the broader discourse context”
(p. 349). This sort of opening (which is common in literature) has the effect of drawing the
reader into the story, as if he or she were already familiar with the participants and locale.5
Notice the article use in the opening paragraph of William Faulkner’s (1931) Sanctuary (p. 3):
From beyond the screen of bushes which surrounded the spring, Popeye watched the
man drinking. A faint path led from the road to the spring. Popeye watched the man—
a tall, thin man, hatless, in worn gray flannel trousers and carrying a tweed coat under
his arm—emerge from the path and kneel to drink at the spring.
Right from the beginning, the reader gets the screen, the spring, the man, and the road. Although
Faulkner uses the, man in lines 1 and 2, later in line 3, he refers to the same character with a
man (using the indefinite article to classify). These uses of the are examples of speakers/writers
manipulating the core meaning of the definite article—imposing familiarity onto a text that
is about to be heard or read.
Cultural Use
Eiu and Gleason (2002) consider cultural use to be use of the definite article “with a noun that is
a unique and well-known referent in a speech community” (p. 7). Common examples presented
in ESE/EFE textbooks are the รนท and the moon, where the background for identification comes
from general knowledge of the skies. The รนท and the moon are unique and can be identified
from among other entities such as clouds, stars, and planets. Notice that this set of objects
shared among language users is made up of what we see in the skies with the naked eye. If we
shift our frame of reference (i.e., the background for identifiability) to the universe, we can no
longer talk about a unique รนท and moon. Because there are many suns and moons in this larger
background of the universe, it would be more appropriate to refer to our รนท and our moon.
There are examples of cultural use that seem to challenge the importance of uniqueness
and familiarity. Consider the following:
We listened to the radio.6
I talked to Burt on the phone.
The listener may not be able to identify the exact radio or phone in the sentences above. The
same could be said of the following:
I'm going to	the store/mall the bank the park the library the movies the beach
In such cases, the listener may well know, but does not need to know, the specific store,
bank, and so on that is involved. To account for these examples, we might revisit the core
meaning of the definite article. Against what backgrounds are the referents being singled
out? Consider:
Zahra took the train to Boston.
Chapter 15 -.Articles
289
Rather than identify a specific train, it seems the listener/reader is being asked to identify one
mode of transport against the background of different modes of transportation. With the radio
and the phone above, identification takes place against the background of different modes of
communication. And with the store and the other similar examples, identification takes place against
the background of different public or recognizable places. As we will see, this use of the definite
article seems to approach generic reference—where one type or class is foregrounded against
other types or classes.
Patterns of article usage are sometimes relatively fixed for given disciplines and topics,
which is of some comfort to those who teach English for specific purposes. For example, in
medicine, anatomy, and biology, two article patterns seem to be used for both specific and
generic reference to organs of the body:
Pattern ใ (the + singular noun)	Pattern 2 ("the + plural noun)
(for singular body parts)	(for plural or paired body parts)
the heart	the ears
the liver	the eyes
the stomach	the lungs
the bladder	the teeth
For both these patterns, unique identifiability takes place against the background of the
human body. There is one heart and one liver, just as there are two ears and two eyes to be
identified from among other body parts.
The names of physical ailments and diseases, however, present a much greater learning
problem because of the variety of article patterns and the singular and the plural forms they
take; they run the whole gamut of article and noun number patterns, the only overlap being
the option of using either pattern 2 or pattern 4 for certain diseases, e.g.,:
Pattern 1	Pattern 2	Pattern 3 (a/an + sg noun)	Pattern 4 (0 + plural noun)	Pattern 5 (0 + noncount)
the flu	the mumps	a cold	mumps	pneumonia
the plague	the measles	a headache	measles	cancer
the gout	the bends	a hernia	bends	malaria
Occasionally, the same disease has two different names occurring in two different patterns:
Pattern 1 ะ the flu
Pattern 5: influenza
The name of a disease and its article and noun number usage pattern should be mastered as
a lexical unit if ESL/EFL students are to avoid making recurring errors when they refer to
ailments and diseases because no straightforward system underlies their usage. To assist in
their learning, students can be encouraged to conceptualize different backgrounds for the
various patterns. For example, patterns 1 and 2 signal unique identifiability of one type of
disease against the. background of other types of disease. Pattern 3 evokes the background of
other instances of the same ailment (e.g., one cold among other colds). Patterns 4 and 5 may
be considered to lack any background, the zero article offering a close-up view on the illness.
Use of the with some proper nouns can also be considered a cultural use. Common
patterns include use of the definite article with certain names of public institutions (e.g., the
New York Stock Exchange, the Guggenheim Museum, the Apollo Theater) and geographical names
(e.g., the Hudson River, the Atlantic Ocean). As noted by Liu and Gleason (2002), however, which
290
The Grammar Book
names take the definite article appears to be largely a matter of convention. Consider the
following list; the head noun is indicated in parentheses when deletion is possible:
regions: the Caucasus, the Crimea, the Roussillon,...
deserts: the Sahara (Desert), the Mohave (Desert),...
peninsulas: the Monterey Peninsula, the Iberian Peninsula,...
oceans and seas: the Pacific (Ocean), the Black Sea, the Mediterranean (Sea),...
gulfs: the Gulf of Mexico, the Persian Gulf,...
rivers: the Mississippi (River), the Amazon (River),...
canals: the Brie Canal, the Suez Canal, the Panama Canal,...
While the is used in the names of the previously given geographic bodies, it is not used in the
names of the following:
continents: Asia, South America, Africa,...
countries: Canada, prance, Nigeria,...
counties: Nassau County, Cook County,...
cities: Dallas, l-ondon, Tokyo,... (exception: The Hague)
mountains: Mount Whitney, Mount Aetna,... (exception: The Matterhorn)
lakes: Lake Michigan, Lake Baikal,... (exception: The Great Salt Lake)
islands: Catalina Island, Staten Island,...
points: point Dume, Point Mugu,...
bays: San Francisco Bay, Tampa Bay,...
capes: Cape Cod, Cape Canaveral,...
parks: Yosemite National Park, Douglas Park,...
regions: Appalachia, Alsace, Siberia,...
streets, roads, avenues, boulevards, and so on: Downing street. Abbey Road, Wilshire
Boulevard, Fifth Avenue, Rodeo Drive,...
squares: Trafalgar Square, Union Square,...
hot plural or collective geographical names, the following categories are relevant and are
consistent with plural proper noun conventions, which require use of the·.
countries (if viewed as unions, federations, collections of islands): the U.S.A., the United Kingdom,
the Philippines,...
lakes (if they form a geological group): the Great Lakes, the Finger Lakes,...
mountain ranges: the Rocky Mountains (or the Rockies), the Alps, the Andes,...
islands (if viewed as a group): the Canary Islands, the Azores, the Bahamas,...
With the exception of “regions,” geographical names seem to pattern fairly neatly according
to their geographical features. As such, it may be helpful for learners to conceptualize
geographical names that take the definite article as being identified against a background of
other like features. For instance, the Amazon River evokes a background of other rivers, and
the Azores evoke a background of other islands. Against these backgrounds, a unique referent
is singled out.
We saw a similar conceptualization for the used emphatically with people’s names, as in:
I met THE Julia Roberts.
Here, Julia Roberts is used in a common noun pattern and evokes a class of other individuals
with the same name. In this example, there is a set of Julia Roberts, one of whom—the famous
actress—is uniquely identifiable.
Chapter 15 -.Articles
291
In rare cases, it is possible for the same speaker to refer to the same entity as either a
proper or common noun:
Proper: Earth
Common: the earth
Used as a proper name, “Earth” fits the same paradigm as the other planets in our solar system—
Mercury, Venus, Mars, and so on; it is also used poetically or in personifications as a proper noun:
(Mother) Earth. Used as a unique common noun, the earth relates to the รนท, the moon, the land,
and the sea as part of our immediately visible environment. Thus, speakers can have different
frames of reference for one and the same entity, and they reflect this in their article usage.
Structural Use
Structural use is defined by Liu and Gleason (2002) as the use of the with first-mention
nouns that are modified. Modification—in the form of relative clauses, prepositional phrases,
and appositives—can come after nouns, and the use of the definite article in such contexts
may be considered cataphoric reference (Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad, & Finegan, 1999)
or pointing forward, as we saw in the Faulkner quote earlier in the chapter. Consider the
following sentences:
The person who called was rude.
I remember the beginning of the war very well.
The number seven is considered lucky.
The postmodification here provides information that enables the listener/reader to identify a
unique referent: from among the set of people, one person called; from among the set of different
stages of a war, there is one beginning; from among the set of numbers, there is one seven.
It should be noted that some learners overgeneralize and mistakenly equate any example
of postmodification with use of the definite article (Butler, 2002). Students should thus be
alerted to the fact that a may also be used with postmodified nouns. There is, however, a
difference in meaning:
The person who called was rude.
A person who called was rude.
Given the definite article’s core meaning of unique identifiability, the first sentence suggests
that only one person called, and this person seems to exhibit Epstein’s (2002) discourse
prominence. With the second sentence, however, we can imagine multiple people calling, i.e.,
there is a class of people who called. A person who called is one member of that class and is not
expected to be identified by the listener/reader.
This post-modified structural use can be found with names. In such cases, the names are
no longer functioning as true proper nouns:
The George that called yesterday called again today.
In this example, we can imagine a background of Georges. It is the relative clause that called
yesterday which enables the referent to be uniquely identified.
Modification in structural use may also come before nouns. Consider the following
example of a first-mention noun with the definite article:
The first man on the moon was Neil Armstrong.
Unique identifiability is possible here because of our general conceptual knowledge and the
description within the entire noun phrase. We understand that among a set of rankings, there
is one first position, one second position, one third position and so on. The referent for
the first man on the moon can be singled out against the background of a series of men on the
moon. This general conceptual knowledge helps explain why the definite article often co-
occurs with ordinals and superlatives.
292
The Grammar Book
Generic Use
Generic reference may be understood as that which refers to a kind (e.g., the tiger is a ferocious
animal) or reports a general property (e.g., a tiger eats meat) (Krifka, Pelletier, Carlson,
ter Meulen, Chierchia, & Link, 1995). Four patterns of article usage have been identified as
expressing generic reference:
1.	à -h singular noun
2.	the + plural noun
3.	a/an + singular noun
4.	0 + plural noun/noncount noun
Here, we examine the two patterns with the definite article. The third and fourth
patterns will be discussed later in the sections on indefinite article use and zero article use,
respectively. The first pattern [the + singular noun] represents formal usage. It describes
classes of humans, animals, body organs, plants, and countable inanimate objects that are
presented as human inventions whose origins can be traced: the gas lamp, the can opener, the
laser, the computer, and so on. It is not appropriate as a generic pattern for countable inanimate
objects that gradually developed over time and are not thought of as having been invented:
the book, the window, the table, the chair, and so forth.7 In a study of article usage in articles
published in Scientific American, Master (1987) found that the first pattern [the + singular
noun] was the one most likely to occur with noun subjects and to mark the topic of the essay;
this pattern was also more likely to occur in first sentences of paragraphs and in introductions
and conclusions of essays than elsewhere.
Stern (1977) found that the second pattern [the + plural noun] is the most limited of the
four patterns with countable nouns. It usually expresses generic facts about human groups8
that have a religious, political, national,9 linguistic, social, or occupational/professional basis.
Group affiliation is critical. This is not true of pattern 1, where science-based class membership
rather than social group affiliation was found to be the main criterion. Thus, the following are
not acceptable as generic statements (they are, however, acceptable as specific statements):
*The tigers are ferocious beasts.
*The roses need water.
*The pianos are splendid instruments.
However, any of the other three patterns for countable nouns would produce acceptable
generic statements for these examples. Pattern 2 is sometimes realized as [the + adjective],
where the adjective acts as a noun and serves to identify a particular group of people: the rich,
the poor, the Swedish, the Chinese, etc. It is interesting to note that inclusivity is not retained
as part of the meaning when the pattern [the + plural noun] is used for generic reference,
i.e., exceptions are allowed. For example, the statement the Brazilians are good soccer players
does not require that every single citizen of Brazil play soccer well.
The definite article’s core meaning of unique identifiability is maintained in both
patterns 1 and 2. The referent (in this case a class) is identified from among other classes.
Consider the sentences below:
The tiger is a ferocious animal.
The Brazilians are good soccer players.
In the first sentence, the class of tiger is foregrounded against the background of other
classes of animal. In the second sentence, the class of Brazilians is foregrounded against the
background of other nationalities.
Chapter Ί 5: Articles
293
USES OF A and some	_________________
Nonspecific and specific Use
With a core meaning of classification, indefinite articles can be used with both nonspecific
and specific referents:
I am going to buy a house, but I haven't found one yet.
I am going to buy a house. It's on 13th Avenue.
In the first sentence, there is no specific house that the listener (or the speaker) can identify;
in the second sentence, although the speaker has a specific house in mind, she or he presumes
that the listener cannot identify it. The choice of a in both sentences classifies that which
is going to be bought. In neither sentence does the speaker think that the listener could
uniquely identify a particular house at the time of the utterance. The same motivation applies
for use of some·.
We should get some costumes for the Halloween party. Any costumes will do.
I bought some wine for the party.
In the first example, some costumes are nonspecific for the speaker and the listener, whereas
some -wine is specific for the speaker but nonspecific for the listener. What is important is that
both costumes and twine are indefinite. The speaker presumes an inability by the listener to
uniquely identify them.
That indefinite articles can be used with specific referents is an important point to
make to students. Ionin, Ko, and Wexler (2004) have shown a tendency by some learners
to mistakenly equate use of a with nonspecific referents and the with specific referents
(e.g., * Jackie bought the new car.}. Obviously, such a strategy for article use will produce
inappropriate articles with indefinite specific referents. As Trenkic (2009) points out, learners
should not assume the is used with any noun that they can identify in the real world, without
regard for the discourse or the perspectives of the discourse participants. Learners need to
consider the perspective of the listener/reader as well as the perspective of the speaker/writer.
Shifting Countability
As discussed earlier, indefinite articles can be used to turn noncount nouns into count nouns.
With such a shift in countability comes a change in meaning or perspective:
Noncount (substance) ->	Count (unit or serving)
coffee	a coffee	some coffees
chocolate	a chocolate	some chocolates
We can conceive of chocolate as a delicious non-individuated substance or as an individuated
object that comes in a wrapper. We can also shift our perspective on mass or noncount nouns
from generic substances to more‘specific types of that substance:
Noncount (generic)	—»	Count (type)
cheese	a cheese	some cheeses
tea	a tea	some teas
Often the same mass noun can occur with both of the above count noun interpretations,
depending on the context; for..example:
that café has some interesting teas, (types)
I'll have a tea with lemon, (serving)
294
The Grammar Book
Of course, many idiosyncratic meaning relationships involving noncount and count nouns
must be learned independent of any such regular semantic shifts; in these cases, the meaning
change is not predictable, so the combinations and their meanings must be learned as
individual lexical items:
Mass	Count (singular)	Count (plural)
air (the atmosphere)	an air (melody)	airs (mannerisms)
glass (the silicate-based substance)	a glass (beverage container)	glasses (spectacles)
iron (the metal)	an iron (for pressing clothes)	irons (golf clubs)
Shifting Proper Nouns to Common Nouns
Indefinite articles can also be used to turn a proper noun into a common noun;
She met a John Smith yesterday.
The person whom she met is classified as one John Smith among a larger set of John Smiths.
Personal names are not the only proper nouns that can shift to common noun use. Trade
names often exhibit a metonymical shift, where the name of the company is used to refer to
one of its products:
She drives a Mercedes (car).
I have a Cuisinart (food processor) at home.
He has a Galaxy (smart phone).
Please pass me a Kleenex (tissue).
Generic Use
The pattern [a/an + singular noun] is the most colloquial way of expressing a generality. One
member of a class is representative of the entire class:
A dog makes a good pet.
This pattern can be used to express informal generalities for all semantic contexts except those
where collectivity or group cohesiveness is being expressed. It should also be observed that because
the focus is on one member, it is impossible to use this form for certain generic statements, such as:
*A dinosaur is extinct.
The entire class of dinosaurs is extinct, not one representative member.
USES OF 0	_______________________________________________
The zero article can be used in what appear to be indefinite and definite contexts. In fact,
Master (1997), like Chesterman (1991) and Yotsukura (1970), distinguishes between two
“zero” articles. One occurs with noncount and plural nouns (e.g., milk, eggs) and is referred
to as the zero article, and the other occurs with proper nouns and certain singular count
nouns (e.g., London, lunch) and is referred to as the null article. The zero article is claimed
to be the most indefinite of English articles, whereas the null article is the most definite
(Chesterman, 1991). Given what we believe is a common core meaning, we use only the term
zero article for both contexts.
Use in Indefinite Contexts
As noted earlier, the distinction between 0 and some in indefinite contexts is one of quality
versus quantity. Use of the zero article with noncount and plural count nouns puts the focus
on the entity itself, not on an amount or number:
They saw fish at the aquarium.
Chapter 15:Articles
295
If the speaker had instead said some fish, a “fuzzy” quantity of fish is implied. The distinction
between 0 and a/an in indefinite contexts is one of perspective on the referent. Use of the zero
article promotes a conceptualization of substance, whereas a/an promotes a conceptualization
of object or type:
The boys ate (a) chicken.
He sells (a) cheese of uncommon flavor.
While we suggested above that the core meaning of indefinite articles was classification,
there is a particular context in which the zero article serves that function as well. When a
sentence subject in the singular is classified by a subject predicate, the correct article choice
for the latter is a/an·.
John is a teacher.
This is a pencil.
However, if the sentence subject you are classifying is plural, the appropriate article choice is 0:
John and Bill are teachers.	These are pencils.
"John and Bill are some teachers. "These are some pencils.
Use in Definite Contexts
As previously discussed, the zero article is often used with proper nouns. There are also times
when 0 is used with common nouns in definite contexts. Master (1997) identifies three such
occasions where 0 may be considered to alternate with the·.
1.	Mr. Phillips was appointed (the) treasurer
2.	It usually snows here in (the) winter.
3.	(The) Lunch was quite uneventful.
In each of these examples, the evokes a background for unique identification (e.g., different
titles or positions, the four seasons, salient events for the speaker and the listener). Use of 0
puts the focus squarely on the referent by removing any instructions to the listener to identify
it against a shared set of objects. As with proper nouns, identifiability is a given.
A similar thing happens when 0 is used with certain institutions. Where we might
expect an article, none is used:
They're going to school/prison/church/temple.. .10
Hewson (1972) notes that the zero article with a singular common noun provides “an interior,
qualitative view” of the referent (p. 106). It may help to conceptualize these nouns, when used
without an article, as noncount. In the examples above, the focus appears to be on activity
(such as studying, serving a sentence, worshiping,) rather than on any particular building or
place. With an activity-oriented focus, the referents lack physical boundaries. This contrasts
with a focus on the physical location, which would require the use of an article:
I'm going to a/the school. (Idiave an appointment with the principal.)
Generic Use
The pattern [0 + plural noun/noncount noun] is the most common way of expressing
generic reference (Biber et al., 1999). It can be used in almost all the discourse environments;
in addition, it can be used to make generic statements about simple inanimate objects:
- Books fill leisure time for many people.
296
The Grammar Book
Less formal than use of the definite article with a singular count noun, the 0 pattern ranges from
semiformal to informal registers. The generalization is made simply by pluralizing and requires
no abstract classification. As such, Radden and Dirven (2007) describe this pattern as conveying
generalizations “based on vague, impressionistic judgments” (p. 109) and allowing for exceptions.
It should be noted that learners, when attempting to make generic statements, may at
times inappropriately use the definite article with plural nouns and noncount nouns, as in:
*The amusement parks are fun.
*The red wine is good for you.
In some languages (like Spanish) these sentences would be grammatical. Thus, for some
learners, such usage of the definite article could be considered a result of cross-linguistic
influence from the LI. However, Ionin and Montrul (2009) suggest that learners whose LI
(e.g., Korean and Japanese) lacks such generic forms may also think that these forms are
generic and equate them with their topic markers which are also used to mark nouns as
generic. Teachers may want to stress that the use of [the + plural noun] for generic reference
is highly restricted and that [0 + plural/noncount noun] is the most frequent form.
Conclusion
Of course, much more needs to be said about article usage in English. We hope that this
chapter provides a foundation. We discuss article usage again from time to time when it
overlaps with other grammatical topics, as in Chapters 17, 23, and 35.
In other words, article usage cannot be compartmentalized. Articles are everywhere in
English. As an ESLZEFL teacher, you must be prepared to cope with the varied learning problems
that your students will have related to the use of articles. Focused instruction (i.e., systematic
presentation in a hierarchy of manageable segments with meaningful iterative activities) can
make a difference and can help learners improve their use of articles. In addition, Master (1995)
recommends providing feedback on article usage in students’ written work, having brief class
discussions of article usage patterns, and asking students to keep records of their article errors.
Although the article system in English is extremely complex, many aspects of it are teachable. In
the teaching suggestions that follow, we provide some exercises that we have found to be useful.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form. To raise students’ awareness of the pronunciation of the definite article, elicit the
names of different animals. List these in two columns, depending on whether the animal
name begins with a consonant or vowel sound. The columns might look like this:
dog elephant
cat	ostrich
sheep	ant
Place the before each of the names. Then ask your students if there is any difference
between the pronunciation of the in the first column and in the second column. You
might read the columns aloud and emphasize a vowel distinction in the definite articles
(e.g., /0λ/ dog vs. /di/ elephant). It is worth drawing learners’ attention to the fact that the
two columns also prompt different forms of the indefinite article: a for the first, an for
the second.
Chapter 15: Articles
297
2.	Form. Following Berry’s (1991) suggestion to focus on perception of articles in addition
to production, you can try simple dictation with your students. Read a variety of sentences
that contain articles and ask your students to write down what they hear. In order to expose
students to the most frequent article forms in natural speech, be sure to produce unstressed
/õo/, /a/, /an/, and /sam/.
3.	Meaning. Ίο practice the count-noncount distinction, Niemeier (2008) suggests an
activity in which students plan a class trip. The particular focus is on food and what students
would like to eat on the trip. After eliciting examples from the class (e.g., oranges, bananas,
bread, chocolate, etc.), the teacher asks students to categorize the examples as count nouns or
noncount nouns. For nouns that can appear in both categories (e.g., chocolate), students are
encouraged to discuss differences in meaning and perspective when the item is viewed as a
mass object versus when it is viewed as a countable object.
4.	Form/Meaning. To practice classification with indefinite articles, try the following.
a.	Use the indefinite article to classify objects in the room in which you are teaching.
“What’s in this room?” can be used as a lead-off question. Elicit responses that
distinguish a from an and then the singular form from the articleless plural.
This is a(n)(sg.) (orange, book)
This is a(n)(sg.)ZThese are_________ร. (pl.) (a book/books)
b.	To stress normal indefinite noun usage—as opposed to the subject noun predicate
usage shown above in suggestion 4a—have your students practice describing their
possessions using a/an for singular nouns and unstressed some for mass or plural nouns.
I have a What do you have? I have some What do you have?
5.	Meaning. Give your students practice interpreting the meaning behind articles with a
modified cloze activity. As was done in Butler (2002), have your students fill in the missing
articles and then explain their article choices. This should allow you to see if students
are failing to consider the perspective of the listener/reader, confusing definiteness with
specificity, employing faulty rules for article use, or exhibiting other problems (e.g., ignoring
the count/noncount status of nouns).
6.	Meaning/Use. Give your students practice in expressing generic usage with the zero
article (especially abstract nouns) with the following activity, suggested by Wisniewska,
Riggenbach, and Samuda (2007). Ask students to interview people about what they think
is most important for achieving happiness. Prior to the activity, elicit from students or
provide them with a list of possible abstract nouns, such as love, romance, money, success,
health, religion. Discuss the appropriateness of zero article usage. Students then report
their results to the class, monitoring themselves and being monitored by their peers for
correct article usage.	พ่··
7.	Use. For article use with geographical names and features, try using world maps in the
classroom. Students working* in pairs or small groups choose a country or region and
identify the salient geographical features in their chosen place. They then prepare a
brief presentation on the geography of the country or region, giving special attention to
accurate article use.
298
The Grammar Book
8.	Use. Give your students practice in expressing generic concepts appropriate to different
registers:
Cue: elephant/gigantic
a.	Formal—The elephant is gigantic/a gigantic land mammal.
b.	Less formal—Elephants are gigantic/gigantic animals.
c.	Colloquial—An elephant IS huge.
9.	Use. Develop students’ awareness of the article system at higher levels, especially for
academic purposes, by studying texts from the students’ disciplines together in class. This
can uncover specific patterns of usage.
10.	Use. H. Williams (personal communication) suggests that teachers of academic English
spend some time teaching those common nouns or descriptions that are unique by definition
and where the works practically 100 percent of the time:
The first point	The second point The third point ... The tenth point
The previous point	The next point	The last point
By drawing a loop from one point back to that point, illustrate:
The same point
Show students that these “points” can be rhetorical as well as literal/mathematical, and
that one can use these determiners with many other head nouns: argument, example, draft,
case, page, line, paragraph, and so on.
Exercises
Test your knowledge of what has been presented.
1. Write an original sentence or two to illustrate the following terms. Underline the term
in your example.	/ 1
a.	common count noun	' I
b.	common noncount noun
c.	proper noun
d.	definite article (situational use)
e.	definite article (textual use)
f.	definite article (cultural use)
g.	definite article (structural use)
h.	indefinite article (classification)
i.	0 article (generic)
j.	shifting countability
Chapter 15: Articles
299
' 2. \lf your students produce the following, what norms of Standard English have they not
__j followed?
a.	*The child has a milk on his shirt.
b.	*They gave US many informations.
c.	*1 have big examination today.
d.	“Nowadays, personal computer isn’t luxury anymore.
e.	“When I went to the Europe....
f.	*1 enjoy writing the poetry. It’s my hobby.
g.	*My brother is student.
3.	In what two ways can the following sentence be interpreted?
John is interested in buying a car.
4.	Classify the following definite articles according to the classification system of Liu and
Gleason (2002): situation use, textual use, cultural use, and structural use.
a.	Have you seen the film that just won the award for best picture?
b.	Let me have the check. It’s my turn to pay. (spoken immediately after the waiter
brings the check)
c.	I did a grammar course last year. My friend is going to do the course next year.
d.	When’s the last time you really had a good time?
e.	Watch out for the rude fans. Sometimes they get out of control, (inside a sports stadium)
f.	I went to New York City last week. The traffic is awful.
g.	What is the governor doing about unemployment?
5.	Explain the different speaker conceptualizations for the noun coffee in the following
sentences:
a.	Coffee is a stimulant.
b.	I’d like a coffee, please.
c.	The coffee here is good.
d.	This café has dozens of different coffees.
TTest your ability to apply what you know.
! 6. j Each sentence below has been uttered by an ESL/EFL student. Give reasons for your
. corrections using concepts and terminology from the chapter.
a.	*“Blue pen over there is mine. ” (pointing to a table that has one blue pen and three
black pens)
b.	*“Do we have a homework tonight?"
c.	* “Yesterday I heard the good joke. Let me tell it to you.” (the listeners do not know
what joke the speaker is talking about)
d.	“"The water is necessary for life.” (attempting to make a general statement)
e.	“‘Do you live near Mediterranean Sea?”
300
The Grammar Book
7.	Find a short text and create a modified cloze activity by removing all the articles
(including zero article) and inserting underlined gaps in their place. Give this activity
to a range of individuals who are proficient speakers of English. Do the individuals
insert all of the original articles? Do the responses differ from one individual to
another? Ask your respondents to explain their article choices. This exercise should
highlight the importance of perspective and conceptualization in article usage.
8.	Have a friend (who is a proficient speaker of English) perform a role-play with you.
Ask your friend to be a driving instructor. You are a complete novice driver and know
nothing about cars. Sit side by side with your friend, as if you were sitting in the front
of a car, and ask him or her to explain the different parts around you. You might begin
by pointing to the area in front of your friend (where the steering wheel should be)
and ask “What’ร this?" Listen carefully for the articles that are used. For example,
does your friend respond with one of the following?
(This is) the steering wheel.
(This is) a steering wheel.
Is the same [article + noun] pattern produced for all the parts of the car? Point out
to your friend the different patterns (or the one pattern) that was used and ask if he
or she can provide an explanation. Try this with different people and see if there are
different patterns and explanations.
9.	Find two academic texts from different disciplines. Examine the patterns for generic
reference inf each''text. Is there any noticeable difference in terms of frequency of patterns?
Bibliography
REFERENCE^^^^ '	‘
Amuzie, G., & spinner, p. (2013). Korean EFL learners’ indefinite article use with four types of abstract
nouns. Applied Linguistics, 34(4), 415-434.
Ariel, M. (1990). Accessing noun-phrase antecedents. London, England: Routledge.
Berry, R. (1991). Re-articulating the articles. ELTJ, 45(3), 252-259.
Biber, D., Johansson, ร., Leech, G., Conrad, ร., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and
written English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ltd.
Bitchener, J., Young, ร., & Cameron, D. (2005). The effect of different types of corrective feedback on ESL
student writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 14, 191-205.
Bolinger, D. (1975). A postscript to Poston on the article. Modern Language Journal, 59(4), 181-185.
Butler, YG. (2002). Second language learners’ theories on the use of English articles: An analysis of the
metalinguistic knowledge used by Japanese students in acquiring the English article system. Studies in
Second Language Acquisition, 24, 451-480.
Chandler, J. (2004). The efficacy ofvarious kinds of error feedback for improvement in the accuracy and
fluency of L2 student writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 12, 267-296.
Chesterman, A. (1991). On definiteness: A study with special reference to English and Finnish. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Christophersen, p. (1939). The articles: A study of their theory and use in English. Copenhagen, Denmark:
Einar Munksgaard.
Covitt, R. (1976). Some problematic grammar areas for ESL teachers (Unpublished master's thesis).
University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Chapter ไร·. Articles
301
Epstein, R. (2002). The definite article, accessibility, and the construction of discourse referents. Cognitive
Linguistics, 72(4), 333-378.
Faulkner, พ (1931). Sanctuary. New York, NY: Jonathan Cape and Harrison Smith.
García Mayo, Μ. p. (2008). The acquisition of four nongeneric uses of the article the by Spanish EFL
learners. System, 36, 550-565.
Halliday, M. A. K., & Matthiessen, c. Μ. I. M. (2014). Halliday's introduction to functional grammar
(4th ed.). London, England: Routledge.
Hawkins, J. (1978). Definiteness and indefiniteness. Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Academic Press.
Hewson, J. (19Ί2). Article andnoun in English. The Hague: Mouton.
Ionin, T-, Ko, H., & Wexler, K. (2004). Article semantics in L2 acquisition: The role of specificity.
Language Acquisition, 12, 2-69.
Ionin, T, & Montrul, ร. (2009). Article use and generic reference: Parallels between LI- and L2-
acquisition. In M. p García Mayo & R. Hawkins (Eds.), Second language acquisition of articles: Empirical
findings and theoretical implications (pp. 147-173). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins.
Krifka, M., Pelletier, F. J., Carlson, G. N., ter Meulen, A., Chierchia, G., & Link, G. (1995). Genericity:
An introduction. In G. N. Carlson & E J. Pelletier (Eds.), The generic book (pp. 1-124). Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Liu, D., & Gleason, J. L. (2002). Acquisition of the article the by nonnative speakers of English: An
analysis of four nongeneric uses. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 24, 1-26.
Lyons, c. (1999). Definiteness. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Master, p (1987). Generic the in Scientific American. English for Specific Purposes, 6(3), 165-186.
Master, p. (1990). Teaching the English articles as a binary system. TESOL (Quarterly, 24(f), 461-478.
Master, p. (1995). Consciousness raising and article pedagogy. In D. Belcher & G. Braine (Eds.), Academic
writing in a second language: Essays on research and pedagogy (pp. 183-204). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Master, p (1997, March). Acquiring the two zero articles in English. Paper presented at the American
Association for Applied Linguistics Conference, Orlando, FL.
Munn, A., Miller, K., & Schmitt, c. (2006). Maximality and plurality in children’s interpretation of
definites. In D. Bamman, T. Magnitskaia, & c. Zaller (Eds.), Proceedings ofBUCLD, 30, 377-387.
Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Niemeier, ร. (2008). The notion of boundedness/unboundedness in the foreign language classroom. In
E Boers & ร. Lindstromberg (Eds.), Cognitive linguistic approaches to teaching vocabulary and phraseology
(pp. 309-327). Berlin, Germany: Mouton de Gruyter.
Pelletier, EJ. (2010). Generics: A philosophical introduction. In EJ. Pelletier (Ed.), Kinds, things, and stuff
(pp. 3-15). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Pica, T. (1983). The article in American English: What the textbooks don’t tell US. In N. Wolfson &
E. Judd (Eds.), Sociolinguistics and language acquisition (pp. 222-233). Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Pierce, L., & Ionin, T (2010, March). Perception of article in L2~English. Paper presented at the American
Association for Applied Linguistics Conference, Atlanta, GA.
Radden, G., & Dirven, R. (2007). Cognitive English grammar. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins.
Russell, B. (1905). On denoting.Mind, Ϊ4, 479-493.
Sinclair, J. M. (Ed.). (1991). Corpus, concordance, collocation. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Stern, ร. (1977). Generic use of articles inEnglish (Unpublished English 215 paper). University of California,
Los Angeles, CA.
Trenkic, D. (2009). Accounting for patterns of article omissions and substitutions in second language
production. In M. p. García Mayo & R. Hawkins (Eds.), Second language acquisition of articles: Empirical
findings and theoretical implications (pp. 115-143). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins.
White, B.J. (2010). In search ofsystematicity:A conceptualfram-ework for the English article system (Unpublished
doctoral dissertation). Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI.
Wisniewska, I., Riggenbach, H., & Samuda, V (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 2
(4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
302
The Grammar Book
Yoon, κ. κ. (1993). Challenging prototype descriptions: Perceptions of noun countability and
indefiniteness vs. zero article use. IRAL, 31, 269-289.
Y)tsukura, ร. (1970). The articles in English: A structural analysis of usage. The Hague, Netherlands: Mouton.
SUGGESTIONSÍÕRRÍRTHÊR^IÃdÍn¥^~~~~~~~~~
For comprehensive accounts of the English article system, see:
Christophersen, p. (1939). The articles: A study of their theory and use in English. Copenhagen, Denmark:
Einar Munksgaard.
Hawkins, J. (1978). Definiteness and indefiniteness. Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Academic Press.
For an in-depth treatment of some, look at:
Duffley, p. J., & Larrivée, p. (2012). Exploring the relation between the qualitative and quantitative uses of
the determiner some. English Language and Linguistics, 16(1), 131-149.
For an information structure perspective on articles and teaching suggestions, see:
Master, p (2002). Information structure and English article pedagogy. System, 30, 331-348.
For specific teaching ideas, see:
Berry, R. (1991). Re-articulating the articles. ELT J, 45(f), 252-259.
Firsten, R. (2008). Grammar connection: Structure through content 2. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Eorm, meaning, and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle,
Cengage Learning. .
Master, p. (1990).Teaching the English articles as a binary system. TESOL Quarterly, 24(3), 461-478.
Master, p. (1997). The English article system: Acquisition, function, and pedagogy. System, 25, 215-232.
Thewlis, ร. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 3 (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle,
Cengage Learning.
Endnotes
1.	Covitt (1976) did a survey of ESL teachers in the Los Angeles area in the mid-ใ 970s and found that article
usage was their number one teaching problem. We feel that this result would still be true today if the
survey were repeated.
2.	Note that this rule applies to the initial sound of the following word, not the initial letter, which may
be a vowel letter representing a consonant sound as in unit, which starts with the letter น but which is
pronounced as /y/.
3.	See endnote 2.
4.	Historically significant eras often take the definite article and pattern very much like plural proper names
(i.e., the head noun is either plural or singular but semantically collective in meaning): the 1990s, the
Roaring Twenties; the War Years, the Great Depression, the Renaissance.
5.	This style may be somewhat regional; people from the South and some rural areas in the United States
have a tendency to refer to objects and places and people in the presence of a newcomer as if they were
already familiar to the newcomer.
6.	Note that television is treated differently in British and American English. เท British usage, we see a
program "on the television (the telly)," but เท American usage we see it "on television (on TV)."
7.	Such simple inanimate objects, however, can be used with the by anthropologists or historians who
present them as a significant invention: for example, "The wheel represented a step forward for this
culture/mankind."
Chapter ใ 5: Articles
303
s. On rare occasions, plants or animals will attain the necessary group status and affiliation to merit use of
pattern 3:
Save the whales.
The redwoods must be preserved forever.
Such cases, however, appear to be exceptions.
9. Generally, the adjective form of a nationality is used with the definite article to function as the generic
collective nouns in pattern 2 (e.g., the Germans). If the adjective ends in ท or /, then a regular plural
ending is added: the Canadians, the Israelis, the Saudis. If the adjective ends in a sibilant sound (e.g., ร, z,
(t)ch, dge, sh), no plural ending is added: the English, the Chinese, the Welsh, the Dutch). If the adjective
ends in -/'sh, usually the stem minus the suffix is used with a plural ending to form the generic collective
noun: Polish/the Poles, Swedish/theSwedes, Finnish/the Finns. However,"English"appears to be an
exception to the -ish pattern in that we say"English/the English;" i.e., the sibilant pattern applies here
perhaps because of the historical form of the English was the Angles, a Germanic tribe that settled in
England in the 4th and 5th centuries G.E. Note that the French say "Les Anglais."
10. Note that mosque is an exception to this pattern. We would say, "I'm going to the mosque," not, *"l'm
going to mosque," which suggests that English speakers classify mosque as a building (similar to their use
of cathedral, tabernacle, etc.). However, we have been told that English-speaking Muslims are likely to say,
"I'm going to mosque," so this may well be a matter of perspective.
304
The Grammar Book
Reference and
Possession
CHAPTER
16
Introduction
In this chapter, we describe the forms, meanings, and uses of the grammatical resources that
express reference and possession in English. Speakers and writers use referential forms, such
as pronouns, demonstratives, and, as we saw in the last chapter, articles, to refer to people
and things in the real world or to refer to something in the text itself. Possession can be
expressed referential!^ via possessive determiners (his dog), possessive pronouns (the dog is
his), inflectionally (the man’s dog), or periphrastically (the dog of the man who lives next door).
When it comes to referential and possessive forms, ESL/EFL learners face challenges
across the three areas of form, meaning, and use. Just to name a few of these, students need
to learn to distinguish different discourse functions for this, that, and it·, they may produce he
when they mean she or vice versa; they may produce reflexive pronouns such as hisself instead
of himself, and they may struggle to choose between inflectional (’โ) and periphrastic (of) forms
of the possessive. A greater awareness of the forms, meanings, and uses of referential and
possessive forms should help teachers address these issues—and others—with their students.
In this chapter, we will discuss each of these two major systems in turn.
Forms That Express Reference
Halliday and Hasan (1976) distinguish three types of reference in English: personal reference,
demonstrative reference, and comparative reference. We examine each of the forms in the
305
PERSONAL REFERENCE
The personal pronouns constitute the personal reference system in English.
Subject and Object Pronouns
The following are the subject and object forms of the personal pronouns in English:
Subject			Object	
	Singular	Plural	Singular	Plural
1st Person 2nd Person 3rd Person	you she/he/it (one)1	we you they	me you her/him/it (one)1	นร you them
The subject pronouns function as subject NPs; the object pronoun forms can function as
indirect, direct, or prepositional objects:
indirect object direct object
I gave her	it.
(subj. pro.)	(obj. pro.)	(obj. pro.)
direct object	object of the prep
She returned it to me.
(subj. pro.)	(obj. pro.)	(obj. pro.)
When considering the syntactic form of pronouns, it is worth recalling the third phrase
structure rule:
Np	โ(det3) (APn)N (-pl) (PrepP)
pro
Given that pronouns substitute for an entire NP and not for a simple noun, they regularly
occur by themselves in NP position. That is, they do not take determiners, nor are they
modified by adjectives.2
Possessive Determiners and Pronouns
The possessive forms of personal pronouns appear both as determiners and as pronouns:
This is Sheila's book. -> This is her book, (possessive determiner)
This book is Sheila's. -> This book is hers, (possessive pronoun)
Depending on whether it precedes a noun or stands alone as a pronoun, two different forms
exist in all cases except the third person singular masculine form, which does not change:
Determiner Function			Pronominal Function	
	Singular	Plural	Singular	Plural
1st Person 2nd Person 3rd Person	my your her/his/its one's	our your their	mine yours hers/his3	ours yours theirs
306
The Grammar Book
โ
As mentioned earlier in Chapter 5, the possessive determiners are core determiners, like the
definite article and the demonstratives, and thus they can be preceded by a predeterminer and
followed by a postdeterminer:
pre	core	post	noun head
all	his	other	books
The possessive pronouns, however, replace an entire noun phrase and can function as subjects
or objects:
Λ: Hal makes excellent chili.
S: Really? Mine is pretty good/ too.
subject
Aะ Do you like Joe's new car?
Ü: I prefer yours.
object
The '๗-question word routinely associated with these referential possessive forms is 'whose; it
is used most frequently as a determiner but occasionally occurs as a pronoun:
Whose (umbrella) is this?
It is not uncommon for nonnatives (and natives) to confuse the following two forms: its and
it's. Only the former is a possessive determiner, whereas the latter is a contraction of it and is.
Reflexive Pronouns
Another major set of forms that function as personal reference pronouns are the reflexive
pronouns:
	Singular	Plural
1st Person 2nd Person 3rd Person	myself yourself herself/himself/itself oneself	ourselves yourselves themselves
Notice that the above forms can be divided into two categories—those that are formed
by combining self/selves with a possessive determiner: myself, yourself ourselves, yourselves; and
those that that are formed by combining self/selves with an object pronoun: himself, itself
oneself, themselves. Obviously, herself fits both categories since her is an object pronoun and
a possessive determiner. It is not uncommon for students to produce * hisself and *theirselves,
forms which do occur in some dialects of English, and which are logical, given the paradigm.
When used in their underlying reflexive sense (we will see other uses later in this chapter),
reflexive pronouns replace NP objects that have the same referent as the subject of the verb:
subject	object
Sally cut herself.
t__________—_________I
This is why we said in Chapter 1 that in the sentence, Steve said that Paul hurt himself, the
reflexive pronoun has to refer to Paul, who is the subject of the verb hurt, not Steve, who is
the subject of the verb say.
Not all verbs that take reflexive pronouns in some languages do so in English, however.
For instance, English speakers do not use reflexives for verbs that describe routines that
people do for themselves (e.g., cf. *He shaved himself before his interview. He shaved before his
Chapter 16: Reference and Possession
307
interview.). Also, object pronouns, not reflexive pronouns are used after prepositions of place
(e.g., cf. *He set his briefcase down next to himself He set his briefcase down next to him.).
Reciprocal Pronouns
Two other phrasal forms routinely used to express personal reference are the reciprocal
pronouns, each other and one another. Like reflexive pronouns, both replace NP objects that
typically refer back to NP subjects of the same verb, their antecedents. However, for these
forms, the subject must be conjoined or plural NPs:
Jane and Donna respect each other.
The five children in that family helped one another throughout their lives.
_____________________________________________________
DEMONSTRATIVE REFERENCE4____________ _____________
The demonstrative determiners and pronouns of English vary along two dimensions: proximity
and number.
	Singular	Plural
Near	this	these
Far	that	those
Like the possessives, the demonstratives can function as pronouns as well as determiners
and can represent an entire subject or object NP. Thus, one can say,
Please fill
this form
these forms
out. (determiner function)
or, if the context makes the noun “form(s)” clear, simply say,
Please fill
this
these
out. (pronominal function)
Like the possessive determiners and the definite article, the demonstrative determiners are
core determiners that can co-occur with a predeterminer and a post determiner:
pre	core	post	head noun
all	these	other	issues
The wZ?-question word most closely associated with demonstratives is which·, it can readily
serve either a determiner function or a pronominal function:
Which (dress) did Margaret buy?
Sufficient context is required forrthe pronominal use to be interpretable. The singular
demonstratives, irf’addition to functioning as pronouns and determiners, can function as
adverbs, modifying adjectives or another adverb:
I would like you to build it this tall.
I can't believe they finished that quickly.
___________________________________________________
comparatívííeferêncíF ~	~
A rather diverse set of forms comes together under the rubric of Halliday and Hasan’s (1976)
comparative reference. This type of reference includes forms that express identity, general
similarity, difference, and particular comparison.
308
The Grammar Book
Identity
Comparative referential identity highlights the fact that a referent is identical to its antecedent.
The main construction used to do this in English is a complex determiner comprised of the
definite article collocated with same·.
A young busker loitered on the corner.
The same young man had been there the day before.
The identical nature of the reference may be further intensified in the following way:
the exact/very same young man
the self-same young man
When “the same” functions pronominally, it usually substitutes for a member of the same
class [or what Halliday and Hasan (1989) refer to as “co-classification”].
A: I'll have a hamburger and fries.
B: I'll have the same.
General Similarity
The referential forms expressing general similarity—such, so, and likewise—have different
grammatical functions. Such is a determiner. As shown by the three different ways of
continuing the dialogue started by speaker A, it can directly precede noncount nouns (Bl)
and plural count nouns (B2); however, it is unusual among determiners in that it must be
followed by a/an when it modifies a singular count noun (B3):
A: Did you like Professor Grogan's lecture?
Bl". No, such argumentation tends to bore me.
B2·. No, such lectures bore me.
B3: No, such a lecture tends to bore me.
The referential form so, when used to express general similarity, is quite parallel to this when
used adverbially:
Our table is
... r long,
this J
Both this and so, when used adverbially as referential forms, generally co-occur with some sort
of physical gesture or demonstration on the part of the speaker.
Likewise is a referential adverb expressing general similarity; it often co-occurs with the
pro-verb do, and together they refer to a previously occurring verb phrase:
Mrs. Allison made a generous donation to the Cancer Society. We were hoping you
would do likewise.
Notice that likewise can be substituted for by so to show similarity. So as a pro-form can
substitute for an affirmative clause and not can do so for a negative clause.
Do you want dessert? If so, let me know.
If not, I'll put the ice cream away.
Difference
The referential forms of difference are other—including its related forms (the) others and
another—and else,5 and are frequent and important words in English. They tell the listener/
reader that one speaker/writer is referring to some target item other than the antecedent:
Chapter 16: Reference and Possession
309
Have you had a cookie? Yes? Have another!
ใ___________________J
___________________
I needed some help, and I couldn't find Ralph, so I looked for someone else.
ΐ_____________________T
_______________________
In the first example, another is used referentially to mean “another cookie,” that is, something
in addition to but different from the antecedent (i.e., a cookie'). In the second example, else in
combination with someone refers back to Ralph but means “a person other than or different
from Ralph.”
Particular Comparison
The particular comparatives (e.g., more, less, better, worse, etc.) can be used like pronouns or
adverbs to refer to something in prior discourse. In the following, more means “more coffee,”
in addition to what the speaker has finished:
I finished my coffee. Amy offered me more.
In the next example, the response better means “I’m feeling better than before.”
A: How are you feeling?
B: Better.
Note that many of the comparative reference forms allow US to say something more elliptically
and concisely; thus, we can avoid repetition.
IN θ ____________________________________________________________________________________________
We conclude this section on the various forms of reference with indefinite pronouns. Even
though these forms are not referential in and of themselves, they often serve as antecedents
for referential forms or co-occur with referential forms like else. The indefinite pronouns
occur as compound forms:6
some		any	no	every
-body	somebody	anybody	nobody	everybody
-one	someone	anyone	no one	everyone
-thing	something	anything	nothing	everything
Notice that they all are written as single words except for the phrase no one. -Body and -one mean
“person” in general. -Thing, however, refers to an inanimate or abstract concept, or to an entity
not clearly identifiable as a person (e.g., “Shhh! Something moved.”). Whenever one is used to
mean the cardinal number, however, an indefinite pronoun or compound no longer results. In
this case there is a two-word sequence with the number one receiving stress. Compare:
Anyone could have gotten in free.
Any one of US could have gotten in free; the other two would have had to pay.
Meanings and Uses of Referential Forms
___________________________________________________
PERSON AL I^NOUNSdftEA^^
Pronouns by themselves have little or no semantic content. As we stated at the beginning of
the chapter, they are referential forms that point to people and things in the real world:
I am talking to you right now.
310
The Grammar Book
r
or to antecedents in text:
A guy walks into a bar. He orders a drink. When he gets it, he starts to tell a story.
In the first case, the pronouns serve a deictic function (pointing to a speaker and an addressee
in the moment) and in the second, an anaphoric function (he pointing back to a guy and it
to a drink}. What should be clear in both examples is that context (or co-text) is crucial for
figuring out what pronouns refer to. In other words, it is necessary to examine pronouns in
use in order to understand their meanings.
First and Second Person Pronouns
Determining the referents for first person and second person pronouns is not always a
simple matter. Although the referent for I is most often the speaker (or the author), multiple
interpretations exist for we, as shown by Wechsler (2010, p. 333):
We are the champions! (unison) (speakers)
We want you to come to dinner, (speaker(s) + others)
Shall we go? (speaker(s) + addressees)
Can't we all get along? (speaker(s) + addressees + others)
The same first person plural form is used for different referents. Inclusive we includes
the addressees, while exclusive we excludes the addressees. English speakers use the same
pronoun for both inclusive and exclusive meanings, the only exception being the imperative
let’s, which has an inclusive meaning. Some languages, like those of the Malayo-Polynesian
family, express such an inclusive-exclusive meaning distinction through two separate forms.
Indonesian speakers, for example, use kita to mean we when the person addressed is included, as in
We should (all) go to the movies next Saturday.
whereas kami means we, excluding the person addressed:
Are we late? (addressed to person who has been waiting)
Studies of academic English have revealed different discourse functions performed by the
inclusive and exclusive we forms. For instance, in a corpus of 36 scientific journal articles, Kuo
(1999) found that the authors used the exclusive we mainly to explain what they had done in their
research and to report their results, whereas the inclusive we was used to signal assumed common
ground with the readers and the inclusive chunk let US was used “to invite readers to cooperate
in the discourse” (p. 134). Examining four transcribed university mathematics lectures from
MICASE, Fortanet (2004) found that the inclusive we was used for functions such as guiding
the class through the lecture or presenting the audience new information with the chunks “we
have...” and “we get...” The inclusive we was also used to refer to larger communities to which
the speaker and audience belonged, such as Western civilization or humanity.
It is worth noting that in the two studies mentioned previously, the inclusive we was
more frequent in lectures and the exclusive we more frequent in academic journals. This may
say something about the differences between speech and writing. Speakers giving a lecture
perhaps feel more pressure to signal cooperation with the audience (hence more use of the
inclusive form); whereas authors composing a journal article feel less pressure to do this.
However, Harwood (2005) points out that writers of research articles do exploit the fact that
English does not distinguish between inclusive and exclusive we. Rather than using exclusive
I, writers use inclusive we to make readers more receptive to the writers’ claims. Based on his
corpus study, Harwood recommends a phraseological approach to teaching academic writing:
teaching common collocations with pronouns, such as “As we will see...”
Like we,you is used for different referents. It can refer to a singular addressee or to plural
addressees:
Chapter 16: Reference and Possession
311
Thank you for the gift, (conversation between two people)
Thank you for coming, (politician addressing a crowd)
Many L2-English speakers have told US that they find the presence of only one second person
form for singular and plural reference to be disconcerting. Of course, English does have ways
of explicitly signaling plural reference with the second person pronoun, such as use of the
construction you all·?
Thank you all for coming.
or the informal you guys, which seems to be spreading to different contexts.
Given that some languages (like French or Russian) employ a singular second person pronoun
form to mark intimacy and a plural form to mark formality, L2-English speakers may find use
of only one form—you—to be too direct. Another potential source of confusion for ESL/EFL
students IS you used to refer to people in general:
I have got this little problem, you see. Sometimes I forget. And the trouble with
"sometimes" is that you never know when to expect it. (newspaper extract in Biber,
Johansson, Leech, Conrad, & Finegan, 1999, p. 331)
Indeed, Myers and Lampropoulou (2012) have found that you is often used in social science
research interviews as a kind of impersonal reference that does not pick out any particular
person, but is the equivalent of someone, anyone, or one.
Third Person Pronouns
As a conversation or text unfolds, keeping track of the meanings of third person pronouns—
to whom or what they refer—can require effort (Biber et al. 1999). Consider a brief narrative
in which there are a number of different characters. The storyteller could use he and she many
times to refer to different people. The listener or reader must be able to find the appropriate
referent at each use of a pronoun. There may at times be ambiguity. For instance, Huddleston
and Pullum (2002) offer the following sentence (p. 1496):
Liz told Jill that she was going to Paris...
The most natural interpretation of she above is that it refers to Liz. However, it is not difficult
to imagine someone misinterpreting the referent as Jill. Ariel (1988) acknowledges that in
speech, stress plays a factor in signaling the intended referent. Given that pronouns are most
often unstressed, stress on them, according to Ariel, signals that the marked or unexpected
referent is the appropriate choice. For example, consider the following (where the word in all
capital letters signifies that it is stressed):
Liz told Jill that SHE was going to Paris...
Here, the referent would indeed be Jill.
Occasionally, third person pronouns point forward rather than backward to a referent in
a text. Biber et al. (1999) offer the following extract from the start of a novel (p. 3 31):
It was the first dead body he had ever seen.
Such use is quite similar to first-mention non-anaphoric uses of the definite article discussed
in the last chapter. The pronoun it at the start of the sentence imposes a sense of familiarity
upon the reader.
There are other uses of it that break the traditional mold of a pronoun pointing to an
antecedent that has previously Been expressed in the form of an NP. For instance, it is possible
that the antecedent is found in the meaning of a whole clause:
If you don't go while you have a chance, you'll regret it. (Huddleston & Pullum, 2002, p. 1458)
It above refers to the proposition of you not going while you have a chance. (Nonreferential and
cleft uses of it are discussed in Chapters 23 and 30.)
312
The Grammar Book
Third person singular pronouns in English clearly mark gender: masculine (he), feminine
(she), and neuter (it). This can pose a serious problem for students whose native language
makes no such distinction. These students understand the use of he or she/him or her, of
course, but since they are not accustomed to observing the distinction in their mother tongue,
they often use the English third person pronouns inappropriately. Mere rule explication will
do little to aid in this area; however, contextualized practice in using the various third person
pronouns should help heighten student awareness. This same problem, of course, applies to
the third person singular possessive and reflexive personal pronouns.
ESL/EFL students will have to learn that certain inanimate objects are sometimes
referred to with a feminine pronoun form, although the use of it is more common today. This
has been true for ships, countries, cars, and until recently, hurricanes, which now are given
alternative masculine and feminine names and referred to as he or she as appropriate. Before
the sex of an animal is known, often the masculine pronoun is used; however, once an animal
or anything else has been given a gender-marked proper name, the appropriate feminine or
masculine pronoun tends to be used.
Of course, the controversy continues as to whether or not it is sexist (or discriminatory)
to use the third person singular masculine form when one intends to include both the meaning
of he and she, as in:
When a person first arrives in a new country, he has many adjustments to make.
For now, this controversy will have to be resolved by each individual. Even if you yourself
do not find such references offensive, you might explain to your ESL/EFL students that
some people dp and that stylistic alternatives are possible and often preferred. In place of
potentially sexist he, the coordinated pronoun form he or she may be used:
When a person first arrives in a new country, he or she has many adjustments to
make.
The form he/she (or s/he) may also be used in writing:
When a person first arrives in a new country, he/she has many adjustments to make.
It is possible to use antecedents and pronouns that are plural and thus gender neutral:
When people first arrive in a new country, they have many adjustments to make.
Some writers prefer to alternate their use of he and she across longer stretches of text. For
instance, reference to an antecedent that is not gender specific will be signaled by she in one
paragraph; in the following paragraph, he will be used for reference to another antecedent
lacking gender specificity. It should be pointed out that these strategies apply not just to
subject pronouns, but to object, possessive, and other forms of pronouns as well.
A more informal way of avoiding sexist language with pronouns is to use a singular
they/their. Such use is widely accepted for reference to antecedents that are indefinite pronouns:
Everybody has their own way of doing things.
No one believes they can be happy all the time.
Common nouns may also be antecedents for singular they/their, as in the following examples
from Huddleston and Pullum (2002, p. 4930):
The patient should be told at the outset how much they will be required to pay.
But a journalist should not be forced to reveal their sources.
Huddleston and Pullum observe that such examples8 are frequent in conversation but are
avoided in formal writing.
Chapter 16: Reference and Possession
313
Choosing between Subject and Object Pronoun Forms
Tn verbless or elliptical utterances, the object pronoun sometimes replaces the subject form,
which would be expected in a complete sentence or in a partially reduced sentence with a
verb form.
Who received the letter?
I received the letter.
I did.
Me.
In full sentences with the copula be, personal pronouns functioning as subject noun
predicates used to take the subject form in formal English:
It is I.
This is she.
This usage is now changing even in formal English, and in informal English, the object
pronoun is preferred:
It's me.
That's her.
However; the desire to use formal English and be “correct” has led some native speakers to
use I even as a conjoined direct object or a conjoined object of a preposition.
?This concerns only you and I.
?The article was written by Nancy and I.
’Between you and I, he's a fool.
These forms are becoming colloquially acceptable, and they are occurring with ever increasing
frequency even though they are prescriptively incorrect. Also increasing in frequency are
object pronouns in conjoined subjects:
Me and Sally have known each other for a long time.
Her and Harry sure do make an interesting couple.
Biber et al. (1999) point out that that such constructions are mostly limited to conversation and
that the object pronoun most often occurs as the first element in the conjoined subject (p. 3 3 8).
For more formal contexts and registers, subject pronouns are used:
Sally and I have known each other for a long time.
She and Harry sure do make an interesting couple.
Notice that Me and Sally has become Sally and I. Biber et al. observed a strong preference for
first person pronouns in conjoined subjects to be in second position, whereas third person
pronouns prefer first position.
Biber et al. (1999) also found object pronouns to appear regularly after than and as, again
predominantly in conversation. It is important to note, however, that the subject pronoun is
used if there is a subsequent verb:
Harry is much funnier than m£ Harry is much funnier than I will ever be.
Sally is as neurotic as him.	Sally is as neurotic as he is.
Biber et al. identify a similar preference for use of object pronouns in the construction
as/than + pronoun:
Jim might be stronger than me, but I am faster than him.
We will not take up the meaning and use of possessive determiners and pronouns at this time
because we deal comprehensively with the meaning and use of forms of possession in the
second half of this chapter.
314
The Grammar Book
REFLEXIVE AND RECIPROCAL PRONOUNS: MEANING AND USE
A potential cross-linguistic problem derives from the distinction English makes between
plural reflexive pronouns and reciprocal pronouns:
The children hit themselves. ê> ê>
The children hit each other.
Many languages (e.g., Spanish and Yoruba) can use virtually the same forms to refer to both
the reflexive and reciprocal meaning and allow the context to disambiguate. Learners speaking
such first languages may unintentionally produce English sentences such as the following:
* After ten years, she and Ted were happy to see themselves again.
In a series of studies, Staczek (1986, 1987) made observations about uses of reflexive
pronouns in English. First, the reflexive pronoun seems to be alternating with subject and
object pronouns in ways that are not semantically reflexive:9
What about yourself?
(= you)
We expected yourself to take the lead.
(= you)
The text was first copyedited by my mother and myself.
(= me)
Mr. Dennison, Mr. Pappas, and myself have spent hundreds of hours...
On behalf of myself and Delta Airlines,...
l— me)
From a syntactic view, such uses of reflexives are a form of asystematic variation, according
to Staczek. They may at times reflect the speaker’s or the writer’s insecurity over whether to
use the subject or object pronoun or a reflexive pronoun, or their desire to use a phonetically
more salient form in juxtaposition with one or more proper names.
Second, Staczek (1988) looked at the variation in the use of the plural reflexives
-self/selves and suggests that increasing colloquial use of the -self forms as plural reflexives—
which he documents (examples below)—is evidence that English is undergoing a change and
that the now prescriptively required -selves forms may eventually be lost:
How we portray ourself influences the way we behave.
I'm sure many of you have played this head game with yourself.
We encourage people to give themself credit for the labor in remodeling.
As for the use of reciprocal pronouns, each other appears much more frequently than one
another in both speech and writing (Biber et al., 1999). Quirk, Greenbaum, Leech, and Svartvik
(1985) explain that register is a factor: the more frequent each other is informal, while one another
is the more formal choice. Another difference is that each other can have inanimate antecedents
(e.g., The houses face each other), but one another almost always takes human antecedents.
D E Μ 0 N ST R AT IvFpI^^	ร E
Like personal pronouns, demonstrative pronouns and determiners possess little semantic
content and mostly function deictically or anaphorically. It is not surprising that, as Levinson
Chapter 16: Reference and Possession
315
(2004) has noted, demonstratives often co-occur with a pointing gesture. Diessel (2006)
stresses the communicative value of demonstratives and identifies two main uses for them
(p-470):
To bring a referent into current focus:
Look, that's Bill.
To differentiate referents currently in focus:
Here are two books. This one is mine, and that one is yours.
But how does a speaker know when to use this and when to use that?
Proximity is the traditional explanation for the meaning difference between demonstratives.
This/these have a sense of “nearness” and that/those a sense of “distance.” The nearness or
distance being conveyed could be spatial, temporal (this — now vs. that = then), psychological
(this — more preferred vs. that — less preferred), or simply sequential (this — first mention vs.
that = second mention):
Spatial: I like this car better than that one10 over there.
Temporal: I like this movie better than that concert last night.
Psychological:111 like this candidate, which is why I didn't vote for that one.
Sequential: This dress is less attractive than that one.
In this explanation, the speaker determines the proximity of the referent and then chooses the
demonstrative based on this determination.
Strauss (2002) offers a more dynamic and complex account for the use of demonstratives.
For her, the key factor in a speaker’s choice to use this or that is focus, which she defines as
“the degree of attention the hearer should pay to the referent” (p. 135). More attention (or
focus) is required for new information. Strauss proposes the following framework, which we
have adapted somewhat:
Forทา(ร)	Meaning	Listener	Referent
this/these	high focus	new information	important
that/those	medium focus		
it/they/them	low focus	old information	unimportant
Strauss (2002) analyzed a 45,000-word corpus of spontaneous speech for the uses of
this/these, that/those, and it/they/them. She found that/those and it/they/them were used almost
exclusively for anaphoric reference, 92 percent and 97 percent of their total uses respectively.
This contrasted with 56 percent anaphoric use for this/these. The other uses of this/these
included the following [examples from Strauss (1993, pp. 405-407)]:
Cataphorically to point forward):
[a radio talk show]	'^·
Again we come back to this: Murder is the act of killing someone....
Exophorically (to point outside the text at something):
[teacher is lecturing] ·'-
Yeah. The border states, specifically [pulls down map] we've looked at this before....
Nonreferentially (to introduce or present new information):
Bee: They stuck us in this crazy building that they juh—they're not even finished with it.
316
The Grammar Book
The three non-anaphoric uses are all utilized to introduce a new referent or topic into the
discourse. The choice of this signals to the addressee that the speaker is placing a certain level
of importance on whatever is being introduced.
Another interesting pattern that Strauss (2002) found in her oral data was that
his/these occurred as determiners 56 percent of the time and as pronouns 44 percent of the
time, whereas that/those occurred as pronouns 72 percent of the time and as determiners only
28 percent of the time. Strauss feels that this reinforces her analysis of this/these as high-focus,
new-information signals where the whole noun referent tends to be mentioned; however, that is
more like it and occurs more often pronominally to signal a lower degree of focus and a greater
degree of shared information.
A preference for using this/these as determiners (instead of as pronouns) was also found
in a corpus study of academic written English. Analyzing 52 research articles (totaling over
200,000 words of text) from journals in two different disciplines, Gray and Cortes (2011) found
similar results for both disciplines. From the field of applied linguistics, this/these appeared as
determiners 79 percent of the time and as pronouns 21 percent of the time; from the field of
materials and civil engineering, this/these appeared as determiners 83 percent of the time and
as pronouns 17 percent of the time. When the demonstratives were used as pronouns, they
almost always had antecedents that were larger or more extensive than noun phrases, as seen
in one of the examples from the engineering discipline provided by Gray and Cortes (p. 38):
For all NDT methods, the sensitivity decreases with increasing strength levels; this
can affect the variation coefficient of the estimated strength, for HSC cores 105.
The underlined section above is the antecedent for this. When used as determiners, this/these
were found to occur frequently with shell nouns. Gray and Cortes, following Schmid (2000)
and Flowerdew (2003), define shell nouns as “abstract nouns used to sum up, or encompass,
detailed information in an efficient manner” (p. 36). Such nouns like analysis, method, model,
finding, etc. appeared in more than 40 percent of the instances of this/these used as determiners.
Frodesen and Eyring (2007) point out that it is important to understand how the
demonstratives and personal pronouns interact with the articles. They give the following examples
to show that these forms are often equally grammatical choices, but that the choice depends on
the speaker’s or writer’s intentions or what she or he expects the listener/reader to know (p. 123):
r that joke
the joke before.
Oh, I've heard
Norm told US
thosejokes
thejokes
them
With the following two example sets, Frodesen and Eyring show that demonstratives give the
referent more emphasis (or “focus” as Strauss says) than use of an article or pronoun:
I heard a speaker on campus this afternoon...
(1)	The speaker/she was talking about communicating effectively in the workplace.
(2)	This speaker was the best I've heard on the topic of workplace communication.
More emphasis is placed on the speaker in (2); in (1) the focus is not so much the speaker but
what the speaker was talking about:
I'm not sure if I'll type my paper myself...
(3)	If I do, /twill probably take all day!
(4)	I have more important things to do than that!
The it in (3) gives less emphasis to the antecedent—type my paper myself—and more to
the fact that it will take all day; the that in (4) gives the antecedent more emphasis, which is
Chapter 16: Reference and Possession
317
reinforced by the sentence-final position of that, which also conveys the negative psychological
angle that we mentioned earlier.
The other point that Frodesen and Tyring (2 007) make is that personal and demonstrative
pronouns are often used to avoid repetition and wordiness when antecedents are in adjacent
clauses:
I asked my instructor if I needed to submit a bibliography with my draft.
1.__Í that
She told me 1 ■_______
[ ?the bibliography
would be unnecessary.
This research paper is one of the best I've written. I'm sure my classmates will
?the research paper J
enjoy
Possession
It is time now to turn to the second major system in this chapter, that of possession.
POSSESSI
In addition to the possessive determiners and possessive pronouns discussed earlier, as part of
reference, there are two other major ways of signaling possession in English. In writing, the
first is by inflecting singular nouns and irregular plural nouns not ending in r with ’.ร·.·
the baby's crib the women's room
For regular plural nouns, an apostrophe is added after the ร:
the boys'trip
For singular nouns that end in ร, there is growing acceptance to add ’ร:
Bess's house Kansas's climate
However, it is noKuncommon to see the inflectional possessive for such nouns expressed
without the final ร:
Bess'house	Kansas'climate
The apostrophe added to regular plural nouns does nothing to alter the pronunciation
of the word (boys is pronounced the same way as boys’); however, the addition of the ’ร to
singular and irregular plural nouns is realized in speech as /s/ when it occurs after voiceless
nonsibilants, /z/ when it follows voiced nonsibilant consonants and vowels, and/oz/ after
sibilant consonants (i.e., /s/, /z/, /s/, /z/, /c/, and / j/):
Mac's	/masks/
Sam's	/saemz /
Grace's	/gresez/
318
The Grammar Book
The other way of signaling possession is by using the periphrastic of possessive form
where the possessor and thing possessed are inverted if one compares this order with that of
the inflected ’ร form.
the man's name —> the name of the man
From the example above, you might infer that the ’.ร· possessive and of possessive forms
are interchangeable. This is not usually the case, as you will see below when we discuss this
contrast again under the use of the possessive.
When the nouns involved are relatively short, double possessive inflections are possible:
Bob's brother's car
Double and even triple periphrastic possessives are also possible, regardless of whether the
nouns involved are long or short:
the cover of the folio of the sonnets of Shakespeare
Syntactically, we treat a noun inflected with the possessive ’ร· as a determiner, which may
takes its own determiner (creating a complex determiner):
NP
det (modifier)	det (head)	N
my	neighbor’s	daughter-in-law
The periphrastic possessive with of is generated as a noun phrase with a prepositional
phrase following the head noun:
NP
det	N	PrepP
the daughter-in-law prep NP
of det N
my neighbor
....................
One of the most interesting structural facts about the possessive inflection is that it may
be an inflection on complex or compound noun phrases as well as on simple nouns:
the mayor of San Diegopsfl car
Sally and Johnps~| new baby
Another interesting fact about the ’ร possessive form is that, like possessive pronouns,
the noun that follows the inflected noun may be deleted if it can be inferred from context:
Where is your car?
It's being repaired, so I borrowed Ted's, (i.e., Ted's car)
It is also possible for the ’ร possessive and the of possessive to occur in the same construction,
sometimes called the double genitive:
a colleague of Jim's
these poems of Art's
These mirror similar constructions with '’ร and possessive pronouns:
a colleague of his
these poems of his
Chapter 16: Reference and Possession
319
THE MEANING OF POSSESSIVE FORMS
What does the “possessive” inflection or form mean? As we will see, the ’r inflection, sometimes
called the genitive case, and possessive pronouns are used to express a number of different
referential meanings. To make better sense of these meanings, let US start at a somewhat
abstract level. Cognitive linguistics views possession as a link between two things or entities.
One entity serves as a reference point for the other entity (Langacker, 1999). In the example
Sophie’s bicycle, we identify or conceptualize bicycle through reference to Sophie.
Two main types of reference have been identified for the genitive. Biber et al. (1999)
propose the terms specifying and classifying-12 Specifying genitives help answer the question
Whose X? or Which X?
Sophie's bicycle
the child's book
By specifying whose, Sophie’s and the child’s are clearly acting as determiners. They allow us
to pick out which bicycle and which toys. In contrast, classifying genitives help answer the
question What type ofX?
a children's book
several women's universities
The’j inflections above act less like determiners and more like modifiers, resulting in
constructions which behave like compound nouns. In fact, they are so much like compound
nouns that it sounds odd to insert an adjective: *several women’s elite universities. The adjective
would instead be placed before the classifying genitive: several elite women’s universities.
At a less abstract level, the following are some of the meanings that may be expressed by
the possessive inflection and possessive pronouns:
Possession:	John's car	her book
Agency/Source: Human Relationships:	Shakespeare's sonnets	his ideas
a. kinship:	Bob's cousin	my father
b. professional:	Joe's teacher	their doctor
c. other social: Traits (Physical	Anne's neighbor	your girlfriend
or Other):	Sue's eyes	her ego
Representation:	John's portrait	his statue
	(= a portrait of John)	(= a statue of him)
Evaluation:	the project's importance	its value
Named After:	5 st. Paul's cathedral	
Location:	Maine's coastline	
Time:	tomorrow's meeting	
Measurement: Subject +	an hour's wait	
Nominalized Verb:	the earth's rotation	his actions
Object +	(= the earth rotates)	(— he acts)
Nominalized Verb:	the planet's discovery	her arrest
	l— somebody discovered	(= somebody
	the planet)	arrested her)
The Grammar Book
320
This list does not exhaust the meaning potential of possessive inflections and forms in English
(See Peters & พesterstâhl, 2013). The construction is highly ambiguous from a semantic
perspective since a phrase such as the following can mean several different things:
John's portrait
possession: the portrait that John owns
agency: the portrait that John painted
representation: the portrait of John
In most cases, the context will help disambiguate the intended meaning.
Although the of construction may be used to express many of the same meanings above,
it is not always interchangeable with the possessive inflection. This contrast will be covered
below. For detailed treatment of the preposition of see Chapter 21.
THE USE orpossissiyFFORMF ""
A problem in using possessive forms may arise for learners whose first language has
grammatical gender. English has notional gender, which means that the gender of the
possessive determiner or pronoun agrees semantically with the gender of the possessor:
Paul lost his book.
Paula lost her book.
In some languages with grammatical gender (e.g., French, Spanish, etc.), the possessive
determiner agrees grammatically with the object possessed. Thus, in French one says:
Paul/Paule	a	perdu son	livre.
'Paul/Paula has lost his/her	book'
Livre is a masculine noun in French, and the possessive determiner row must agree with the
possessed noun livre regardless of whether the possessor is Paul (M) or Paule (F). This is an
initial problem for learners to sort out if their first language has this type of grammatical
gender.
Also, although all languages have a way of signaling possession, they don’t all regard the
same things as possessable. In Spanish, for example, one refers to parts of the body using the
definite article, whereas in English, we would use a possessive form. Compare:
Spanish (literal translation): I have broken the leg.
English: I have broken my leg.
Thus, one of the areas you may have to work on with your students is to help them
become familiar with those semantic or lexical domains where the English possessive forms
normally occur.
The Use of Inflected versus Periphrastic Possessives
How should learners know when to use the ’ร construction and when to use the of construction?
After all, there are plenty of instances where either form appears to be acceptable:
The works of Shakespeare fill an enormous volume.
Shakespeare's works fill an enormous volume.
Biber et al. (1999) note that the of construction is more frequent than the ’ร construction. But
what factors can learners take into account beyond overall frequency?
One approach is to ask learners to examine the type of reference of the modifying
noun, in the examples above, Shakespeare or Shakespeare’s. Biber et al. (1999) suggest that
the ’.ร· construction is preferred for modifying nouns that refer to humans, whereas the of
construction is preferred for modifying nouns that refer to concrete things. Kreyer (2003), in
Chapter 16: Reference and Possession
321
his study of a subcorpus of 45,000 words taken from the British National Corpus, found this
to be the case. He identified a strong preference for ’ร with proper nouns and an even stronger
preference for of with non-personal inanimate reference (for example, nouns like chair and
table). To illustrate this preference, we performed quick Google searches for the following
phrases and found these results:
"John's abilities"	11,600
"the abilities of John"	268
"the building's exits"	41,500
"the exits of the building"	516,000
Learners might consider this as the human factor. We are likely—though not required—to
use ’ร for nouns with human reference,13 or at least animate nouns, and to use of for nouns
with reference to nonhuman inanimate things.14,15
A second factor in choosing between the ’ร and of constructions is the length of the
modifying noun phrase. Biber et al. (1999) show that although one-word modifying noun
phrases favor the ’ร construction, modifying noun phrases of three words or more strongly
favor the of construction. Consider how the first example sounds better than the second:
the story of terribly unhappy Alexander
?terriblv unhappy Alexander's story
Learners can be encouraged to choose of for longer modifying noun phrases. It is also worth
pointing out that the type of modification matters. In his subcorpus, Kreyer (2003) found that
post-modification in the modifying noun phrase was found exclusively in the of construction.16
One would more likely expect to hear:
the main character of a story that is widely popular
than to hear:
?a story that is widely popular's main character
It should be acknowledged that there are times when only one form is appropriate.
Huddleston and Pullum (2002) identify a number of cases where inflectional ’ร cannot be
used, such as in the expression of type, quantity, and depiction (p. 477):
the two kinds of shrub	*shrub's two kinds
the glass of red wine	*red wine's glass
the painting of the haystack	?the haystack's painting
Biber et al. (1999) point out the existence of certain idioms that require inflectional ’ร, such as
death’s door and for heaven’s sake. They also observe that classifying genitives and genitives of
measurement resist the of construction (p. 306):
a ship's doctor	?the doctor of a ship
several women's universities	^several universities of women
an hour's time	5	*time of an hour
The difference between the ’ร and the of genitive is perhaps the most widely studied of all
contrasts; in fact an entire specialrssue of a journal has been devoted to the topic of “genitive
variation” (Payne & Berlage, 2014a). Many factors appear to play a part, although as we
have seen, animacy and length seem to be the most influential (Rosenbach, 2014). It has
also been established that the use of the ’ร genitive with inanimate possessors is spreading
over tithe, although the effect of strength of animacy is variable across varieties of English
and is in more advanced in American English than British English (Rosenbach, 2014).
Yet, Jankowski and Tagliamonte (2014), in their study of Canadian English (as spoken in
Toronto), found that the animacy factor was still obligatorily marked, i.e., human possessors
are marked with ’ร and of genitives are used with inanimates. It is also possible that modality
322
The Grammar Book
makes a difference with speech favouring the ’ร variant in the interest of processing economy
(Hinrichs & Szmrecsanyi, 2007).
Social Uses of Possessive Determiners
We do know from work by Staczek (1994) that at least two possessive determiners, your and
our, are used in nonliteral, socially motivated ways in spoken English in a variety of settings.
It seems that speakers try to identify with and engage their listener(s) through special uses of
your and our. Staczek provides the following examples:
You get your fan, your temperature gauge... These are your fog lamps in the front.
[Volvo salesman to potential customer]
The chicken is not your real hot Mexican food, [chef to TV audience on PBS cooking program]
Here's a look at your local weather, [local meteorologist on the All Weather Channel]
We're gonna go ahead and put our fertilizer down, [radio gardening expert to caller]
What are we going to do with our certificate of deposit? [bank officer to customer]
In most of these cases, the possessive determiner can be paraphrased with either a definite
article or no article at all.17 Staczek notes that he has found such uses of your and our in
instructional settings, sales/marketing situations, scripted TV comedies, weather forecasts,
and even in fifteenth-century cookbooks [“and cover them with thy lids and let them bake . . ."
(p. 12)]. We feel thatnonpossessive pronominal forms (especially we) can also be used similarly:
How are we today? [doctor to patient]
The use of we in the preceding sentence and of our in the bank officer’s question above,
respectively, can sometimes be perceived by the listener as condescending speech on the
part of the user, i.e., the bank officer and doctor appear to be treating the bank customer
and the patient like children. Where the speaker clearly has the right to instruct someone
or demonstrate something (i.e., the gardening expert), the use of we/our and your seems less
condescending and more in the nature of building informal relationships.
Conclusion
The English pronoun system is not as complicated as that of many other languages.
Nevertheless, there is considerable detail for your students to master in learning the forms,
meanings, and uses of the pronoun system and of the other referential forms. Having two
forms for the possessive or genitive also causes problems for learners. Your job will require
that you give your students continued exposure and meaningful practice to aid them in their
learning and use of these forms.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	FornVMeaiiing. A good way for children to practice the possessive determiners with parts
of the body is to play “Simon Says” and to amplify the game with questions. For example:
Teacher. Simon says, touch your head.
Teacher. What did you (sg.) do? / What did you (pl.) do?
Chapter 16: Reference and Possession
323
Student ไ·. I touched my head. / We touched our heads.
or
Teacher·. What did he do?
Student2·. He touched his head.
2.	Form. To draw learners’ attention to the pronunciation of the possessive ’ร form, present
them with small cards. Each card should display a different phrase that uses the possessive
construction. Be sure to include multiple examples of the three different pronunciation
patterns for ’ร (ItJ, /s/, and /oz/). Ask students to organize the cards into three columns and to
explain why they have done so. You can always give them hints to help them get started. The
resulting columns should represent the three different pronunciation patterns. This activity
provides an opportunity to discuss the articulatory process of voicing and to distinguish
voiced from voiceless phonemes.
3.	Meaning. Kealey and Inness (1997) suggest the following activity for practicing
the meaning of possessive forms used with physical traits. Students are each given a sentence
with possessives in it and are asked to memorize it (individually, in pairs, in groups—
depending on the size of the class). The sentences are all descriptions of a child’s face. The
students are given a sketch of a family portrait with the child’s parents clearly depicted but
with the child’s face missing. They have to circulate around the room and tell each other
their sentences in order to complete the child’s face and thus the family portrait (pp. 80-83).
Sample sentences: He has his mother's hair. He has his father's eyes. He has his mother's chin.
4.	Form. A substitution drill may be useful for demonstrating and practicing the correspondence
between possessive determiners and pronouns. It would be desirable to have the examples be
authentic.
Your book is red	->	Yours is red.
My book is blue.	—»	Mine is blue.
Our classroom is small. —»	Ours is small.
Their car is black.	—>	Theirs is black.
5.	Use. Give your students a passage in which the possessives followed by head nouns have
been replaced with a blank line and two NPs in parentheses. Have them write the correct
form of the possessive on each line, inflectional or periphrastic, explaining why they made the
choices they did. For example:
Last Saturday I went shopping. It was (1)(my friend/birthday) and I wanted to___________
buy a gift. I drove (2)(my father/car) to town. When I arrived, I realized___________
(3)(the shopping district/the center) was already quite crowded....___________
................
6.	Meaning. To practice distinguishing his and her, Celce-Murcia and Hilles (1988) suggest
giving learners a black-and-white sketch of a boy and girl. The boy and girl are similarly
dressed (in T-shirts and shorts). Each learner should have a small box of crayons. The
teacher then gives a series of commands (learners are told not to look at any sketch but
their own): Color his hair redcpeolor her hair brovon·, color her shorts green·, color his shorts black·,
and so on. When the exercise is finished, the learners can compare their results.
7.	Use. Students can gain practice in the use of third person pronouns in writing through this
simple revision exercise. After writing a short story, students: 1) highlight all third person
prõnouns, 2) identify the antecedent for each of these pronouns, and 3) draw a line from
each pronoun to its antecedent. This activity allows the teacher to point out cases where
the reader may be likely to misinterpret the intended antecedent for various reasons such
as intervening noun phrases between the pronoun and the antecedent (e.g., I like dolphins
and horses. They live in the seal).
324
The Grammar Book
8.	Form/Meaning. As a way of introducing students to the syntactic and semantic
elements inherent in the use of the reciprocal pronoun each other, M. Bedell (personal
communication) suggests the following procedure.
Teacher: (introduces a sentence) I saw Albert.
(Teacher asks a student to reverse the action.)
Student ไ: Albert saw me.
(Teacher asks another student to combine the two sentences.)
Student2:1 saw Albert and Albert saw me.
Teacher explains that whenever we have two sentences that are the reverse of each other,
we can avoid the repetition by conjoining the subjects and using each other as a substitute
for the objects;
Albert and I saw each other.
The teacher then provides several other sentences that the students can (a) reverse,
(b) combine, and (c) paraphrase with each other,
Phil hit George. Sally likes Sam.
9.	Use. To explore different uses of demonstrative determiners and pronouns, provide
students with a piece of academic writing. Students 1) highlight all instances of this,
that, these, and those, 2) explain why they think the author chose to use a determiner or
pronoun in each instance, and 3) why they think the author chose this/these over that/those
(or vice versa) for each instance.
10.	Use. Frodesen and Eyeing (2007) present an exercise that asks students to choose between
it, the + noun phrase, demonstrative determiner + noun phrase, and demonstrative pronoun.
Parenthetical information is meant to help guide students’ choices. Here is the first item in
the exercise (p. 124):
1.1	read [an article reporting on a survey about American's ideas of comfort foods],
discusses how women tend to prefer snack-related comfort food like candy
and chocolates while men prefer meal-related comfort foods such as pasta or casseroles.
(Put focus on the new information in the second sentence, not the referent.)
Such an exercise provides students practice in choosing among referential forms in
discourse.
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1.	Provide your own sentences to illustrate the following terms. Underline the word(s)
illustrating the term:
a. subject pronoun	f. demonstrative	j. singular “they”
b. object pronoun	determiner	k. ’ร possessive
c. possessive pronoun	g. reciprocal pronoun	L of possessive
d. possessive determiner	h. reflexive pronoun	/	-J	I	เ
e. demonstrative	i. indefinite compound	
pronoun	pronoun	
Chapter 16: Reference and Possession
325
2.	Explain the ungrammatically or awkwardness of the following sentences:
a.	?The train conductor checked the mysterious and handsome foreign traveler’s ticket.
b.	*Him and she are going to Akron next weekend.
c.	*This Time magazine is mines.
d.	*There’s no one here besides I.
Test your ability to apply what you know.
3.	We have already seen how the indefinite pronoun one can mean "everyone" in a
general sense, as in
One never knows who real friends are until times like these.
What other pronoun (or pronouns) in English can also more informally mean “everyone
in general"?
4.	1 In this chapter, we have mentioned the objection some people raise these days to using
the third person singular masculine pronoun in reference to people of both genders.
- Many people reject the solution of using slash lines, as in his/her or s/he because they
feel it is stylistically awkward. Aside from creating a new neuter pronoun, which is a
solution some have suggested, what are other acceptable ways of circumlocuting the
usage of he, his, and him when these forms are used in a general sense?
5.	What would you tell students who produced the following:
a.	*The friend who helped me organize the picnic’s house is on the corner.
b.	*He kicked hisself for not remembering her name.
c.	*This is Mary bicycle.
d.	Everybody from all the classes are going.
e.	*Leo and Hugo hit themselves, and Hugo got injured.
6.	Second language morpheme acquisition studies have found that the 'ร possessive form
was supplied far less accurately than many other morphemes in obligatory contexts by
ESL/EFL students (Dulay & Burt, 1974; Larsen-Freeman, 1976). We have already mentioned
several reasons why the 'ร form causes problems for learners. Can you think of any other
feature(s) of this structure that would account for its frequent misuse or omission?
7.	In English, there are constructions called noun compounds, which consist of two
nouns juxtaposed to create a compound word. The noun in attributive position
functions much as an adjective would; for example:
jewelry store	table leg stone wall
As Andersen/1979) points out, the Spanish construction for both the English 'ร
possessive form and noun compound is often the same:
possessive—Milly's garden—el jardin de Milly
noun compound—a baseball player—un jugador de béisbol
Given these facts, what sort of problems would you expect a Spanish speaker to have
with English ’ร possessives? What two types of errors involving the possessive form in
English would you expect these learners to commit?
8.1 One of your students heard a native speaker of English say, “This prize was given to
J Edgar and I. ” Your student asks you if this sentence is okay. What will you reply?
326
The Grammar Book
Bibliography
R E F E R E N c ES	____________ -
Andersen, R. (1979). The relationship between first language transfer and second language
overgeneralization: data from the English of Spanish speakers. In R. Andersen (Ed.), The acquisition and
use of Spanish and English as first and second languages (pp. 43-58). Washington, DC: TESOL.
Ariel, M. (1988). Referring and accessibility. Journal of Linguistics, 24, 65-87.
Biber, D., Johansson, ร., Leech, G., Conrad, ร., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and
written English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ltd.
Celce-Murcia, M-, & Hilles, ร. (1988). Techniques and resources in teaching grammar. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Cornish, F. (2001). Modal that as determiner and pronoun: The primacy of the cognitive-interactive
dimension. English Language and Linguistics, 5(2), 297-315.
Declerck, R. (1991). A comprehensive descriptive grammar of English. Tokyo, Japan: Kaitakusha.
Diessel, H. (2006). Demonstratives, joint attention, and the emergence of grammar. Cognitive Linguistics,
17(4), 463-489.
Dulay, H., & Burt, M. (1974). Natural sequences in child second language acquisition. Language Learning,
24(1), 37-54.
Flowerdew, J. (2003). Signalling nouns in discourse. English for specific Purposes, 22, 329-346.
Fortanet, I. (2004). The use of we in university lectures: Reference and function. English for specific Purposes,
23,45-66.	,
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Gray, B., & Cortes, V (2011). Perception vs. evidence: An analysis of this and these in academic prose.
English for Specific Purposes, 30, 31-43.
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion in English. London, England: Longman.
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1989). Language, context, and text. Oxford, England: Oxford University
Press.
Harwood, N. (2005). ‘We do not seem to have a theory..The theory I present here attempts to fill this gap’:
Inclusive and exclusive pronouns in academic writing. Applied Linguistics, 26(3), 343-375.
Hinrichs, L., & Szmrecsanyi, B. (2007). Recent changes in the function and frequency of standard English
genitive constructions: A multivariate analysis of tagged corpora. English Language and Linguistics, 11(3),
437-474.
Huddleston, R., & Pullum, G. K. (2002). The Cambridge grammar of the English language. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Jankowski, B., & Tagliamonte, ร. (2014). On the genitive’s trail: Data and method from a sociolinguistic
perspective. English Language and Linguistics, 18(2), 305-329.
Kealey, J., & Inness, D. (1997). Shenanigames: Grammar-focused interactive ESL/EFL activities and games.
Brattleboro, VT: Pro Lingua Associates.
Kreyer, R. (2003). Genitive and of-construction in modern written English. Processability and human
involvement. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 8(2), 169-207.
Kuo, C.-H. (1999). The use of personal pronouns: Role relationships in scientific journal articles. English
for Specific Purposes, 18, 121-138.
Langacker, R. พ. (1999). Grammar and conceptualization. Berlin, Germany: Mouton de Gruyter.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (1976). An explanation for the morpheme acquisition order of second language
learners. Language Learning, 26(1), 125-134.
Chapter 16: Reference and Possession
327
Levinson, ร. c. (2004). Deixis and pragmatics. In L. Horn & G. Ward (Eds.), The handbook of pragmatics
(pp. 97-121). Oxford, England: Blackwell.
Myers, G., & Lampropoulou, ร. (2012). Impersonal ‘you’ and stance-taking in social research interviews.
Journal of Pragmatics, 44(10), 1206-1218.
Payne, J., & Berlage, E. (Eds.). (2014a). Genitive variation in English [Special issue]. English Language
and Linguistics, 18(2).
Payne, J., & Berlage, E. (2014b). Genitive variation: The niche role of the oblique genitive. English
Language and Linguistics, 18(2), 331-360.
Peters, ร., & Westerstâhl, D. (2013). The semantics of possessives. Language, 89(4), 713-759.
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, ร., Leech, G., & Svartvik, J. (1985).^4 comprehensive grammar of the English language.
London, England: Longman.
Rosenbach, A. (2007). Emerging variation: Determiner genitives and noun modifiers in English. English
Language and Linguistics, 77(1), 143-189.
Rosenbach, A. (2014). English genitive variation-The state of the art. English Language and Linguistics,
18(2), 215-262.
Schmid, H. (2000). English abstract nouns as conceptual shells: From corpus to cognition. Berlin, Germany:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Staczek, J. (1986). The English pronominal reflexive: An aspect of usage variation. Stadia Anglica
Posnaniensia, 19, 119-128.
Staczek, J. (1987). Sentential and discoursal reflexives in English: A matter of variation. Stadia Anglica
Posnaniensia, 20, 115-121.
Staczek, J. (1988). Variation in the plural reflexive in spoken English: Preliminary evidence for merger. In
A. R. Thomas (Ed.), Methods in dialectology (pp. 674-683). Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters.
Staczek, J. (1994). Social uses of possessive adjectives in English. In M. Montgomery & G. Little (Eds.),
Centennial usage studies. Tuscaloosa, AL: University of Alabama Press.
Strauss, ร. (1993). Why this and that are not complete without it. In K. Beals, G. Cooke, D. Kathman,
ร. Rita, K. McCulloch, & D. Testen (Eds.), CLS 29 (pp. 403-417). Proceedings from the 29th Regional
Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society.
Strauss, ร. (2002). This, that, and it in spoken American English: A demonstrative system of gradient focus.
Language Sciences, 24, 131-152.
Wechsler, ร. (2010). What you and I mean to each other: Person indexicals, self-ascription, and theory of
mind. Language, 86(2), 332-365.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
For the descriptive sources dealing with all the forms introduced in this chapter, see:
Biber, D., Johansson, ร., Leech, G., Conrad, ร., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and
written English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ltd.
Huddleston, R., & Pullum, G. K. (2002). The Cambridge grammar of the English language. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Quirk, R., & Greenbaum, ร. (1973)ไ*ฟ concise grammar of contemporary English. New York, NY: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich.
For a functional perspective on reference and possession, see:
Halliday, M. A. K., & Matthiesseij, c. Μ. I. M. (2014). Halliday's introduction to functional grammar (4th ed.).
Lõndon, England: Hodder Education.
For a functional account of pronoun usage, consult:
Keizer, E. (2011). English proforms: An alternative account. English Language and Linguistics, 15(2), 303-334.
For a cognitive perspective on reference and possession, see:
Radden, G., & Dirven, R. (2007). Cognitive English grammar. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins.
328
The Grammar Book
For treatments of reference, see:
Breban, T., Davidse, K., & Ghesquière, κ. (2011). A typology of anaphoric and cataphoric relations
expressed by English complex determiners. Journal of Pragmatics, 43( 11), 2689-2703.
Brown, G., & Yule, G. (1983). Discourse. Cambridge, England: Cambridge บท!versity Press.
Carter, R., & McCarthy, M. (2006). Cambridge grammar of English. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Gundel, J. K. (2010). Reference and accessibility from a givenness hierarchy perspective. International
Review of Pragmatics, 2, 148-168.
Gundel, J. K., Hedberg, N.J & Zacharski, R. (1993). Cognitive status and the form of referring expressions
in discourse. Language, 69(2), 274—307.
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion in English. London, England: Longman.
Payne, J., Pullum, G. K., Scholz, B. c., & Berlage, E. (2013). Anaphoric one and its implications. Language,
89(4), 794-829.
van Hoek, K. (1995). Conceptual reference points: A cognitive grammar account of pronominal anaphora
constraints. Language, 71(2), 310-340.
Wales, K. (1996). Personal pronouns in present-day English. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
For treatment of pronouns, see:
Simon, H. J., & Wiese, H. (2002). Pronouns—Grammar and representation. Amsterdam, Netherlands:
John Benjamins.
For teaching suggestions see:
Badalamenti, V., & Henner-Stanchina, C. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 1 (4th ed.).
Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Cake, c. D. (2009). Grammar connection: Structure through content 5. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Houck, N., & Hilles, ร. (2009). Grammar connection: Structure through content 4. Boston, MA: Heinle,
Cengage Learning.
Thewlis, ร. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 3 (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Endnotes
1.	The personal pronoun one is a formal, general third-person pronoun that neutralizes the gender distinction
เท she/he or her/him. Since it is formal, it occurs less frequently than the other personal pronouns.
2.	See Huddleston and Pullum (2002, pp. 429-430) for exceptions, such as lucky you, he who laughs last, and
just them.
3.	For all practical purposes, there are no possessive pronouns its and one's.The possessive determiners its
and one's เท the following sentences do not have pronominal counterparts.
The cat is going to eat its dinner. One should take care of one's health.
*This dinner is its.	*Regarding health, one should take care of one's.
The acceptable version in the pair on the right is more typically British than American. เท American English, we
would more likely say One should take care of his health"or—to avoid sexist language—"People should take
care of their health."
4.	Halliday and Hasan (1976) also include the definite article the (which derives etymologically from that)
and the pro-adverbs (i.e., pro-forms that replace and refer to adverbiais) here, there, now, and then as part
of demonstrative reference.
5.	Else has a related adverbial form elsewhere, which is used to direct the listener or reader away from the
antecedent and to some other place or condition: If the answer to the problem isn't in the back of the book;
you'll have to find it elsewhere.
Chapter า 6: Reference and Possession
329
6.	These indefinite"pronouns"are not true pronouns; syntactically, they behave much like regular nouns
and take adjectives and prepositional phrases: a certain someone, somebody with a gun. There are also
related indefinite pro-adverbs;
somewhere/someplace anywhere/anyplace nowhere/noplace everywhere/everyplace
7.	See Biber et al. (ใ 999, p. 330) for other ways to signal second person plural reference.
8.	While increasing use of singular they may feel like a recent phenomenon, Huddleston and Pullum (2002)
point out that it has been around since Middle English. (12-14th centuries C.E.)
9.	Other semantically nonreflexive uses of reflexives are for emphasis (1) and used adverbially to mean
"alone,""without assistance" (2):
1.	John himself will tell you the news.
2.	The child wanted to solve the puzzle by himself.
10.	The nominal substitute one (pl. ones) often co-occurs with referential determiners to avoid repetition of
lexical nouns. For more information on the nominal substitute one, see Halliday & Hasan (1976, pp. 91-105).
11.	See Cornish (2001) for an excellent discussion of the psychological domain (or modal aspect) of
demonstrative determiners and pronouns.
12.	Other terms have been used, such as defining Vร. classifying (Declerck, 1991) and determiner genitive vs.
attributive genitive (Rosenbach, 2007).
13.	Not all possessive constructions follow this tendency. For example, a Google search for "John's actions"
received only 47, 700 compared to 121,000 for "the actions of John,"possibly because action is an
nominalized verb.
14.	This guideline, however, may not be as useful today as it once was. Diachronic studies (e.g., Rosenbach,
2007) have shown a historical shift toward more use of inflectional 'ร with inanimate modifying nouns.
15.	Kreyer (2003) also found a strong preference for the of construction with collectives (e.g., government)
and lower animals (e.g., ants) (p. 186).
16.	Payne and Berlage (2014b) discuss the "semantic niche" that the oblique genitive occupies. An oblique
genitive takes the form of the friend of John's, as opposed to John's friend or the friend of John.
17.	Staczek (1994) notes the opposite pattern also may occur: the definite articles can be used where the
possessive determiner is expected: /forgot to buy the wife a g/ft (p. 14); however, he gave no explanation
or analysis for this use.
330
The Grammar Book
Partitives, Collectives,
and Quantifiers
Introduction
Being able to communicate the quantity or amount of something is an important human need
that we satisfy through language. If we need to be precise, we can refer to quantities by using
numbers of various types:
Cardinal number: We have class for two hours a day.
Fraction: I have to leave in (ส) half an hour.
Percentage: Fifty percent of the class was out with the flu.1
Multiplier: They have offered to double my salary if I join their firm.
But due to the importance of this concept, we employ many other linguistic devices for
quantification besides numbersTo illustrate this, here is a partial inventory of the different linguistic
means that English speakers use to express approximations of quantity (based on Kennedy, 1987).
•	First of all, we have terms in each of the four major parts of speech:
Nouns: average, estimate, neighborhood, vicinity
Verbs: say, guess, verge on
Adjectives: (50)-odd, inexact, approximate
Adverbs: approximately, roughly, nearly
•	Then, too, minor parts of speech can be used to give an approximation of quantity:
Prepositions: about, around, near
Determiners: some (50)...
•	Affixes:
Suffix: (50)-ish
Prefix: quasi-universal
•	Phrases:
Conjoined prepositional phrases: from {50) to (60), between (50) and (60)
Lexicalized phrases: more or less, or so, or more, or thereabouts, something like,
within a hair's breadth of, within spitting distance of, at (the) most, on the order of
•	Clauses:
If you said (50), you wouldn't be far wrong.
This chapter examines three linguistic devices relevant to quantification: a partitive
denotes a part of a larger whole, a collective denotes a collection of individuals, and a quantifier
denotes number or amount.
Partitives: the best part of
Collectives: group
Quantifiers: almost all
331
Each device provides challenges for ESL/EFL learners. Idiomatic partitives (e.g., a clove of
garlic, a loaf of bread) represent an area of the lexicon with tight collocational restrictions
(i.e., only certain nouns fit in the construction after the partitive noun) and must be learned
individually. Partitive constructions that include numbers can be tricky for students to get
right. For instance, although fifteen of the states is acceptable, fifteen of states is not. Partitives
can also be problematic when it comes to the issue of agreement. In particular, errors in verb
agreement may occur when partitives are used in subject position:
*A box of delicious doughnuts are on the table.
The verb in the sentence above should be in the singular form, as it should agree with the
head noun box and not with doughnuts.
Like partitives, collectives also raise questions about agreement. Which sentence below
should students consider as correct?
The team is struggling at the moment.
The team are struggling at the moment.
The answer is not as straightforward as it is for partitives as we will see later in this chapter.
Quantifiers present a host of further challenges. Some of these concern the countability
of the noun being quantified:
many cups	*much cups
much water	*many water
Others concern the definiteness (or lack thereof) regarding the noun being quantified:
most cups	"most of cups
most of the cups "most the cups
And still others involve significant semantic distinctions among quantifiers:
There's a little water. So we should be fine.
There's little water. So we may not be fine.
It is not uncommon for ESL/EFL learners to produce something like the following:
?There's little water. So we should be fine.
In this chapter, we explore the above challenges, as well as other factors related to the form,
meaning, and use of partitives, collectives, and quantifiers.
Partitives
A partitive is a construction that denotes a part of a whole. Its phrasal form typically consists
of a count noun followed by of followed by another noun.
(det) noun of noun
a	grain of salt/sand ·'
The same pattern:· can be used to quantify or limit noncount nouns:
(det)of	~~~_________e.g., a drop of water_____________
[partitive noun] [noncount noun] two drops of water
and to delimit the quantity of count nouns:
(det)of e.g., a deck of cards______________	___________
[partitive noun] [count noun] two decks of cards
Partitives can modify both nonspecific nouns:
I need a deck of cards to show you my new magic trick, (any deck—nonspecific)
and specific nouns:
Will a deck of these cards do?2
332
The Grammar Book
When the partitive noun is part of the subject, the verb agrees with it. If the partitive
noun is singular, the verb is singular. If the partitive noun is plural, the verb is also plural:
A mountain of dirty laundry was piled up after our vacation.
Mountains of dirty laundry were piled up after our vacation.
In order to capture the array of common types of partitives, we group them by categories
(although some may overlap).
• Precise measure phrases (Many ESL/EFL students are more familiar with metric
measure phrases):
a gallon of gas two cups ofsugar •	Container-based:3 a bottle of catsup two cartons of books •	Portion-based:	a yard of fabric two spoonfuls of cough syrup a jar of jam two cans of oil
a slice of bread	a dollop of whipped cream
two helpings of potatoes	two servings of ice cream
• Individual members of a category (of course, more than one can be referred to when
a number is used):
a word of advice	an item of information
two pieces of luggage • Parts or fractions:	two articles of clothing
a segment of society two portions of the budget • Shape of:	a tenth of the population two sections of the newspaper
a ball of yarn two streams of water	a column of smoke two sticks of butter
• Pair of:
Some plural count nouns without a singular form are viewed strictly as pairs—things
having two equal parts—and the partitive count noun pair* is used with these norms; for example:
	trousers		trouser
pair of	scissors	*a	scissor
	tongs		tong
• Idiomatic partitives:
Vegetables	Other food items
. , โ lettuce a head of 1 [cabbage	a bunch of grapes a loaf of bread
an ear of corn	a dove of garlic
a stalk of celery	a sprig of parsley
Chapter 17: Partitives, Collectives, and Quantifiers
333
Animals
People
a gang of thieves
a troupe of actors
a team of ballplayers
a crew of helpers
a herd of cattle
a flock of birds
a school offish
a pride of lions
•	A majority of, the majority of, a minority of:
These partitives are used to show the proportion of some explicit set. A majority ο/’and
the majority of are used with quantities greater than half. A minority of is used to signal less (or
fewer) than half:
A majority of the people feel that educational reform is a priority.5
•	A few “partitives” can even be used to express a quality or subtype, rather than quantity, of
a particular thing:
a sort of appliance new kinds of media
a type of bird
•	Numbers as partitives:
Certain plural number words are used in partitive constructions to convey approximations
and not exact numbers.
dozens of, scores of, hundreds of, thousands of, millions of, etc.
In these constructions, the second noun can be nonspecific or specific:
Millions of people watched the Olympics on TV.
Hundreds of the athletes gave their best performances?
Similar constructions exist for exact numbers. However, there is a key difference. Such
constructions are only possible when the second noun is specific. When the second noun is
not specific, of is not used:
three hundred of the representatives
*three hundred of representatives
three hundred representatives
Note that hundred and dozen remain singular with a specific number, even when the number
preceding it is more than one:
*three hundreds of the representatives
*two dozens of the eggs
We return to consider the use of the word of later in this chapter.
one dozen of the (brown) eggs
*one dozen of eggs
one dozen eggs
Collectives
A collective noun is’a noun that refers to a group of individuals. Collectives sometimes appear
in partitive constructions, as wCsaw above in partitives for animals or people:
a team of ballplayers a flock of birds
Collective nouns are exceptional, in that, as subjects, they may take either singular or plural
subject-verb agreement:
The team has been outstanding this year.
The team have been outstanding this year.
While plural verb agreement with collectives has been found to be much more frequent in
British than in American English (Bock, Cutler, Eberhard, Butterfield, Cutting, & Humphreys,
2006), the preferred pattern is singular agreement in both dialects (Biber, Johansson, Leech,
334
The Grammar Book
f
Conrad, & Finegan, 1999).7 Even with singular verb agreement, however, speakers can choose
to interpret the noun as a whole unit or as the individual members or components that
compose the unit:
_________	.1.	.,-11 Í It was looking for prey 1
A flock of birds was circling the field. 1 1	,1.	,	(·
I They were looking for prey J
____________	1 itself
The committee is blaming 1	1 l·
I themselves
Plural pronoun agreement with collectives is common in both American and British English
(Bock et al., 2006). Such variation between singular and plural agreement is also observable
in other anaphoric forms, such as possessive determiners and relative clauses:
The committee blamed
**s . 1 chairperson,
their)
My audience,
which was
who were
very supportive,...
According to Celce (1970), there are three main types of collective nouns. The first
comprises common collectives, some of which can enter into partitive constructions, as you have
just seen. They might be referred to as particularizing nouns because they talk about a particular
collection of people or animals. The other types are the unique collectives, which represent the
sole member of a particular set, and the generic collectives, which refer to all members of a class:
Common Collectives	Unique Collectives	Generic Collectives
(a/the) class	the Vatican	the clergy
(a/the) team	the Kremlin	the bourgeoisie
(a/the) herd8	(the) Congress	the intelligensia
(a/the) government	(the) Parliament	the aristocracy
Each of these collective nouns can be seen to be a single entity or a collection of individuals.
One’s perspective, in North American English at least, is more frequently signaled by the use
of singular or plural anaphoric reference than by subject-verb agreement.
Collective Nouns Derived from Adjectives
In addition to these three types of collective nouns, a number of adjectivally derived nouns in
English may be considered as generic collectives. Nouns like the meek, the dead, and the rich,
when they have human reference, resemble generic collective nouns in a number of ways:
they are always preceded by the, they are not overtly singular or plural, and they may refer to
a whole group in general terms rather than to a particular or unique group.
An important difference between these collective nouns derived from adjectives and the
other categories of collective nouns is that the adjective-based collectives always take plural verbs:
The elderly are increasingly asserting their rights.
*The elderly is increasingly asserting its rights.
Quantifiers
As we have already noted, a third syntactic construction is used when we want to talk about
amount or quantity. Quantifiers indicate a nonspecific amount or quantity of the noun that
follows.9 Quantifiers can be determiners, or when the referent is clear, pronouns:
Chapter 17: Partitives, Collectives, and Quantifiers
335
A: I want some ice cream.
B: I want some too.
It is helpful to arrange quantifiers showing increasing amounts along two continua—one
positive and one negative.10The diagonal lines connect items or sets of items that logically contradict
each other. Quantifiers that modify count nouns are above the horizontal lines; those used with
noncount nouns are below the lines. Where there are no lines, the quantifier can be used with count
and noncount nouns alike. We explore each of these distinctions in more detail below the continua.
Positive
some/a few/several/a couple of	quite a few (a great) many/a (good) number of/a lot of most/almost all	all
some/a little	quite a little a great deal of/a good deal of/a lot of	\	/
NONE
none/no/notany few/hardly any/scarcely any just/only a few not ทาany/many.. .not most. ..not not all
_______	little/hardly any/scarcely any just/only a little_not much_____________________________
NEGATIVE
^—-———..............................................................—
Going from left to right on the continua are increasing amounts of the noun being modified.
To illustrate this, here is one progression from along the positive continuum:
Some packages have been brought in from the car.
Quite a few packages have been brought in.
A lot of packages have been brought in.
Almost all packages have been brought in.
All packages have been brought in.
We said earlier that quantifiers can be determiners or pronouns. This is easily seen in all these
example sentences save the middle one. A lot of cannot be a pronoun, but a lot can:
Some have been brought in from the car.
Quite a few have been brought in.
A lot have been brought in.
Almost all have been brought in.
All have been brought in.
POSITIVE ANDllEGAfivfc^
The reason for the two continua is that the negative quantifiers not only convey quantity, but
also convey a negative assessment of the quantity. The speaker or writer’s negative stance is
overtly marked by the negative particle not in many of the negative quantifiers:
Not all drivers are responsible (but all drivers should be).
With other quantifiers on the negative continuum, there is no negative particle; nonetheless,
they have a negative connotation. These examples make the connotations explicit:
He took ต few (= some, several) biscuits, with the result that few (= hardly any) were
left for the rest of US.
336
The Grammar Book
He then took a little (= some) butter, with the result that little (= hardly any) was left
for the rest of US.
Notice that one way to capture the negative connotation in the second quantifier in each of the
pairs above is to paraphrase/ra> and little as hardly any or scarcely any. Langacker (2012) explains the
difference between few/little and a few/a little as a matter of perspective. Few and little quantify an
amount that is contrasted with a normal amount. Thus, few biscuits is less than a normal number
of biscuits. The starting point in this perspective is the norm, and the “less than” direction makes
few and little negative quantifiers. When the indefinite article is part of the quantifier phrase
(afew/a little), the starting point is zero .A few biscuits is a small number that is more than zero.
The “more than” direction in this perspective makes a few and a little positive quantifiers.
Another difference between a few or a little and few or little is that the former can occur
in the first utterance in a discourse; for example:
„	, la few minutes 1 ,
Do you have 1 ■ ■	1 ?
I a little time J
There are a few apples in the kitchen if you'd like one.
There's a little cake in the kitchen if you'd like some.
Few and little, however, generally require more context because a negative or contradictory
tone must be established:
Harold was lonely and desperate; he had few friends and little money.
Many ESL/EFL students omit the indefinite article when they use a few or a little. While
the result is not necessarily an inaccurate construction, the listener or reader is likely to be
confused by the use of an implicitly negative quantifier when a positive one seems to be
required by the discourse:
?l have few good friends back home. They write to me often.
QU ANTI FIERS ARE DETERMINERS
You may already have noticed that some of the quantifiers take the form of a partitive
construction—a phrase consisting of a noun of quantity followed by of and preceded by the
indefinite article: a lot of, a number of, a great deal of, a couple of.
Notice that these phrasal quantifiers are not true partitives for several reasons:
•	They convey a nonspecific number or amount, whereas partitives tend to convey a more
specific number or amount:
Quantifier: The bulldozer has already cleared a lot of land at the construction site.
Partitive: The bulldozer has already cleared 10 acres of land at the construction site.
•	Their nouns can’t be quantified in the same way that partitive nouns can:
They lost a good deal of money in the pyramid scheme.
*They lost
two good deals of money
two lots of money
in the stock market.
There were a number of problems with the show.
"There were
two numbers of problems
two couples of problems
with the opening act.
Chapter 17: Partitives, Collectives, and Quantifiers
337
•	Like other quantifiers, they can precede partitives:11
A couple of pounds of sliced turkey should last for a while.
Several wagonloads of hay should see US through the winter.
•	Finally, and perhaps most important, when they modify a subject, the main verb agrees
with the noun that follows the phrasal quantifier:12
A lot of cards were on the table.
A number of marbles are on the floor.
This contrasts with the subject-verb agreement shown by true partitives:
A deck of cards was on the table.
A box of marbles is on the floor.
In other words, these phrasal quantifiers are determiners, as we have already observed, not the
partitive noun + of construction.
QUANTIFIERS WITH COUNT/NONCOUNT NOUNS
As you have seen, some quantifiers occur only with count nouns, others with noncount nouns,
and still others with both.
Count: There weren't many people at the soccer game due to the inclement weather.
Noncount: There wasn't much food left after the players ate.
Both count and noncount: There weren't a lot of people at the soccer game. There
wasn't a lot of food left.
When much and many are used as pronouns, the verb form associated with each reflects the
difference: many requires a plural verb, whereas much agrees with a singular verb:
Many are called every year.
Much is done by nonprofit organizations.
With a lot of the verb agrees with the number of the noun being quantified.
A lot of people were there.
A lot of time was wasted.
Grammar books will often say that much has a restricted use—that it is used in questions and
negatives, but they say that a lot of is preferred in affirmative statements:
Does Jake have many friends? Does Jake have much fun?
Jake doesn't have many friends.	Jake doesn't have much fun.
Jake has many friends.	"Jake has much fun.
Jake has a lot of friends.	Jake has a lot of fun.
While this is a good rule of thumb for beginning and low intermediate level ESL/EFL
students, it is not^the whole story-Neumann (1975) found that in formal written contexts,
much can be used in affirmative statements:
(in a job application) I have much experience in the skills you have listed as required
for the position.
Even here, though, Neumann found that native speakers preferred a great deal of in such a
context. She also reports that native speakers prefer many over a lot of in formal contexts, even
in affirmative statements, a finding confirmed by Biber et al. (1999) for academic English:
Today, more people are raising children alone, and many individuals are discovering
that the act of being the sole parent can be very difficult.
338
The Grammar Book
Notice, too, that unmodified much and many cannot readily be used pronominally in short
answers to questions:
How much money does it cost?
How many books do you have?
*Much.
Not much.
A little.
?Many.
Not many.
(Quite) A few.
USING OF BEFORE SPECIFIC NOUNS
Notice that just as you saw earlier with numerals, quantifiers can be made to modify specific
noun phrases, too. This is done by adding of before the specific noun phrase:
many of these teachers	"many these teachers
a few of the students	*a few the students
hardly any of their parents	*hardly any their parents
Also notice that for these quantifiers, of cannot be part of the construction when the quantified
noun is not definite:13
*many of teachers	many teachers
*a few of students	a few students
"hardly any of parents	hardly any parents
The definiteness of the quantified noun has implications for the extreme end of the negative
continuum, where no and none appear to complement each other. That is, no is used as a
determiner before nouns that are not definite, while none of is used before nouns that are definite
and can function as a pronoun:
No schools would agree to it.	"No would agree to it.
None of the schools would agree to it.	None would agree to it.
Prescriptive grammarians have insisted that it is unneccessary to use the of after the quantifiers
all and both (we deal with the latter below) except when they precede a pronoun, in which
case of is required. It is true that neither all nor both need of to signal a specific noun following
them, because the semantics of all and both demand that the noun be specific:
All (the) juniors will register tomorrow.
All of them
Both (the) seniors were inducted into the Honor Society.
Both of them
However, the use of o/with all and both is quite common, especially in North American
English, as you saw in Chapter 4, presumably by analogy with the other quantifiers:
All of the juniors will register tomorrow.
Both of the seniors were inducted into the Honor Society.
COM PARATI
We will have much to say about comparatives later in this book, but it is appropriate at this
juncture to point out that even though they are determiners or pronouns and not adjectives,
several quantifiers have comparative and superlative forms like adjectives:
Chapter 17: Partitives, Collectives, and Quantifiers
339
	Comparative	Superlative
much	more	most
many	more	most
few	fewer	fewest
little	less	least
Whereas many of the quantifiers on the continua above are absolute, the comparative and
superlative forms are relative:14
Many people are telecommuting these days.
Still, more people prefer to work in an office in the company of others.
And most people don't have a choice.
I have few homework assignments these days.
I have fewer homework assignments than I did at the beginning of the term.
I have the fewest homework assignments of anyone I know.15
Note that although prescriptively speaking, less is reserved for noncount nouns, less is
increasingly used for both count nouns and noncount nouns, especially in informal discourse.
For example, a recent Google search of the phrase “less calories” produced 1,370,000 results.
This number is just over half of the results produced by a search of the prescriptively preferred
“fewer calories” (2,640,000 results). In fact, a search of “less accidents” actually yielded more
results (297,000) than did a search of “fewer accidents” (245,000).
We have more to say about the use of these quantifiers in Chapters 34 and 35.
QUANTIFIERS WÍTHSPÍcÍÃTsÍE^^
Other quantifiers are excluded from our continua because of their special semantic nature:
any, both, each, every, either, neither, enough, plenty of, the 'พhole of, the rest of, and the remainder of.
•	Any, as you saw in earlier chapters, is used in negatives and questions as a counterpart to
the unstressed article some. Any can also be used in affirmative statements as a quantifier,
and when it is, it refers to “one or more, no matter which” (Jespersen, 1933, p. 181).
Any of those answers will do.
Any household detergent works.
Bolinger (1960) notes that such sentences are related to conditionals; that is, if something
is a household detergent, it will work. The conditional sense of any extends to sentences
such as:
Any (of the) pasta left at the end of the meal will be put in a casserole.
A paraphrase of this example would be pasta, if there is any.
•	Both can be followed only by plural nouns signaling quantities of two:
Two boys and a girl were accused of setting off a false alarm. Both (of the) boys
felt ashamed of what they had done.
•	Each refers to all members of a group, but does so individually, rather than collectively. It
therefore modifies a singular noun and takes a singular verb:
Each special effect was created by a different computer programmer.
•	Each may be used with oft 0 highlight the definiteness of the group’ร individual members:
Each of the special effects was created by a different computer programmer.
Notice when this construction [each of the (plural noun)] is in subject position, the verb
number is still singular.
340
The Grammar Book
•	Every is much like each in its meaning but is more collective. It too takes a singular verb:
Every special effect was created by a different programmer.
Unlike each, however, every cannot function as a pronoun:
*1 will describe every.
I will describe each.
•	Every must also be followed by one in quantifier expressions using of:
Every one of the special effects was created by a different programmer.
"Every of the special effects was created by a different programmer.
•	Either and neither are like both in that two members of a set are being considered. In fact,
sometimes either can substitute for both. However, both either and neither take singular
verbs (see Chapter 4):
Either date is preferable to September 7.
Both dates are preferable to September 7.
•	Either can also offer a choice between two alternatives:
When you are through, you can ask either of US to help you clean up.
•	Neither means "not one and not the other”:
Neither of US knows the answer.
Neither twin has ever married.
•	Enough means “sufficient”:
We have enough volunteers to finish building the playground.
With the exception of every, all of the quantifiers we have just examined can stand alone as
pronouns:
Would you like any?
I'll have both.
Each has its own merits.
Either will do.
Neither will work.
We've had enough.
•	Plenty of means more than sufficient or ample. Although it appears across registers, it is
most frequent in informal speech:
We have plenty of volunteers to finish building the playground.
•	The vohole of 16 the rest of the remainder of quantify definite nouns and are used to express an
entire thing or a specific part of it:
The whole of Quebec is francophone.
1 โ the rest of
In I
I the remainder of
the country, English is the dominant language.
As with other quantifiers, when the rest of and the remainder of appear in constructions
with plural nouns in subject position, the verb agrees with the second noun:
The rest of the exercises are easy.
The remainder of the classes were canceled.
Chapter ใ 7: Partitives, Collectives, and Quantifiers
341
INFORMAL QUANTIFIERS
Not listed on our continua are phrasal quantifiers that are often restricted to informal
registers:
•	a bunch of, a heap of, a load of
These phrases, originally partitive constructions denoting shape, may also be used as
quantifiers that signal a nonspecific number or amount. For example, consider the following:
A bunch of grapes was removed from the vine, (partitive)
A bunch of grapes were in the salad, (quantifier)
A bunch of grapes in the first sentence is a partitive phrase that refers to a collection of grapes
connected to the same stem, while a bunch of in the second sentence refers to the individual
grapes in the salad. As we saw earlier, subject-verb agreement clearly distinguishes the
partitive from the quantifier (at least in cases where the partitive noun is singular and the
second noun is plural). These quantifiers can modify plural count nouns (a heap of troubles) as
well as noncount nouns (a heap of trouble):17
•	lots of, heaps of, loads of, oodles of, stacks of
These all signal a large quantity and may appear with count nouns (loads of bills) and noncount
nouns (loads of cash):
•	a bit of, a flicker of a scrap of, a shred of, a sliver of, a speck of, a spot of, a trace of, a touch of, a
whijfof
These all signal a small quantity and, with the exception of a bit of, are used much less
frequently than other quantifiers [for more on the pragmatic and collocational restrictions of
such constructions, see Brems (2007)]. Just like the other phrases in this section, these small
quantity phrases are used both as partitives and as quantifiers:
She could see a flicker of light emanating from the candle, (partitive)
We were left without a flicker of hope, (quantifier)
Brems (2003) argues that the reason for their hybrid status is that they originated as lexical
items, denoting shape, and they are in the process of becoming grammaticalized, i.e, used as
lexicogrammatical constructions to signal an amount.
FLOATED QUANTIFIERS
We have seen that quantifiers appear as determiners and as pronouns. But what do we make
of the following?
The votes have all been counted.
All quantifies the votes but does not come before the noun phrase, as we would expect with a
normal determiner. This unusual position is known as quantifier float. The set of quantifiers
that may be “floated” is restricted to all, both, and each, which may appear in the following
positions (Reed, 2010):
after the subject noun phrase: The four candidates each gave a good speech.
after the first auxiliary verb: The votes have all been counted.
after copular be: The winning candidate and her husband are both pleased with
the results.
before or after not: The losing candidates are all not happy.
The voting public is not all satisfied with the results.18
342
The Grammar Book
The Order of Determiners
in a Noun Phrase
Although (believe it or not!) we have not considered all the possible forms that can serve as
determiners in English, in the last few chapters, we have dealt with the most important types.
Thus, it is appropriate now to revisit a point that we first made in Chapter 5. We said then
that there are three subcategories of determiners to consider when sequencing determiners
before a noun. The following is a chart (based on Quirk,Greenbaum, Leech & Svartvik,
1985) that distributes most of the determiners we have explored thus far into one of the three
subcategories:
Predeterminers	Core Determiners	Postdeterminers
quantifiers: all.	articles	cardinal numbers
both, half	possessives	ordinal numbers
multipliers; double.	demonstratives	general ordinals:
twice, three times, etc.	quantifiers: some, any,	next, last, another, etc.
intensifiers:	no, each, every, either.	quantifiers: many, much.
such a, what a	neither, enough	(a) few, (a) little, several.
I, more,
less, most, least
phrasal quantifiers:
a great deal of, a lot of, a
good number of, etc.
It is possible to sequence determiners in an English noun phrase by picking one determiner
from the predeterminer column, one from the core determiner column, and one or more
from the postdeterminer column. Here are some examples:
pre core post	core
All our many hopes were kept alive by her encouraging words.
core post post
These next two weeks before school starts will be hectic.
Not all combinations are possible, of course. For instance, quantifiers may be present in all
three positions, but they cannot always be combined:
*Half every paycheck goes to pay off our mortgage.
When a predeterminer quantifier is used as a pronoun, with the partitive of phrase following
it, though, it is possible to have one quantifier from each of the first two columns combined:
Half of every paycheck goes to pay off our mortgage.
Conclusion
Our treatment of the linguistic devices that English speakers use in quantification has been limited.
Still, it is apparent that there is a lot to learn. We hope that it has also been clear that these devices are
quite common. Indeed, we found that we have used a lot of (!) quantifiers, collectives, and partitives
to talk about quantifiers, collectives, and partitives! We should also point out that while the core
quantifiers constitute a closed class, partitives are an open class. Indeed, the pattern for partitives is
very productive, which means that it can be extended to create new expressions all the time.
Chapter 17: Partitives, Collectives, and Quantifiers
343
ESL/EFL students should have no trouble grasping the semantic concepts of these
linguistic devices in general. However, they will struggle with some of the details of form,
the difference in positive and negative connotations as depicted on our two continua, and
perhaps with the development of a large enough repertoire of these expressions to provide
both variety and appropriateness in the ways in which they express quantification in English.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form/Meaning. To have students practice partitives, play the “supermarket” game. A
student starts the game by saying “I went to the supermarket and I bought...” completing
the sentence with a partitive and a noun beginning with the letter A; for example, “a bag
of apples.” The second student must repeat the sentence and add to it with a partitive
and a noun beginning with the letter B; for example, “I went to the supermarket and I
bought a bag of apples and a bunch of bananas.” The third student might add: “I went to
the supermarket and I bought a bag of apples, a bunch of bananas, and a box of cookies.”
The game continues until all students have had a chance, or all 26 letters have been used,
or when the teacher and students are stumped in finding examples!
2.	Form/Meaning. Have your students bring in their favorite recipes and share them with one
another. This will give them good practice in using measure quantifiers. Collect the recipes
and “publish” a class cookbook. If possible, prepare some of the recipes together.
3.	Form/Meaning. Plan a party with your class. Have students figure out what they would
like to serve and how much they will need of each item. Draw up a shopping list. If practical,
go on a shopping trip together, using the opportunity to introduce some of the idiomatic
partitives for fruits and vegetables you find.
4.	Meaning. Here are two books, intended for children, which can be used to expose students
to collective nouns:
•Beasts by the Bunches, by A. Mifflin Lowe, 1987 (Garden City, NY: Doubleday), in
which the author has written a poem for each collective noun.
•A Cache of Jewels and Other Collective Nouns, by Ruth Heller, 1987 (New York, NY:
Scholastic, Inc.), which has great illustrations and which also shows the variety of
collective nouns that can be used for the same animal group.
ร. Meaning. Ask students to examine agreement patterns exhibited by collective nouns
in authentic texts, such as short newspaper articles. Have your students underline all the
collectives, as well as any verbs or pronouns that refer to them. You can then generate a
discussion around how the author is conceptualizing the collective nouns. Alternatively, if
you are having trouble finding tgxts with a sufficient number of collectives, you can always
provide students -individual sentences to examine, as inThewlis (2007, p. 369).
6.	Meaning. This two-part exercise allows students to practice both the form and meaning
of quantifiers. First, dictate sentences with quantifiers to students. Then ask the students to
paraphrase the quantifier in one sentence with that of another. For example:
Teacher: 1 a. There was little money left after the shopping spree.
Students: 1b. There wasn't much money left after the shopping spree.
Teacher: 2a. A majority of the items we bought were purchased in the first hour.
Students: 2b. More than half of the items we bought were purchased in the first hour.
344
The Grammar Book
Teacher: 3a. However, a few items were purchased later.
Students: 3b. However, some items were purchased later.
This format provides a good opportunity to test students on their ability to hear the
distinction between a few and few, as well as a little and little. Given the reduction of the
indefinite article, for many students this is not an easy distinction to make. You might also
extend this exercise to include the area of use by asking students to provide more or less
formal quantifiers in their paraphrases.
7.	Form. Dictation can also be used to offer students practice in quantifying definite and
indefinite nouns. Read out loud sentences such as the following for students to write:
1.	*Most of workers are on strike.
2.	*A few the people are still working.
3.	Scarcely any of the newspapers are covering the story.
4.	*Many of reporters don't seem to be interested.
5.	*None the striking workers are pleased.
First, have students underline all the quantifiers. Next, have them identify which forms
are incorrect (as in sentences 1,2,4, and 5). Then ask them to make corrections and to
explain their corrections. The explanation phase allows you to see if students are making
the connection to use of for definite nouns or to drop of for indefinite nouns. This phase
also allows you to hear students’ thinking behind unanticipated corrections. Be aware
that there are often multiple ways to correct the problematic sentences. For example, in
(1), of could'be deleted or the could be inserted between of and the. In the first correction,
workers are treated as indefinite; in the second, workers are definite.
8.	Form. Corpora may be exploited as a way of encouraging students to recognize the of-pattern
in quantifier expressions for specific nouns. For example, you can direct your students to the
Corpus of Contemporary American English: COCA (http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/) and have
them search phrases such as a few of and many of. Ask students what they notice about the
words immediately to the right of the searched quantifier phrase. It should be abundantly
clear that the next word is most often the definite article, a demonstrative determiner, a
pronoun, or a possessive—all forms that signal definiteness. Then ask students to remove the
word of from their searches (e.g., search a few and many I) They will see that there is no longer
a pattern of definiteness to the immediate right of the quantifier.
9.	Use. Ask students to conduct a survey of their classmates’ preferences. In small groups,
students should decide which preferences they would like to survey, such as type of music,
type of book, food, movie, and so on. Staying in their small groups, students should design
a questionnaire to collect the information they wish to learn. After the questionnaires have
been distributed and completed, the group should compile the information and report their
findings to the rest of the class. They should use quantifiers first and then use percentages to
be more precise. For example:
Our survey shows that some students in our class prefer rock music, some prefer
classical music, and a few prefer jazz. Forty percent chose rock music,...
Chapter 17: Partitives, Collectives, and Quantifiers
345
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1.	Provide an original sentence illustrating each of the following terms. Underline the
pertinent word(s) in your example. '
a.	partitive noun
b.	idiomatic partitive noun
c.	collective noun
e.	quantifier
f.	quantifier with negative connotation
g.	quantifier for count nouns
d.	collective noun derived from adjective h. phrasal quantifier
2.	Account for the ungrammaticality or semantic problems in each of the following
- sentences:
a.	*Chalk are on blackboard tray.
b.	*A lot people were at the garage sale.
c.	‘Although he had few close friends, he was very lonely.
d.	*He has a deal of energy today.
e.	* Almost people like Chinese food.
3.	Explain the difference between (i.) and (ท.) in each of the following pairs of sentences.
a.	(i.) Many of the workers at the plant lost their jobs due to downsizing.
(ii.) Many workers lost their jobs due to downsizing.
b.	(i.) The class didn’t quiet down; it was in a boisterous mood.
(ii.) The class didn’t quiet down; they were in a boisterous mood.
c.	(i.) Thanks a lot.
(ii.) Thanks lots.
d.	(i.) I got a speck of dust in my eye.
(ii.) I got a piece of dust in my eye.
Test your ability to apply what you know.
4.	ESL/EFL students have produced the following. How would you guide them to more
\ standard usage?
a.	*1 still have much problem in learning English.
b.	*Larry bought a dozen of eggs.
c.	*Peg needs to get some informations for her term paper.
d.	?We have.much homework tonight.
e.	*Some my friends are gSing camping this weekend.
f.	*Katie likes the song “Five Hundreds Miles.”
g.	*1 need a couple a minutes.
b.	*Some of books on the table may be yours.
5.	Explain the plural use of the number-based noun in the following newspaper headline:
Greece: A Centuries-Old Framework for Contemporary Living
346
The Grammar Book
6.	A student asks you to explain why in one instance several is followed by of
and in another instance it isn't. How would you explain? Note that you can use
suprasentential information to help you.
The Chinese have given a pair of pandas to the Bronx Zoo. They have had several
offspring. Several of the offspring have been sent to other zoos around the country.
7.	There are two ways of making a noun specific when it is preceded by a partitive.
One is to use a definite determiner with the partitive noun. Alternatively, a definite
determiner can be used with the following noun:
____ โ this deck of cards	1 .
Will \ . . , .	\ do?
I a deck of these cards J
What is the difference between them? It will help to answer this question if you
generate some of your own examples.
Bibliography
REFERENCES	____
Biber, D., Johansson, ร., Leech, G., Conrad, ร., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and
Ίwritten English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ltd.
Bock, K., Cutler,·Ά., Eberhard, K. M., Butterfield, ร., Cutting, J. c., & Humphreys, K. R. (2006). Number
agreement in British and American English: Disagreeing to agree collectively. Language, 6*2(1), 64-113.
Bolinger, D. (1960). Linguistic science and linguistic engineering. Word, 16, 374-391.
Brems, L. (2003). Measure noun constructions: An instance of semantically driven grammaticalization.
International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 8(2), 283-312.
Brems, L. (2007). The grammaticalization of small size nouns. Journal of English Linguistics, 35(4), 293-394.
Brems, L. (2010). Size noun constructions as collocationally constrained constructions: Lexical and
grammatical uses. English Language and Linguistics, 14(1), 83-109.
Celce, M. (1970). The duality of collective nouns. English Language Teaching, 24(2), 164-169.
Davies, M. (2008). The corpus of contemporary American English (COCA): 425 million words, 1990-present.
Retrieved from http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/
Depraetere, I. (2003). On verbal concord with collective nouns in British English. English Language and
Linguistics, 7(4), 83-109.
Huddleston, R., & Pullum, G. K. (2002). The Cambridge grammar of the English language. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Jespersen, o. (1933). Essentials of English grammar. London, England: Allen and Unwin.
Kennedy, G. (1987). Quantification and the use of English: A case study of one aspect of the learner’s task.
Applied Linguistics, 8(3), 264-286.
Langacker, R. พ. (1991). Descriptive application: Foundations of cognitive grammar (Vol. 2). Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Langacker, R. พ. (2012, May 18). The indefinite article in complex quantifiers. Paper presented at the 11th
Conceptual Structure, Discourse, and Language Conference, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Neumann, R. (1975). Much confusion (Unpublished English 215 paper). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, ร., Leech, G., & Svartvik, J. (1985). A comprehensive grammar of the English language.
London, England: Longman.
Reed, A. M. (2010). The discourse function of floated quantifiers. Journal of Pragmatics, 42, 1737-1761.
Chapter 17: Partitives, Collectives, and Quantifiers
347
348
Schwarzschild, R. (2002). The grammar of measurement. In B. Jackson (Ed.), Proceedings of semantics and
linguistic theory (SALT) XII (pp. 225-245). Ithica, NY: CLC Publications.
Thewlis, ร. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 3 (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING	_
For linguistic analyses of quantification, see:
Hintikka, J. (1974). Quantifiers and quantification theory. Linguistic Inquiry, 5, 151-157.
Hogg, R. (1977). English quantifier systems. Amsterdam, Netherlands: North Holland Publishing Company.
Radden, G., & Dirven, R. (2007). Cognitive English grammar. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins
For a usage study on quantifiers, see:
Behre, E (1967). Studies in Agatha Christie’s writings: The behavior of a good (great) deal', a lot, lots, much, plenty,
many, a good (great) many. Gothenberg Studies in English. Gõteborg: Elanders Boktryckeri Aktiebolag.
For corpus studies regarding the use of English quantifiers, see:
Ariel, M. (2004). Most. Language, 80(f), 658-706.
Vannestâl, Μ. E. (2004). Syntactic variation in English quantified noun phrases with all, whole, both, and half.
Vaxjo, Sweden: Vaxjo University Press.
For pedagogical suggestions in teaching quantifiers, consult;
Badalamenti, V, & Henner-รtanchina, c. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 1 (4th ed.).
Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Firsten, R. (2008). Grammar connection: Structure through content 2. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Frodeson, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Wisniewska, I., Riggenbach, H., & Samuda, V. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 2 (4th
ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
For pedagogical ideas for teaching quantifiers and collective nouns, see:
Byrd, p., & Benson, B. (1989). Improving the grammar of written English: The handbook. Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth.
Cake, c. D. (2009). Grammar connection: Structure through content 5. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage
Learning.
Endnotes
1.	You may wish to review the rules presented in Chapter 4 for subject-verb agreement for fractions and
percentages.
2.	Schwarzschild£2002) distinguishes between partitives and pseudopartitives.The latter requires a
determiner-less noun in the second noun slot (a deck of cards, a drop of water); whereas, a true partitive
consists of a noun with determiner in the second noun slot {a deck of these cards, a drop of the water).
เท this book, we refer to both as partitives,
3.	You can add-ful to container partitives:
a boxful of chocolates	a bagful of chips
You can also add -ful to some other partitives:
a mouthful of food	a houseful of company
Notice that some measure words require-ful:
a spoonful of medicine
*a spoon of medicine
The Grammar Book
4.	The count noun pair also occurs with other nouns that are usually in pairs, but these nouns may also
occur in the singular:
a pair of shoes an old shoe
a pair of earrings a jade earring
5.	Majority and minority can also be considered collective nouns. See our treatment in Chapter 4 for
subject-verb agreement with majority and minority.
6.	Notice that with large nonspecific numbers, such as
Tens of thousands of fans sought tickets to the rock concert.
the partitive may be preceded by another number + of.
7.	เท an examination of British English within the Collins COBUILD corpus, Depraetere (2003) found only
one collective noun (staff) to exhibit significant preference for plural verbs. เท analyzing a subset of
the British National Corpus, Bock et al. (2006) observed that (in addition to staff) clergy, couple, mob,
and quartet strongly prefer plural verbs. Bock et al. (2006) point out three collectives that "are reliably
specified as plurals in standard American [English]; "these are people, cattle, and police (p. 89).
8.	Although modern English prefers more general collectives for animals (e.g., herd, flock, swarm), older
forms of English had many more of these idiomatic collectives for animals, a brace of partridges, a gaggle
of geese, a pod of whales, a leap of leopards, and so on.
9.	Except for all and none, which are at the extreme ends of the scale presented on page 336.
10.	The quantifiers on the continua are among the most frequently used. Not all quantifiers are represented.
We discuss others with special semantic meaning later in this chapter.
11.	Normally, partitives don't follow other partitives, although it is possible for a quantity partitive to be
included within the scope of a quality partitive:
Two types of bars of soap
*Two bars of types of soap
12.	As you saw earlier, this is not the case with the true partitives, whose nouns determine number
agreement with the verb when the partitive is เท subject position:
A pile of dishes was in the sink.
Two piles of dishes were in the sink.
13.	This is not the case for those phrasal quantifier expressions containing of that are listed in the continua:
a couple of, a number of, a lot of, a great deal of, a good deal of. These may quantify definite or indefinite
nouns because the of is part of the quantifier phrase. For example:
A couple of those cars. A couple of cars.
A lot of the drivers.	A lot of drivers.
14.	Another quantifier that is relative is all. All is relative in the sensethat it specifies a quantity in relation
to a reference quantity. Langacker (1991) shows that in response to a question asking how many, an
absolute quantifier would be acceptable, but a relative one would not:
How many California condors still exist?
Several	*AII
A few	(absolute quantifiers)	*Most	(relative quantifiers)
Nineteen	*Each
15.	Since fewest is a superlative form, where its set is specified, it requires the definite article. See Chapter 35.
16.	The difference between the whole of and the quantifier all is very complicated. See Quirk et al. (1985) or
Huddleston and Pullum (2002, p. 375) for the details.
17.	Brems (2010) points out that in their quantifier form, these phrases collocate with a fairly wide range of
nouns. เท their partitive form (or"head use,"as Brems calls it), the second noun is restricted to a subset of
concrete nouns.
18.	Notice the difference in meaning between all not and not all. In the first sentence, the quantifier takes
scope over not: all of the losing candidates were not happy. เท the second sentence, not takes scope over
the quantifier: not all of the voting public is satisfied. (See Chapter 10.)
Chapter 17: Partitives, Collectives, and Quantifiers
349
The Passive Voice
CHAPTER M
18
Introduction
In this chapter, we look at a grammatical category that is different from the others that we have
explored thus far. The category is voice, which uses a form of the verb to tell US whether the
subject is the actor or is acted upon. The two basic voices are active and passive. You are well
acquainted with the active voice because it is the unmarked voice that we have been investigating
up to this point. The more marked voice, the passive voice, is the focus of this chapter.
In the active voice, the subject of a clause is very often the agent, or doer, of some action:
Darwin studied the fauna of the Galapagos Islands.
At other times, speakers/writers of English will have reason to put the experiencer of
the action, sometimes referred to as the patient, into subject position. One way to do so is to
use the passive voice:
The fauna of the Galapagos Islands was studied by Darwin.
As Langacker (1987) has pointed out, the difference between active and passive is a focal
adjustment analogous to the difference between these two sentences:
The cat is under the blanket. The blanket is over the cat.
In other words, using the passive allows speakers to make a kind of figure/ground reversal.
Most languages in the world employ different voices to put different constituents in
focus. For example, in the Bantu languages, the passive is used if the agent is inanimate and
the patient or experiencer of the action is animate. Thus, in the following example, speakers
of Bantu languages would strongly prefer the passive voice:
Elsa was bothered by the election.
over the active:
The election bothered Elsa.
Another example comes from Japanese. Japanese has two passive voices, one of which
is similar to the English passive voice. The other passive voice in Japanese is an adversative
passive, in which the subject is adversely affected by the action portrayed in the verb
(พierzbicka, 1988). For example:
John ga ame ni fur-are-ta.
John (topic marker) rain by fall (passive) (past)
The literal translation of this sentence, John vias fallen by rain, is interpreted to mean that
John was adversely affected by rain. Although “neutral” passives are possible in Japanese,
adversative passives are common enough that Japanese students may puzzle over when to use
the passive voice in English.
351
Speakers of other topic-comment typological languages, such as Chinese, have a passive,
but it is not employed often. What Chinese speakers do when speaking English is use a
“pseudo-passive,” which Han (2000) attributes to Chinese topic-comment typology as well
as syntactic structure.
*New cars must keep inside. (= New cars must be kept inside.)
Another dimension to the English passive, which it shares with many languages, is that
it has a stative version and a dynamic one. It makes sense that the stative passive is made with
a form of the classically stative be verb:
The start of school was delayed by the snow.
and that, the dynamic passive is constructed with the get verb:
We got dismissed early, too.
The fact that English has these two passives is sometimes overlooked in ESL/EFL
instructional materials. Also, from this last example, it may be obvious why linguists suggest
a relationship between passive participles and past participles functioning as adjectives, e.g.:
Mike was/got annoyed at Julie's remark.
We will have more to say about adjectives in Chapter 20, but it is worth bearing in
mind their relevance as we consider the meaning of the passive here. We also note that style
manuals often admonish writers to avoid using the passive voice. We object to such dictates
because the passive has an important role to play, which we discuss when we take up the use
of the passive later in this chapter. What is important is that students understand when to use
the passive voice rather than the active. Indeed, their not doing so also results in overuse of
the passive:
*Many restaurant managers are carried out customer satisfaction surveys, (example
from Celce-Murcia & Hinkel, 2014)
In fact, although many ESL/EFL grammar books make it seem that the learning
challenge for the passive is its form, this is not true from our perspective. Our experience has
shown us that it is learning when to use the English passive that presents the greatest long-
term challenge to ESL/EFL students. Nonetheless, as with all constructions, students will
have to learn its forms and their meanings, so it is to these we turn first, before concluding
the chapter by explicating the use of the passive voice.
Forms of the English Passive
As we have just noted, the passive allows the NP that receives the action of the verb to occupy
the subject position. Not all verbs convey actions, of course, but we will start with those that
do. Here is a tree to illustrate a passive sentence:
Paul McCartney was knighted.
Paul McCartney -past be knight -en
352
The Grammar Book
Note that the normal word order of English still holds, but the auxiliary has been
expanded to include the passive morphology: a form of the be verb + the past participle—
be.. ,-en. We will need to elaborate our phrase structure rule for the auxiliary to accommodate
the passive:
	T	(pm) (perf) (prog) (pass)1
AUX —>	M	
	-imper	
And a new phrase structure rule specifying the composition of the passive is required:
pass —> be...-en
As can be seen in our example sentence, the agent of the action is not the subject of the
sentence. In fact, usually in passive sentences, the agent is not mentioned at all [for this reason,
Huddleston and Pullum (2002) call it “the short passive” (p. 679)]. If the agent is mentioned,
it appears in a prepositional phrase marked with the preposition by [which Huddleston and
Pullum call “the long passive” (p. 678)]. Here is how a tree with the long passive looks:
Paul McCartney was knighted by the Queen.
ร
รบBJ
NP
N
Paul McCartney -past be knight -en prep NP
by det N
the	Queen
THE_PASSIVE WITH TENSE AND ASPECT
What we have illustrated so far is the simple passive. It is also possible for the passive voice to
interact with other elements in the auxiliary.2 For illustrative purposes, here are a few of the
combinations that exist:
•	With simple present:
Copper is mined in Chile.
•	With present perfect:
Copper has been mined in Chile.
•	With modals:
Copper will be mined in Chile for some time to come.
•	With present progressive:
Copper is being mined in Chile.
•	With simple past:
Copper was mined in Chile.
•	With past progressive:
Copper was being mined in Chile.
Chapter 18: The Passive Voice
353
The perfect progressive forms of the Zig-passive are possible for some speakers of North
American English, but they are rare since the been being combination is difficult to process:
Copper has been being mined in Chile for years.
Notice that in all of the above, the passive was the last auxiliary verb to appear in the
string, thereby justifying its final position in our phrase structure rule for the auxiliary.
We also want to point out that it is not always the direct object that becomes the subject
of a passive sentence. An indirect object of an active voice sentence can be the subject of
a passive sentence, as can the object of a preposition. In the latter case, the preposition is
“stranded” (i.e., left behind):
Stephanie was given a promotion, (indirect object as subject)
Brad is being operated on for a hernia, (object of the preposition is the subject)
OTHER PASSIVE verbs'—~
As we said in the introduction to this chapter, although be is the prototypical auxiliary verb of
the passive, it is possible to have other verbs fulfill this function.
Get
The ger-passive construction, as with ordinary Zig-passive, presents a process or event as
undergone by the subject (Mitkovska & Buzarovska, 2012). Here is one of their examples,
selected from the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA):
My car got broken into this weekend, and the crooks stole $1,500 of stuff.
In order to account for such examples, our phrase structure rule will have to include get
as an alternative to be. One important structural difference to note between the Zig-passive and
the ger-passive is that get does not function as a true auxiliary verb in questions and negatives
in the way that be does. As a result of this, do must serve as an operator for get in questions
and negatives:
B e-passive	Get-passive
A: Was Bruno arrested?	A: Did Bruno get arrested?
B: No. He wasn't even caught.	B: No. He didn't even get caught.
Another difference that exists between the Zig-passive and the ger-passive is that the latter
can occur more readily with the perfect progressive:
His plans have been getting sidetracked for years.
?His plans have been being sidetracked for years.
The ger-passive should not be confused with the main verb get followed by an adjective
when it is used to mark a change of state:
Unfortunately, Lou got sick just before the big game.
Sometimes-the adjective is in the form of a past participle, which makes it more difficult
to distinguish the main verb ger from the passive verb get.
Unfortunately, Lou got indisposed just before the big game. (get is the main verb, followed
by a past participle, which is an adjective)
We return to the discussion of ger-passives and get with adjectives later in this chapter.
Have
It is also possible for have to function as a passive auxiliary. When it does, we refer to it as the
experiential have to distinguish it from the causative have, which we examine in Chapter 32.
354
The Grammar Book
passive (experiential—The purse-
^'''''^snatching happened to her. It was
beyond her control.)
Mary had her purse sna1ched.<^^^
causative (Mary arranged for someone
to snatch her purse—perhaps to file a
fraudulent insurance claim.)
Note that the z^e-passive is a bit more complicated than the ^-passive and the get-
passive in that the pattern for the have-passive includes an intervening noun phrase: have ...
NP ...-6-r, where the NP is the subject of the past participle.
Be (in Complex Passives)
The ^e-passive can also interact with complements such as rZwi-clauses and infinitives,
producing complex passives:
It is rumored that he will get the job.
That he will get the job has been decided.
John is thought to be intelligent.
We consider these further in Chapter 32.
PASSIVE ON_________________________________________________________
The passive is more limited than the active voice, in that only certain verbs (see below)
may occur in the passive. However, some passive sentences in English have no active voice
counterpart, such as
Mehdi was born in Tehran
?His mother bore Medhi in Tehran.
There is, of course, the active verb to bear.) as in The lioness bore three cubs. However, for
all intents and purposes, there is no active voice counterpart for to be bom to talk about facts
concerning human birth. Other verbs that occur commonly in the passive are be deemed,
be fined) be hospitalized, be jailed) be scheduled) be shipped) be staffed) be suspended.
Similarly, some verbs readily enter into complex passives that have no variant in the
active voice:
It is rumored that he is on his way out.
^Someone rumors that he is on his way out.
For these reasons, and for reasons we give in the sections on the meaning and the use of
the passive, we feel justified in positing a passive construction that is different from the active
and not a mere variation of it.
The Meaning Off he Passive
The passive can be said to have a grammatical meaning rather than a lexical one. It is a focus
construction that exists to put the patient (i.e., the experience!- or undergoer of an action)
in subject position. The subject is acted upon and is thus “passive.” Indeed, Shibatani (1985)
has shown that the passive “defocuses” the agent. No matter when it is used or what its form,
then, it will always have this core meaning. However, there are facts related to this core
meaning with which the remainder of this chapter deals.
Chapter 18: The Passive Voice
355
SEMANTIC CONSTRAINTS ON USING THE PASSIVE
The passive voice requires a transitive verb. This is not to say, however, that every passive
sentence with a transitive verb is acceptable. Langacker (1987), for example, shows that the
acceptability of passive sentences is influenced by several factors:
1.	The more definite the subject is, the more acceptable the sentence in passive form is:
This poem was written by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow.
?Poems were written by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow.
2.	With stative verbs, the more indefinite the object in the by phrase is, the more likely it
is to be acceptable in its passive form:
Arthur Ashe was liked by everybody.
?Arthur Ashe was liked by me.
The movie has been seen by everyone in town.
?The movie has been seen by Jim.
3.	The more the verb denotes a physical action, as opposed to a state, the more
acceptable its use in a passive sentence is:
The ball was kicked over the goalposts.
?The ball was wanted by the other team.3
Notice, though, that if factors 1 and 2 are honored, then a stative verb like want can be
used more easily in the passive voice:
This old jalopy of mine must be wanted by somebody!
Presumably the first two observations can be accounted for by recognizing that the
information status of constituents appearing in initial position and in predicate position in
English sentences is different. As you have already seen several times in this book, the subject
NP usually presents given or known information, and is therefore typically more definite
than any predicate NP. We have more to say about this in the section on use.
The third observation stems from the fact that the subject of a passive sentence needs
to be somehow affected by the action of the verb. Therefore, certain transitive verbs are
not likely to occur in the passive voice when used statively.4 This is true, for example, of the
following verbs:
•	Verbs of containing (e.g., contain., hold, comprise)'.
*Two gallons of water are held by the watering can.
•	Verbs of measure (e.g., weigh, cost, last):
*Five dollars is cost by the parking fine.
•	Reciprocal verbs (e.g., resemble, look like, equal):
*Lori is resembled by her father.
•	Verbs of fitting (e.g., fit. suit):
*He is suited by the plan.
•	Verbs of possession (e.g., have, belong):
*A caris had by him.
356
The Grammar Book
MEANING DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE ACTIVE AND PASSIVE
At other times, both active and passive voice can be used, but there is a difference in meaning
or truth value. This is especially true when numerals or quantifiers are used; it is also true of
generic statements:
Everyone in the room speaks two languages, (i.e., any two languages per person)
Two languages are spoken by everyone in the room, (i.e., two specific languages that
everybody speaks) (Chomsky, 1965)
Few people read many books, (i.e., there are few people in this world who read lots of books)
Many books are read by few people, (i.e., there are many books that are read by few people)
(Lakoff, 1968)
Moles dig tunnels. (This is a true generic statement about all moles.)
Tunnels are dug by moles. (This is not true. Not all tunnels are dug by moles.)
BEPASSI VES	_____
We offered an explanation for the difference between the passive have and the causative have
by saying that the passive have talks about the subject as experiencer. Next, we turn to the
semantic distinction between be and get.
As we said earlier, the Ae-passive is the prototypical passive verb. It is unmarked and
thus semantically neutral, which is not true of the get-passive. Get-passives often suggest
responsibility oh the part of the subject, i.e., the subject brings “the action onto itself’ (Barber,
1975), especially evident when followed by a reflexive pronoun (p.22):
He got invited to the party.
He got himself invited to the party.
According to Carter and McCarthy (1999), the English ger-passive, like the Japanese
passive, overwhelmingly tends to be used adversely (constituting 124 of 139 occurrences in
their corpus of slightly over 1 million running words of informal spoken English). Here are
some examples from their data:
A: And [er] she had gone in the house because I gave her the key.
B.'Yeah.
A: And for some reason don't ask me why but she couldn't get out.
B: Oh no. She got locked เท.
A: And I lost my second eldest brother.
B: Ahh yeah yeah
A: He was [er] sergeant and [er]
B: Yes, mm
A: he got killed [B: Mm] trying to save some other man, some other soldier.
The adversative nature of the ger-passive was also borne out in a contextual analysis
by Yim (1998), who found that the ger-passive occurred with verbs from semantic categories
such as physical assault (get hit), hindrance (get trapped), transference (get snatched), and verbs
of emotional or mental strain (get punished). Yim suggests that the ger-passive’s affinity for
affective connotations is consistent with its colloquial nature.
Another characteristic of the ger-passive noted by Carter and McCarthy (1999) was its
lack of expressed agent (130 of 139 ger-passives were short passives); likewise, in Yim’s (1998)
data, 119 of 125 ger-passives had no by phrases. In addition, there is the fact that ger-passives
could not replace Ae-passives with nondynamic verbs:
Chapter 18: The Passive Voice
357
This bed had not been slept in.
*This bed had not got slept in.
Joe hasn't been seen for years.
*Joe hasn't got(ten) seen for years.
Yim’s (1998) data support this observation. It appears that get-passives are predominantly
associated with verbs that emphasize actions or processes. Consequently, they are also more
likely to occur with adverbs of frequency:
This man continually got wiped out.
Finally, Yim (1998) notes that the overwhelming majority of get-passives in her data had
human subjects (90.4 percent), which is not true of be passives.
_________________________________________________________________
PAST PARTIcI p L........................................................................
Most of the time, the distinction between a past participle functioning as a passive verb and
one serving as an adjective will be obvious. However, the distinction is not always clear cut.
Willis (1994) points out that in a sentence such as
The windows were broken.
the past participle broken could be regarded as either adjectival or passive:
The house was a mess. The paintwork was peeling and the windows were broken.
(participle is adjectival)
The windows were broken by the force of the explosion, (participle is passive)
In the first interpretation, the past participle is descriptive, or stative, and thus adjectival.
In the second, the past participle is dynamic, and thus passive. However, you will see in
Chapter 20 that adjectives can sometimes be dynamic. Thus, in the end, in cases of ambiguity,
the only distinguishing sentence-level feature that we are left with is the use of by with a noun
phrase to mark an agent in the passive voice, if the passive is a long one:
— 1	, โ by someone (passive)
The beans were refried. ] '___■■ ■ J ,, 7____
[ present state of the beans (adjective)
The fact that not all adjectival and participle pairs are homophonous, even though their
spelling makes them appear so, suggests that adjectives and passives have a different origin:
The learned scholar translated all the works of Hegel. (Learned as adjective is
pronounced with two syllables.)
This was confirmed by Dubinsky and Simango (1996), who note that in Old English,
there were two distinct affixes that have merged into the modern spelling -ed:
The congregation was blessed, (verb [b I E ร t])
The blessed event (adjective [b I e s I d])
When it comes to the ger-passive, Mitkovska and Buzarovska (2012) support the
contention of Quirk, GreenbaumjTeech, and Svartvik (1985) that there is a “passive gradient.”
They point to a form intermediate between ger-passives and get + adjectives. These forms,
such as got dressed·.
He got up and made his way to the bathroom, where he showered, shaved, and got dressed.
do not really have a passive meaning, in that the subject retains agency; however, they are still
labeled as “pseudo-passives” (Quirk et al., 1985, p. 161) or “adjectival passives” (Huddleston &
Pullum, 2002, p. 1441) due to their form.
358
The Grammar Book
A MIDDLE VOICE CONSTRUCTION____
We hinted in the introduction to this chapter of the existence of a means besides the passive
to put a nonagentive patient into subject position. In fact, there is another option. Although
it does not have a separate verb form from the active voice, this construction is sometimes
referred to as “the middle voice.” The middle voice allows the subject of a sentence to be
nonagentive, as in the passive voice, but the morphology of the verb to be in the active voice:
1.	Her high c shattered the glass, (active voice)
2.	The glass was shattered by her high c. (passive voice)
3.	The glass shattered, (middle voice)
As Lock (1996) puts it, English allows a representation of processes not only in terms of
actions (1 and 2), but also in terms of happenings (3). Other languages, of course, can report
happenings as well. Some do so with the use of reflexives (examples from Shibatani, 1985):
Spanish	French	Russian
Se abrió la puerta.	La porte s'est ouverte.	Lekcija nacalas'.
(Refl. open the door.)	(the door Refl.-is opened.)	(lecture began Refl.)
The door opened.	The door opened.	The lecture began.
Instead, English uses special verbs to express spontaneous occurrences. Such verbs, which
allow the object of a transitive clause to be a subject of an intransitive clause without changing
voice, are called ergative, or change-of-state, verbs. Ergative verbs, such as shatter, can appear
in all three voices; thus they take either agents or patients of the action as subjects. There are
several hundred .ergative verbs, so they are common enough so that students will encounter
them frequently
Many ergative verbs, like shatter, suggest changes of state: examples include age, begin,
bend, break, burst, change, close, condense, cool, decrease, develop, drop, dry, empty, end, evaporate,
finish, grow, increase, melt, open, sink, slow, spread, start, stop, and tear.
Three other categories of ergative verbs are mentioned in Collins COBUILD English
Grammar (Sinclair & Fox, 1990):
•	Verbs of cooking (bake, boil, cook, defrost, fry, roast, thicken, etc.):
I'm baking a cake.
The cake is being baked by her friends.
The cake is baking.
•	Verbs of physical movement (move, rock, shake, spin, swing, turn, etc.):
The boy spun the top.
The top was spun by the boy.
The top spun.
•	Verbs that involve vehicles (drive, fly, park, reverse, run, sail, etc.):
She drove the car.
The car was driven all the way to Tallahassee.
The car drives well.
Rutherford (1987) tells us that ESL/EFL students, for whom the idea of an ergative
verb is new, sometimes object to such sentences as
The window broke.
The students argue that windows can’t break themselves, and thus they feel obliged to
use the passive or express an agent:
The window was broken.
Someone broke the window.
Chapter 18: The Passive Voice
359
Difference between Passive and Middle Constructions
While such sentences are not wrong, of course, the active voice sentence with a patient
subject is perfectly permissible in English with ergative verbs. The difference between the
passive and middle constructions is that the passive suggests the existence of an agent, even
if the agent is not explicit. The verb used ergatively does not permit an agent. This can be
shown by the addition of a by phrase:
The window was broken, (passive)	The window broke, (ergative)
The window was broken by the gang.	*The window broke by the gang.
Thus, the following are situations in which the middle construction is preferred to the
passive with an explicit or implicit agent:
1.	When the focus is on the change of state, and the agent is irrelevant.
The bank closes at 5 P.M.
2.	When the writer’ร or speaker’ร objective is to create an aura of mystery or suspense—
that is, things seem to be happening without the intervention of an agent:
We were sitting quietly after dinner, when suddenly the door opened.
3.	When the subject is something so fragile or unstable that it can break, change,
dissolve, and so on without any apparent intervention on the part of any agent:
Left hanging on the fence, the red balloon suddenly burst.
4.	When it is natural to expect change to occur (i.e., physical, social, or psychological
“laws” seem to be involved):
The ice on the pond melted earlier than usual.
5.	When there are so many possible causes for a change of state that it would be
misleading to imply a single agent:
Prices increased due to a variety of factors.
Another challenge for ESL/EFL students is to learn which verbs are ergative. Lock
(1996) notes that students may make errors such as
*Many of the old buildings in the center of town have recently demolished.
not because they have trouble with the passive voice, but rather because they have incorrectly,
but understandably, assumed that the verb demolish can be used ergatively.
The middle voice is also used frequently in written scientific discourse where change is
measurable. Research by Vongpumivitch (2002), who compiled a corpus of approximately a half
million words from six on-line academic journals, demonstrates that verbs like change, increase,
and decrease are far more often used in the middle voice than the passive voice. The following
example begins with the passive and switches to the middle voice for two of these verbs:
Furthermore, brachial and femoral arterial blood flows were dissociated in response to
vestibular,stimulation, such'that brachial vascular resistance increased while femoral
resistance decreased. (Begin Research Bulletin, 53(1), 11 -16)
Intransitive Verbs with Ergative Meaning
In addition to verbs that can occur in all three voices, an ergative meaning can be expressed
by intransitive verbs that take the focus of the process as subjects:
•	Verbs of occurrence—happen, occur, take place:
The incident occurred before anyone knew what was happening.
•	Verbs of inherently directed motion (Rosen, 1984)—arrive, fall, rise, emerge, go:
The dough rose.
360
The Grammar Book
• Verbs of description—appear, disappear, vanish:
The trail disappeared into the woods.
Since these verbs have no transitive counterparts, they do not occur in the passive voice.
These intransitive verbs in the active voice with nonagentive subjects cause problems for
ESL/EFL students who sometimes overgeneralize the passive voice and write:
*The accident was happened last night.
Yip (1995) reports that Chinese students produce such sentences possibly because
students have been taught that sentences with grammatical subjects that are not agents
require the passive in English. This is simply not the case, and ESL/EFL students need to
learn about these intransitive verbs as well as the middle voice.
Extending the Middle Voice
It should be pointed out, however, that not all analysts accept a lexicalist approach to the
middle voice. Yoshimura and Taylor (2004) explicitly reject the idea that there is a set number
of “middle-forming” verbs. While change-of-state verbs easily enter into the middle voice:
The problem with ripe fruit is that it bruises easily.
it is also possible to extend the middle voice construction to other verbs when responsibility
for a process is being shifted to a non-agent:
This product sells well.
Yoshimura and Taylor (2004) refer to the compatibility between the middle construction
and advertising. Here are some of the examples they offer:
Erases easily with dry cloth, paper towel or tissue, (spoken of a whiteboard)
Looks great in the dining room, study, on the deck... Folds away for easy storage and
transportation, (spoken of a folding chair)
Testers found that it blended easily, gave the promised glow and wore well during the day.
(spoken of a foundation cream)
Such middle-construction promotional statements often occur with simple present tense
because they “characterize a ... general aspect of the world’s ‘structure’, as opposed to specific
phenomena which happen to occur within that stable framework” (Langacker, 2003, p. 19).
Other languages treat the thing or person who has been affected or has undergone the
process with case endings (e.g., Japanese) or word order (e.g., Italian) to distinguish subjects
of active intransitives from subjects of intransitives that are events or happenings (Zobl, 1989).
Giovanni telefona.
‘Giovanni telephones.’
Arriva Giovanni.
‘Giovanni arrives.’
(The subject-verb order indicates that the subject of the intransitive
verb is an agent; therefore, the verb denotes an action.)
(The verb-subject order indicates that the subject is
nonagentive, denoting a happening, not an action.)
With its restricted word order, English will not permit such permutations, of course.
Nevertheless, it does have a passive and a middle voice, which afford English speakers yet
another option for achieving theme-rheme cohesion in discourse (Rutherford, 1987).
The Use of the Passive
Rutherford’s (1987) observation provides a convenient segue into a discussion on the use of
the passive. Two central matters concern US here: knowing when English speakers use the
passive, as opposed to the active, or middle voice; and knowing when they include an explicit
agent in a passive sentence. As you will see, these two issues overlap considerably. We will also
take up a few other issues regarding the use of the passive.
Chapter 18: The Passive Voice
361
ACTIVE VERSUS PASSIVE
Again, we should remember that most languages have a means of shifting focus in a sentence.
The English passive is not unique in this regard. What will be problematic, though, is that not
all languages use the passive or equivalent focus constructions for the same reasons. We have
already noted that the Japanese passive is most often adversative. While the English passive
can be used to report adversity as well (especially the get-passive), the passive in English has
a wider range than in many other languages. Nevertheless, the passive is the marked voice;
English speakers normally select the agent as subject and use the active voice. Just when, then,
is the passive preferred?
We have already indicated that the passive is used when we want to defocus the agent.
The following are three specific times when this might be warranted (Thompson, 1987):
1.	The passive is used when the agent is not to be mentioned because
•	it is redundant or easy to supply:
Pineapples are grown in Hawaii.
•	it is unknown:
The bank was robbed yesterday.
•	it is very general:
By the end of the 1960s, the United States could no longer be described as a
white, Anglo-Saxon, Protestant nation, (example from Hayes, 1992)
•	the speaker/writer is being tactful by not mentioning the agent:
Margaret was given some bad advice about selecting courses.
•	the speaker is being evasive:
An error was made in the budget.
2 a.The passive is used when the patient is more closely related than the agent to the
theme of the text (i.e., what it is about):
I was a young Columbia man while I worked in a cafeteria from 6:30 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. L
was much respected bv the management, even though I drove the people I worked with
insane, because I had standards they couldn't cope with. (Thompson, ใ 987, p. 503)
The patient I in the underlined clause is more thematic than the agent the management.
In other words, the passive topicalizes the patient or experiencer/undergoer of the action.
Here is another example where the thematic status of the patient and agent is critical to
the decision to use the passive:
The ends of a spindle were suspended from a bracket protruding to one side of the
sledge frame.
We suspended the ends of a spindle from a bracket protruding to one side of the
sledge frame.	A.
The first sentence in the passive voice, which has been adapted from Banks (1997), was
culled from a corpus of 11 research articles having to do with oceanography. The second
sentence is one that Banks constructed. Banks argues that scientists choose to use the passive due
not so much to their desire to sound objective as to the fact that the theme of scientific writing
deals with the apparatus or results of a study rather than the person conducting the investigation.
2b. The passive is used when the nonagent is a participant in the immediately preceding
sentence. Here is an example, taken from The Explorers of the Mississippi (p. 145):
Lorenzo arrived in Paris as a down-at-heel political refugee without friends or money;
luckily for him, France at that time was ruled bv an Italian, Cardinal Mazarin...
(Thompson, 1987, p. 506)
362
The Grammar Book
In this example, France is not the theme of the passage, but it does relate to Paris in
the previous clause. You saw in Chapter 2 how new information is introduced in the rheme
of one sentence and then becomes the theme of the next sentence. As we noted at the end
of the section on meaning, passive and middle voices are devices that promote this thematic
cohesion. Thus, as Thompson (1987) points out, strategies 2a and 2b are related. They are
illustrations of the same cohesive principle of thematic unity, with strategy 2 a simply applying
to a larger stretch of text than strategy 2b. Thompson concludes, “It appears that users of
English are content to code the agent as subject unless broadly thematic or more local cross-
clausal considerations require an alternative coding” (p. 501).
Not surprisingly, distributions of the passive differ among genres. Where more focus is
on the outcome or what happened, such as with scientific or journalistic writing, passives are
more frequent than with fictional and conversational English. Pioneering work by Huddleston
(1971) and Shintani (1979) attests to this.
It is worth noting that although not as many passives occur in conversations as in written
genres, there is a way in informal English to defocus the agent without using the passive voice.
Interlocutors often use the nonanaphoric they with active voice where the passive would also
be possible (Thompson, 1987):
They forecast a snowy winter this year.
A snowy winter was forecast this year.
The they is nonanaphoric because it has no antecedent. The exact identity of the agent
is unimportant. Thus, the discourse function of the nonanaphoric they can be said to overlap
partially with agentless passives. This brings US to the question of the conditions governing
naming an agent. As we said earlier, reasons for when to use the passive overlap considerably
with issues concerning whether or not to mention the agent. This is the other major use issue
concerning the passive voice.
AGENTED PASSIVES
Since the function of the passive is to defocus the agent (Shibatani, 1985), we may rightfully
inquire as to when the long passive is used; i.e., when the agent does appear. In fact, the
answer is that it appears surprisingly infrequently. Most analyses show that only about
15 to 20 percent of the passives occurring in texts explicitly include agents. Because of their
infrequency, Shintani (1979) suggests that we teach our ESL/EFL students when and why
to retain the agent in those approximately 15 percent of passive sentences that have explicit
agents, rather than trying to give them rules for omitting the agent in those 85 percent of
passives that are agentless. She examined a large number of agents that were overtly expressed
in passive sentences occurring in written and spoken discourse, and she concluded that almost
all these agents could be explained by one of three generalizations.
Agented long passives are used:
1.	When the agent is new information:
While Jill was walking down the street, her purse was snatched by a young man.
Chapter 18: The Passive Voice
363
2.	When the agent is nonhuman (i.e., we expect agents to be human):
All the lights and appliances in the Albertson household are switched on and off daily
by this electrical device.
3.	When the agent is a well-known personage and should be included as propositional
information:
The Mona Lisa was painted by da Vinci.
STYLE MANUALS VERSUS REASONS FOR USING THE PASSIVE
Before concluding, we return to one of our pet peeves: style manuals admonishing against
using the passive. Such edicts fail to recognize that the passive voice fulfills important functions.
In a study of the use of the passive in articles in medical journals, Millar, Budgell, and Fuller
(2013) found—contrary to journal style manuals that portray the passive as a stylistic choice
that should be avoided because it lacks clarity—that the passive was used in certain sections of
the research reports frequently and appropriately.
Examining the use of the passive in a corpus of 1.2 + million words drawn from the top five
ranking medical journals (compiled in 2009 by the Centre for Biomedical and Health Linguistics),
Millar, Budgell, and Fuller (2013) found the passive voice helpfol in the following ways:
•	Allowing complex agents with several modifiers to follow the verb in keeping with the
principle of “end weight” (Quirk et al., 1985), in which long noun phrases are placed at
the end of sentences.
The warm-up programme was developed by medical staff from the Oslo Sport
Trauma Research Center and coaching staff from the Norwegian Handball
Federation,... (BMJ-1-M)
versus this paraphrase, which is more difficult to process:
Medical staff from the Oslo Sports Trauma Research Center and coaching staff from
the Norwegian Handball Federation developed the warm-up programme,...
•	Promoting thematic coherence throughout the text [see Thompson’s (1987) 2a/b examples]
•	Permitting the omission of redundant information, here presumably the researcher(s) who
had already been introduced:
... factors were not statistically significantly associated with increased risk... (AIM- 3-M)
They also found that the passive was especially frequent in the methodology sections
of articles,
... responses were recorded on a scale of 1 to 5... (AIM-2-M)
in the introductions to the reports in order to “create a research space” (Swales, 1990, p. 141),
Appropriate trials are needed to explore this possibility. (NEJM-2-D)
and, in the discussion sections as .well, where the passive was employed because it especially
lends itself to making generalizations.
Pertaining to our point, the- authors did find significantly fewer passive constructions in
two of the five journals, attributing this finding in part due to the influence of style guidelines
regarding use of voice. The authors assert that the active voice can unintentionally draw
readers’ attention to the researchers and away from their research findings; therefore, the
authors call for the creation of new style guidelines to reflect the complexities of using the
passive and active voice.
Finally in a similar vein regarding motivating the passive, Baratta (2009) argues that
while the pa' sive voice has traditionally been thought of as contributing to an overall objective
tone in academic writing, it actually can be used to reveal writer stance (i.e., the ways in
364
The Grammar Book
which writers reveal their opinions, evaluations, and feelings on a given matter). As Hyland
(2002) observes, “Academic prose is not completely impersonal . . . writers gain credibility
by projecting an identity invested with individual authority, displaying confidence in their
evaluations and commitment to their ideas” (p. 1091).
Baratta (2009) gives an example from the writing of an English-speaking student:
During my childhood, and even to this day, there has always been a strong emphasis
placed on how I should'speak by my immediate family. My idiolect has been greatly
moulded by their influence, mostly in a linguistically speaking,'positive'way. (p. 1416)
and offers this interpretation of the writer’s stance:
By referencing "their influence," the writer is making it clear that it is familial pressure,
not personal desire, which led her to change how she speaks. However, by incorporating
this information within a passive sentence, emphasis is given to such pressure and in the
process, her disagreement with this. Though she references a "positive" change, it is implied
within the context of the essay that she does not necessarily appreciate the changes she
has had to make. (p. 1416)
Clearly, helping students to see reasons why the passive is the preferred voice at a given time
is more useful than a style guideline that advises writers to avoid its use entirely.
Conclusion
Early transformational grammar accounts and many ESL/EFL texts tended to treat the passive
voice as if it were a syntactic variant of the active voice. We have attempted to argue against
this characterization of the passive. In fact, use of the two voices is motivated by different
reasons. One would find a passive in a discourse for which an active voice sentence would
not be appropriate. Similarly, there are times when the middle voice is more appropriate
than either the active or the passive. Learning when to use the passive is the greatest learning
challenge for ESL/EFL students, who will tend to overuse or underuse it with respect to its
use in English, depending on its frequency of occurrence and its functions in their native
languages. Therefore, it is better from the start to introduce the passive as a grammatical
construction with a particular use of its own.
Teaching Suggestions
1. Form. Willis (1994) suggests that since the be + past participle pattern will be familiar
to students from the pattern for copular verbs followed by adjectives, this pattern can
be used as a starting point for teaching students the passive voice. Ask students to look
around the room and choose five objects. Then they are to ask classmates what they are
made of. For example, the first student asks:
A: What is the desk made of?
The second student answers and asks a question of her own, and so forth:
B: The desk is made of wood.
B: What are the windows made of?
C: The windows are made of glass.
C: What are the chairs made of?
D: The chairs are made of plastic and metal.
D: What is the blackboard made of?
Chapter 18: The Passive Voice
365
Next, to introduce the passive, ask students to talk among themselves about what
they are wearing or carrying with them and where it was made. For example:
My shoes were made in Italy.
My blouse was made เท the Philippines.
My cell phone was made in Finland.
To reinforce the dynamic sense of the second set of statements, you can point out to
students that the second set of sentences is used in the past tense and can be followed by
a by phrase with the agent or doer of the action.
My shoes were made in Italy by shoemakers.
However, the sentences in the first set cannot be followed by the agent because the
past participle is being used adjectivally—that is, to describe the state of the object, not
the result of a process:
*The desk is made of wood by furniture makers.
2.	Form, (present perfect passive) Ask students to close their eyes. Change five things about
the room. Ask students to open their eyes and to guess what changes have been made. For
example:
The lights have been turned off.
The desk has been cleared off.
The chair has been turned upside down.
3.	Form, (past passive) Have students play the card game “Concentration.” Make 12 pairs
of cards. On one card of each pair, put the name of a famous painter, author, or inventor.
On the other card in the pair, put the name of the painting, book, or invention for which
the person is famous. Make up pairs of cards such as the following:
Agatha Christie	Murder on the Orient Express
Beethoven	the Moonlight Sonata
Shakespeare	Romeo and Juliet
Alexander Graham Bell	the telephone
Picasso	Guernica
Give each small group of students a deck of cards that has been shuffled and ask them
to place the cards face down. Students should take turns. The first student should turn
over 2 cards. If the cards match, the student should make an active or passive sentence—
an active voice sentence if the agent was the first card that the student turned over, or a
passive voice sentence if the agent was the second card. If the student is able to make a
match and a correct sentence, he or she keeps the pair of cards and can turn over another
pair. If not, both cards are turned face down again, and it is the next student’s turn to try.
The game continues until all the pairs have been matched. The student with the most
matched pairs, wins the game. Then students can make up their own pairs.
4.	Form/Meaning. To havè^students practice the get-passive in its adversative use, tell
students to imagine that they are children. They have had some friends over. The friends
have left, but the place is a mess. Their parents have returned, and the “children” have to
explain what happened. Give students a list of problems to explain or have them brainstorm
a- list themselves. Have them role-play the parent-child interaction. For example:
Parent: What happened to the curtain?
Child: It got stepped on.
Parent: And what happened to the rug?
Child: It got spilled on.
366
The Grammar Book
5.	Meaning. Show students two photographs of the same place—one taken many years ago
and one taken recently. Ask them to say what changes have occurred. Then ask them to
predict what changes they think will occur in the future:
A new highway was opened.
New houses will be built.
6.	Meaning. 1b familiarize students with change-of-state verbs, have them conduct
or imagine conducting an experiment that demonstrates that water evaporates when
heated and condenses when cooled. Have them write up or talk through the steps of the
experiment.
7.	Use. Kim and McDonough (2008) report that Korean EFL learners from three levels of
English proficiency increased their use of the passive voice when they interacted with a
researcher who used a number of passives in a picture description activity. This is known
as a priming effect, where participants produce more of a certain construction, prompted
by what their interlocutor does. See if you can get a similar priming effect with your
students. The immediate use of passive correctly in context might help scaffold their
independent use later on.
8.	Use. Ask students to pretend that they are newspaper reporters. They have been called
to the scene of a fire. Describe the scene to them, or have them imagine one of their own.
Ask them to write a newspaper account of the incident. For example:
Late last night, a fire broke out at 212 Main Street. All of the people who lived there were
rescued, but unfortunately, two pets were killed by the smoke. Firefighters were called
shortly before midnight. When they arrived...
9.	Use. Find a short article on science from a publication such as Science News. Ask students
to read the article, locate the passive sentences, and say why they think the author used
the passive. Also, they should try to explain why an agent was mentioned, if applicable.
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1.	Provide an original sentence illustrating each of the following terms. Underline the
pertinent word(s) in your examples:
a.	active voice	e. a verb that is always passive
b.	passive voice	f. a verb that is never passive
c.	passive voice with agent	g. middle voice (with ergative verb)
d.	the get-passive	h. an intransitive verb with a nonagent
subject
2.	Draw tree diagrams for the following sentences:
a.	The report is being studied by the committee.
b.	The work isn’t going to be completed on time.
c.	Was the play written by O’Neill?
d.	John got arrested after the robbery.
Chapter 18: The Passive Voice
367
3.	Why are the following sentences ungrammatical or at least questionable?
a.	*Horace will be had tested on his Spanish proficiency.
b.	*Two liters were contained by the bottle.
c.	*In the bus was eaten a sandwich by Bill.
d.	?Some cars were bought by the customer.
4.	When there are two be verbs in a row in a passive sentence, one of them is passive.
Which one is the passive be, and how do you know?
The food for the festival has been being prepared for days.
Test your ability to apply what you know.
5.	Examine the directions following the examples in Teaching Suggestion 3. Explain why
the passive was used in the "Concentration" game.
6.	Why do you think that ESL/EFL students produced the following? How will you help
your students?
a.	*1 born in Seoul in 1970.	d.	*She got hurted by his remarks.
b.	*The song was sang several times	e.	*My cat must have been died
by the choir.	by a car.
c.	* Argentina was slowed down	f.	*It was disappeared two weeks	ago.
its inflation.
7.	In light of what has been discussed in this chapter, see if you can account for the
difference between the following pairs of verbs, which are infamous for causing
problems to native speakers of English.
rise	raise
lie	lay
sit	seat
8.	One of your students asks you to distinguish between be married and get married.
What would you say? How about have married and have been married?
9.	The length of the by phrase affects the choice of active or passive. Remember, though,
that we are looking for reasons to give our students. What is the reason for a lengthy
by phrase, and how does its length affect a decision to use the passive? Here is an
example, cited in Gilbert (1992):
That night, on the jourl ney to the Skagit village, he was wakened in his blanket by
the dark force of something he had heard and neglected to consider. (Dillard, A Trip
to the Mountains, Harper's, August"! 991)
368
The Grammar Book
Bibliography
REFERENCES '
Banks, D. (1997). On the structure of scientific information. The News: Teachers of English to Speakers of Other
Languages—France, 15, 15-18.
Baratta, A. M. (2009). Revealing stance through passive voice. Journal of Pragmatics, 41, 1406-1421.
Barber, E. J. พ. (1975). Voice—Beyond the passive. Proceedings of the First Annual Meeting of the Berkeley
Linguistics Society, 16-24.
Carter, R., & McCarthy, M. (1999). The English ger-passive in spoken discourse: Description and
implications for an interpersonal grammar. English Language and Linguistics, 3, 41-58.
Celce-Murcia, M., & Hinkel, E. (2014, March). Understanding and teaching passive voice and
related constructions. Paper presented at the International TESOL Convention, Portland, OR.
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the theory of syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dubinsky, ร., & Simango, R. (1996). Passive and stative in Chichewa: Evidence for modular distinctions in
grammar. Language, 72(4), 749-781.
Gilbert, ร. (1992). Passive voice constructions in literature (Unpublished Linguistics 5741 term paper).
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
Han, z. (2000). Persistence of the implicit influence of the NL: The case of the pseudo-passive. ^/^//e
Linguistics, 21(1), 78-105.
Hayes, c. (1992). Use of the passive voice in the editorial/opinion page of major newspapers (Unpublished
Linguistics 5741 term’paper). University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
Huddleston, R. (1971). The sentence in written English. London, England: Cambridge University Press.
Huddleston, R., & Pullum, G. K. (2002). The Cambridge grammar of the English language. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Hyland, K. (2002). Authority and invisibility: Authorial identity in academic writin g. Journal of Pragmatics,
34(8), 1091-1112.
Kim, Y., & McDonough, K. (2008). Learners’ production of passives during syntactic priming activities.
Applied Linguistics, 29(1), 149-154.
Lakoff, G. (1968). Repartee: Negation, conjunctions, and quantifiers (Unpublished paper). Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA.
Langacker, R. พ. (1987). Theoretical prerequisites: Foundations of cognitive grammar (Vol. 1). Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Langacker, R. พ. (2003). Extreme subjectification: English tense and modals. In H. Cuyckens, Th. Berg,
R. Dirven, & K.-U. Panther (Eds.), Motivation in language: Studies in honour of Gunter Radden (pp. 3-26).
Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins.
Lock, G. (1996). Functional English grammar. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Millar, N., Budgell, B., & Fuller, K. (2013). ‘Use the active voice whenever possible’: The impact of style
guidelines in medical journals. Applied Linguistics, 34(4), 393-414.
Mitkovska, L., & Buzarovska, E. (2012). An alternative analysis of the English ger-past participle
constructions: Is get all that passive? Journal of English Linguistics, 40(2), 196-215.
Rosen, c. (1984). The interface between semantic roles and initial grammatical relations. In D. Perlmutter
& c. Rosen (Eds.), Studies in relational grammar (Vol. 2, pp. 38-77). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, ร., Leech, G., & Svartvik,J. (1985). A comprehensive grammar of the English language.
London, England: Longman.
Rutherford, พ. (1987). Second language grammar: Learning and teaching. London, England: Longman.
Shibatani, M. (1985). Passives and related constructions. Language, 61(4), 821-848.
Shintani, M. (1979). The frequency and usage of the English passive (Unpublished doctoral dissertation).
University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Chapter 18: The Passive Voice
369
Sinclair, J., & Fox, G. (1990). Collins COBUILD English grammar. London, England: Coilins.
Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Thompson, ร. (1987). The passive in English: A discourse perspective. In R. Channon & L. Shockey (Eds.),
In honor of Ilse Lehiste (pp. 497-511). Dordrecht, Netherlands: Foris Publications.
Vongpumivitch, V (2002). Partial report of voice frequency from a corpus analysis (Unpublished Applied
Linguistics paper). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Warner, A. R. (1995). Predicting the progressive passive: Parametric change within a lexicalist framework.
Language, 77(3), 533-557.
Wierzbicka, A. (1988). The semantics of grammar. Amsterdam, Netherlands/Philadelphia, PA: John
Benjamins.
Willis, D. (1994). A lexical approach. In M. Bygate, A. Tonkyn, & E. Williams (Eds.), Grammar and the
language teacher (pp. 56-66). London, England: Prentice Hall.
Yim, B. (1998). The get passive (Unpublished master’s thesis). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Yip, V. (1995). Interlanguage and learnability: From Chinese to English. Amsterdam, Netherlands/Philadelphia,
PA: John Benjamins.
Yoshimura, K, & Taylor, J. R. (2004). What makes a good middle? The role of qualia in the interpretation
and acceptability of middle expressions in English. English Language and Linguistics, 8, 293-321.
Zobl, H. (1989). Canonical typological structures and ergativity in English L2 acquisition. In ร. Gass &
J. Schachter (Eds.), Linguistic aspects of second language acquisition (pp. 203-221). Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING —	~______
To trace the evolution of the pet-passive:
Fleisher, N. (2006). The origin of passive “get.” English Language and Linguistics, 70(2), 225-252.
Givón, T, & Yang, L. (1994). The rise of the English get-passive. In B. Fox & p. Hopper (Eds.), Voice: Form
and function (pp. 119-149). Amsterdam, Netherlands/Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Gronemeyer, c. (1999). On deriving complex polysemy: The grammaticalization of get. English Language
and Linguistics, 3, 1-39.
Hundt, M. (2001). What corpora tell US about the grammaticalisation of voice in get-constructions. Studies
in Language, 25, 49-88.
Toyota, J. (2008). Diachronic change in the English passive. Basingstoke, England: Palgrave Macmillan.
For pedagogical suggestions, see:
Cake, c. D. (2009). Grammar connection: Structure through content 5. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage
Learning.
Carlisi, K. (2008). Grammar connection: Structure through content 3. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Houck, N., & Hilles, ร'. (2009). Grammar connection: Structure through content 4. Boston, MA: Heinle,
Cengage Learning.	'^“
Thewlis, ร. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 3 (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage
Learning.
Wisniewska, I., Riggenbach, H., &„Samuda, V. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 2
(4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
For pedagogical suggestions, particularly for teaching ergative verbs, see:
Pennington, M. (Ed.). (1995). New ways in teachinggrammar. Alexandria, VA: TESOL.
370
The Grammar Book
Endnotes
1.	This rule works to account for the structure of most passive sentences. It does fail, however, to produce
passive imperatives, which are rare but possible in English (Quirk et al., 1985), although it could be
argued that seated is an adjective participle:
Be seated.
If we were to move -imper up into the curly brackets withT and M, we could account for passive imperatives,
but other problems would arise. For now, therefore, we will stick with this rendition of the phrase structure rule.
2.	We give two examples with progressive passives in the list here. Warner (1995) shows that the progressive
passive is relatively new to English, the first attested instance appearing in the latter half of the
eighteenth century. He goes on to claim that the progressive passive did not originate from the merging
of the passive voice with progressive aspect, but rather resulted from other changes เท the auxiliary.
3.	Notice that in the sentence Butch Cassidy was wanted by the law, want has a special meaning (i.e. the
authorities were searching for Butch Cassidy).
4.	The reason that we say certain stative verbs do not take the passive voice is that some stative verbs that
involve mental states passivize easily, such as The answer is believed to be correct and Donald Trump is
thought to have a lot of money.
Chapter 18: The Passive Voice
371
Sentences with
Indirect Objects
CHAPTER
19
I
Introduction
Sentences with indirect objects provide an excellent opportunity for seeing how a construction
itself carries meaning. The prototypical sentence with an indirect object, as briefly mentioned
in Chapters 2 and 6, has three noun arguments—one is the subject; the other two, following
a ditransitive verb, are the indirect object and the direct object. This ditransitive or double-
object construction, subject—verb—indirect object—direct object, conveys the meaning
of transfer. English sentences with indirect objects signal particular types of transfer (or, if
negative, the prevention of transfer), depending on the type of verb used. Verbs with transfer
senses that involve giving, creating, or communicating something to someone are often found
in double-object constructions.
Indirect Object Direct Object
(giving)	Sonia gave	Kate	a kiss.
(creating)	Sonia made	Kate	a bookcase.
(communicating)	Sonia asked	Kate	a question.
The same three relationships can be captured by a prepositional object construction,
where the objects are reversed and a preposition is put before the indirect object.
Direct Object	Indirect Object
(giving)	Sonia gave	a kiss	to Kate.
(creating)	Sonia made	a bookcase	for Kate.
(communicating)	Sonia asked	a question	of Kate.
Traditional grammar tells US that the indirect object precedes the direct object and tells US
to พ hom,for whom, or of whom the action of the verb is done. Admittedly, there are far fewer
indirect objects with the third meaning than there are the first two.1 We will discuss both
double-object and prepositional constructions in the pages that follow.2
Furthermore, many verbs taking both a direct and indirect object have a second option:
in the active voice, the subject is the agent of the action (Sonia gave a kiss to Kate.). However,
373
in the passive voice, either the direct object (or patient) or the indirect object (or recipient) can
serve as the subject:
A kiss was given to Kate (by Sonia).
Kate was given a kiss (by Sonia).
Having both direct and indirect objects as subjects of passive sentences is not possible
in many of the world’s languages. In addition to learning these new sentence patterns, ESL/
EFL students will have to learn which English verbs take indirect objects and which verbs do
not. For instance, they will understandably say
*He said me the answer.
analogous to a verb that has a similar meaning:
He told me the answer.
Then, for those students who speak languages, like French and Spanish, which let indirect
objects freely follow the verb, they will say things like
*Ben opened me the door.
instead of
Ben opened the door for me.
ESL/EFL students will also have to learn where the objects, both direct and indirect, are
placed in relation to the subject and verb and in relation to each other. In a cross-linguistic
study of ditransitive constructions, Malchukov, Haspelmath, and Comrie (2010) state that in
the languages of the world, both objects tend to occur next to each other, on the same side
of the verb. Nevertheless, such a generalization still results in six different possibilities drawn
from their cross-linguistic data:
Basic Order	Indirect-Direct Order	Direct-Indirect Order
svo	SV IO DO	SV DO IO
sov	ร IO DO V	ร DO ΙΟ V
vso	VS IO DO	VS DO IO
The Form of Sentences with
Indirect Objects
THE ARGUMENT STRUCmE OF VERBS TAKINGINDIRECT OBJECTS
Recall from Chapter 3 that the argument structure of a verb concerns the number of nouns
(arguments) that a verb takes and their relationship to the verb.
Verbs That Require an Indirect Object
For some ditransitive verbs, the indirect object is indispensable to the meaning and the
structure of the sentence. It is required in both the double-object construction and
the prepositional construction; for example:
*Dan gave a kitten?
11โ Mel a kitten 1
Dan gave J	. u
[ a kitten to Mel J
*Morgan handed the letter.
Morgan handed J Pet^r'et^r I.
[ the letter to Peter]
374
The Grammar Book
Verbs with Optional Prepositional Indirect Objects?
In the previous two examples with give and hand, the indirect object is closely associated with
the meaning of the sentence as a whole and the verb phrase in particular. In contrast, there are
also cases in which the indirect object is optional, both structurally and semantically. Without
the indirect object, the sentence is still complete. The two following sentences, for example,
have optional indirect objects that seem much less closely related to the rest of the sentence
than those in the two immediately preceding examples:
Sonia made a bookcase (for Kate).
The teller cashed the check (for me).
Verbs with Implied Indirect Objects
There are also many cases where the indirect object is not structurally essential, but where
it is strongly implied and thus seems to be present semantically. In addition, the meaning of
these sentences does not change markedly if the indirect object is not overtly expressed; for
example:
Sam sold his car. (i.e., to someone)
Barbara asked a question, (i.e., of someone)
Verbs with Optional Indirect Objects
There are also cases where an indirect object seems to be optionally added to sentences to
indicate that there is a specific recipient of the action involving the direct object (this is often
the speaker or a group including the speaker, but it could also include the addressee):
Go find (me) a pencil.	Grab (yourself) a seat.
Get (us) a bumper sticker.
Verbs with Obligatory versus Deletable Direct Objects
As a related matter, we must also consider the role of the direct object in sentences that
contain both a direct and an indirect object. First, there are cases where the direct object
cannot be deleted in either the double-object or prepositional construction; for example:
Dan gave Mel the kitten.	*Dan gave Mel. (#: donate)
Dan gave the kitten to Mel.	*Dan gave to Mel. (#: donate)
In such cases, both the direct and indirect object are interdependent, indispensable elements
in the sentence. In other cases, the direct object can be deleted, but only in double-object
constructions, where the indirect object comes directly after the verb and before the
understood direct object.
We paid the money to Harry.	*We paid to Harry.
We paid Harry (the money).
Furthermore, there are prepositional constructions in which the direct object can
be deleted, but the preposition preceding the indirect object must be retained. If the
preposition is not retained, the meaning of the sentence changes, since the direct object
is a required or understood constituent and the indirect object is optional or additional
(i.e., the indirect object is reinterpreted as a direct object when it is the only object in
postverbal position):
Sara cooks (dinner) for US. Φ ?Sara cooks US.
In such instances, we can say that the direct object is implied whether overtly stated or not,
and the indirect object is not as closely linked to the meaning of the verb as it was in the two
preceding cases with give and pay.
Chapter 19: Sentences with Indirect Objects
375
SUBCATEGORIZATION OF VERBS THAT TAKE DOUBLE-OBJECT
AND PREPOSITIONAL OBJECTS	___
Many common English verbs can take objects in different syntactic configurations.
SUBCATEGORIES OF VERBS THAT TAKE DOUBLE-OBJECT
AND PREPOSITIONAL CONSTRUCTIONS
Both postverbal (double- object or ditransitive) and prepositional positions	Only เท prepositional position	Only in postverbal (double-object or ditransitive) position
Bea gave Al the idea. Bea gave the idea to Al.	*Bea explained Al the idea. Bea explained the idea to Al.	Bea begrudged Al the idea. *Bea begrudged the idea to Al.
Others: hand, tell, pass, sell, send, get, show, throw, lend, teach, read, offer, fax, write, bring	Others: donate, announce, recommend, reveal, confess, introduce, describe, transmit, report	Others: bill, cost, (over)charge, bet, excuse, envy, forbid, fine, spare, forgive, allow, permit, wish
There are several patterns here that may be helpful when pointed out to learners. First of all,
notice that the verbs in the first column are almost all monosyllabic. Such verbs are generally
of Germanic origin. These are the verbs that allow both syntactic patterns. Latinate verbs,
such as those found in the second column, are longer than one syllable, and tend not to allow
indirect objects in postverbal position. It is not likely that students will know the origin of
the verbs; however, their length is an important clue. It doesn’t always work, of course, (e.g.,
offer in the first column is two syllables), and even young native speakers of English initially
overextend the pattern (e.g., *“Don’t say me that!”), presumably because say is semantically
similar to other verbs on the list, and it is monosyllabic.
Another pattern has been pointed out by Coppock (2009). It pertains to verbs in the
third column. Coppock notes that in double-object constructions with this type of verb, “the
candidate for serving as an indirect object either loses something or is in danger of losing
something” (p. 62). (For example: He charged/finedme $50.) However, this observation doesn’t
account for other verbs in this category, such as forgive, allow, wish, and permit.
If this seems complicated, we should take heart that users of English do learn these
constructions, and later learn to use the constructions productively, extending them to novel
verbs; e.g., “I cc’ed everyone the announcement” and “I texted the apology to John” (Yang,
2010, p. 1172), an extension which illustrates the dynamics of language innovation and change,
which builds on the meaning of transfer inherent in the construction itself.
THE SYNTAX o^ÊNTÊNc^
Even if verbs are properly subcategorized, we still need to account for indirect objects in
different ways, depending on the argument structure that the verb supports. For verbs that
either permit or require the immediate postverbal position for indirect objects, the following
structure applies:
376
The Grammar Book
Lee sent me a message.
This structure also works for sentences like
The book cost me a fortune.
The usher handed me a program.
For verbs that require an indirect object and either permit or require the indirect object to
occur after the direct object in a prepositional phrase, the following structure applies:
Marco gave his laptop to a classmate.
AUX
NP
N
Marco
PrepP
-past
give det
prep
NP
his
laptop
to
det
N
N
a
classmate
The structure also works for sentences like
Mr. Smith offered the job to the candidate.
He left his money to a foundation.
Finally, for verbs that optionally allow but do not require prepositional indirect objects in
order to complete their argument structure, the following structure applies:
Chapter ใ 9: Sentences with Indirect Objects
377
ร
Sonia introduced her family to Charlie.
NP	AUX		VP	ADVL
N	T	V	NP	PrepP
				
Sonia	-past	introduce	det	N	prep	NP
			her family	to	N
				Charlie
This structure also works for sentences like
The teacher explained the problem to the students.
The magician performed a trick for US.
The politician broke the news to her constituents.
Besides accounting for the different argument structure that these verbs enter into, the
syntactic differences between the last two constructions become helpful in understanding
whether or not the indirect object can function as the subject of a passive voice sentence.
SENTENCES WITH INDIRECT OBJECTS IN THE PASSIVE VOICE
We have already noted that English has more passive voice alternatives for sentences with
indirect objects than some other languages do. Thus, the active voice sentence “Chen gave
Mary the book,” has two passive voice paraphrases; one option selects the direct object as the
subject of the passive:
The book was given to Mary (by Chen).5
ร
PRED
SUBJ
NP	AUX	VP	ADVL
			
det	N	T	pass	N	PrepP	PrepP
			
the	book	-past	be give	-en	prep	NP	prep NP
*		to	N	by	N
		Mary	Chen
378
The Grammar Book
The other option selects the indirect object as the subject of the passive:
Mary was given the book (by Chen).
Chen
Some languages resist selecting the indirect object as the subject of a passive sentence.
For example, the literal translation of “Mary was given the book (by Chen)” would be
ungrammatical in German. (In German, the direct object or accusative case can become the
nominative subject of the passive; however, the dative case cannot.) Students coming from
such language backgrounds will need practice in forming English passive sentences where
indirect objects function as subjects.
Not all sentences containing indirect objects allow two passive paraphrases as readily as
the preceding one. When indirect objects are structurally optional constituents in an active
sentence, they do not easily serve as the subject of a passive sentence. For example, the active
sentence “Mary revealed the truth to Ken” readily accepts the direct object as subject of a
passive counterpart:
The truth was revealed to Ken (by Mary).
However, many speakers of English find that if the indirect object is the subject of the passive,
the sentence becomes awkward if not ungrammatical:
?Ken was revealed the truth (by Mary).
You might speculate that since reveal does not permit postverbal indirect objects, this may
account for the questionable nature of the passive sentence above. However, there are also
cases where the active voice counterpart permits alternation:
Arlene made Sandra this dress.
Arlene made this dress for Sandra.
And the passive counterpart with the direct object as subject is fully acceptable:
This dress was made for Sandra (by Arlene).
But still, the version with the indirect object as subject is much more questionable (although
several speakers of British English have told US that this sentence is acceptable in their dialect):
?Sandra was made this dress (by Arlene).
In sum, in those sentences where the indirect object is an obligatory component of a di transitive
verb, the indirect object is readily able to serve as the subject in the passive voice; however,
in those sentences where the indirect object is optional—that is, the verb is transitive and
requires only a direct object—the indirect object cannot readily serve as the subject of the
passive (in American English, at least).
Chapter 19: Sentences with Indirect Objects
379
Meaning Issues with Indirect Objects
THE MEANING OF VERB-INDIRECT OBJECT COMBINATIONS
As we wrote in the introduction, the indirect object construction conveys a meaning of
transfer. More specific meanings follow from the meaning of the verbs that enter into the
construction. Verbs that take indirect objects can be placed into three semantic groups: dative
verbs such as give, benefactive verbs such as make, and eliciting verbs such as ask. In prepositional
constructions, these verbs appear with different prepositions.6 ESL/EFL students would learn,
then, that they must select to + NP in the case of the dative verbs (give, say, sell, explain, etc.),
for + NP in the case of the benefactive verbs (make, buy, cook, prepare, etc.), and of + NP
in the case of the eliciting verbs (ask, request, etc.). The dative verbs compose the largest
category, the eliciting verbs the smallest. Of course, students must learn to take into account
the meaning of the verb as it is used in sentences because some verbs will occur in more than
one of these semantic categories, depending on how they are used; however, in such cases two
different meanings of the verb form are involved; for example:
I'll get this to him. (dative) = "deliver"
I'll get this for him. (benefactive) = "fetch, obtain"
Recent analyses of double-object constructions have gone beyond focusing solely on the
semantics of the verb. For example, Croft (2012) states that the semantics of verbs in these
constructions can be explained by taking into account three components: (1) the core meaning
of the verb; (2) the meaning of “transferred possession,” which is associated with the verb
when it occurs in the double-object construction; and (3) the type of possession indicated
(e.g., actual, conditional, or intended).
To see how these components inform an interpretation, consider the verb bake. It can
appear in a construction with just one object: Sarah bakes her own bread. Once it appears in
the double-object construction, it takes on the meaning of transferred possession. In Sarah
baked me a birthday cake, possession of the cake is being transferred from the agent, Sarah, to
the recipient, me. Notice, however, that the possession is intended, not actual (Sarah baked me
a birthday cake, but her roommates ate it before she could give it to mef
We will look at both verbs and constructions more closely when we discuss specific
classes of verbs and constructions associated with them.
The Ambiguity of For Phrases
One related point to consider is that sentences with prepositional objects preceded by for,
such as the following, may be ambiguous:
Yasu bought the book for me.
There are two possible, interpretations of this sentence:
Proxy:	Yasu bought it for me (i.e., he acted on my behalf) because I didn't have
time to buy it myself.
Benefactive: Yasu bought it for me because my birthday was coming up and he
wanted to give me a gift.
However, if the indirect object occurs in the double-object construction (i.e., Yasu bought me
the book.), only the benefactive interpretation seems to be possible.
This double meaning offor helps explain why the indirect object can come immediately
after the verb open in the first sentence (where for is benefactive and transfer of possession
occurs) but not in the second:
380
The Grammar Book
Benefactive: Open me a beer, please.
(The addressee will presumably open a can/bottle of beer and give it to the
speaker.)
Proxy:	Open the door for me, please.
"Open me the door.
(The addressee does not give the door to the speaker, but merely opens the
door on his/her behalf.)
Semantics of Verbs Followed by Indirect Objects
As we have seen, the essential meaning of a double-object construction is to transfer something
to someone. There are a number of ways that this basic meaning is manifest, in what Goldberg
(1995) calls “constructional subsenses,” depending on the meaning of the verb (pp. 38,148-149).
THE MEANING OF VERBS IN DOUBLE-OBJECT CONSTRUCTIONS (GOLDBERG, 1995)
1	Verb Class	Examples	Constructional Subsenses
1a	Verbs that inherently signify acts of giving	give, pass, hand, serve, feed	X causes Y to receive z
1b	Verbs of instantaneous causation of ballistic motion	throw, toss, kick	(same as la)
1c	Verbs of continuous causation in a deictically specified direction	bring, take	(same as la)
2	Verbs of giving with associated satisfaction conditions	guarantee; promise, owe	Conditions of satisfaction imply that X causes Y to receive z
3	Verbs of refusal	refuse, deny	X causes Y not to receive z
4	Verbs of future transfer	leave, bequeath, allocate, reserve, grant	X acts to cause Y to receive z at some future point in time
5	Verbs of permission	permit, allow	X enables Y to receive z
6a	Verbs of creation	bake, make, build, cook, sew, knit	X intends to cause Y to receive z
6b	Verbs of obtaining	get, grab, buy, win, earn	(same as 6a)
7a	Verbs of (verbal) communication	tell, ask, teach, quote, write, cite, fax, telephone, wire	Metaphorical extension: Messages are entities which are transferred from one person to another
7b	Verbs of showing	show	Metaphorical extension: Perceiving is receiving7
Chapter ใ 9: Sentences with Indirect Objects
381
Of course, there are also many verbs semantically related to one of these categories that
do not take an immediate postverbal indirect object because the verb concerned takes only
prepositional indirect objects:
(communication) *She announced them the news.
She announced the news to them.
(showing)	*She revealed the police her friend's whereabouts.
She revealed her friend's whereabouts to the police.
(creation)	*He decorated her the room.
He decorated the room for her.
In these cases, the etymology and syllable structure of the verbs concerned seem to override
their semantic properties. Subtle differences in meaning may explain why some verbs occur in
both the postverbal and the prepositional constructions and some occur only in prepositional
constructions. As noted previously, the use of open in open the door for me does not imply
transfer of possession, so the double-object construction is not possible. Different semantic
nuances can also explain why heave someone a suitcase is acceptable but lift someone a suitcase
is not. Pinker (2007) states that verbs like heave, pass, and slide indicate the instantaneous
imparting df force, while verbs like lift, drag, and hoist indicate the continuous application
of force. Hence, verbs with similar meanings, syllabic structures, and origins may still differ
enough in meaning to allow the postverbal construction in one case and prohibit it in another.
Semantics Governing Postverbal Position for Indirect Objects
Going beyond the semantic categorization of verbs to the interpretation of sentences,
Goldsmith (1980) and Stowell (1981) have proposed that postverbal position for indirect
objects is limited semantically to cases where the indirect object is “animate” and is a “projected
possessor” of the direct object. Thus, we can explain the acceptable and unacceptable
alternations in the following set:
a.	Joe sent a letter to Sue.
b.	Joe sent Sue a letter.
c.	Joe sent a letter to Cincinnati.
d.	*Joe sent Cincinnati a letter.
In b, Sue is the animate, projected possessor of the letter, whereas in d, Cincinnati is merely
the location of the letter, though this sentence may be acceptable if Cincinnati is a shortened
form for an office or business in Cincinnati. Although this is a good rule of thumb, it is not
without exception. Sometimes it depends on the semantics of the verb. For instance, if the
verb give means to assign a score, it can take an inanimate possessor, e.g., Id give it a 7 out of
10 (Bresnan, Cueni, Nikitina, & Baayen, 2007).
Issues of'Use
EXPLAN AT ION sIfORH^^
We have already given several examples in this chapter of the alternation of the indirect
object in'postverbal or prepositional position. In this section, we will discuss the function of
indirect object alternation.
Erteschik-Shir (1979) has proposed a discourse principle, which is useful for understanding
the function of indirect object alternation. It is the concept of dominance. Basically, a dominant
382
The Grammar Book
constituent in a sentence is the one that a speaker has chosen to highlight, to call to his or her
listener's attention. Providing new rather than given information, it is this constituent in a sentence
that will probably be the topic of further conversation if there is to be any. Thus, in the string:
V ΝΡΊ
to
for
of
NP2
NP2 (i.e., the indirect object) is the dominant noun phrase. If the speaker wants to give
prominence to NP1 (the direct object) instead, an alternate pattern is selected, if lexically
possible, and NP2 precedes NP1, allowing NP1 to be the dominant noun phrase (the
preposition drops out in this case).
V NP2 NP1
Let’s illustrate both scenarios. The only context where making the indirect object dominant
Pass the salt to me, please.
V NP1 to NP2
would be appropriate is one in which the speaker’s request is directed to a listener who is
(1) holding a salt shaker and (2) obviously not knowing to whom to pass it. The listener might
then reply, “Oh, I heard the request for the salt, but I didn’t know who said it.” Most contexts
define the important part of the sentence as being the speaker’s desire for salt, and therefore
one more frequently hears:
Pass me the salt, please.
V NP2 NP1
or—since the speaker is generally the indirect object by implication—simply:
Pass the salt, please.
If the person who complies with this request says anything at all, he or she would be likely to
comment upon the direct object—the salt—not upon the one who initiated the request; that
is, “Sure. Here it is.”8
CONDITIONS oinNDIREcfo^^
The notion of dominance and the distinction between new and given information help us
understand why certain conditions such as the following are placed on indirect obj ect alternation:
1.	For many dialects of English (though not all), the indirect object cannot be postverbal
if the direct object is a pronoun (especially it) and the indirect object is a noun:
We sent it to Doug.	*We sent Doug it.9
On the other hand, when the indirect object is a pronoun and the direct object is a noun
(especially an indefinite one), the alternate pattern (the double-object construction) is
likely to be selected:
We sent him a package.
These observations can be explained by noting that, as a rule, pronouns are less dominant
than nouns and refer to given information. Since pronouns usually have an anaphoric
referent or a referent in the immediate physical environment, it is unlikely that a speaker
would need to direct attention to them—their meaning is already clear from the text or
context. This is not to say that an indirect object that is a pronoun would never occupy
the dominant position, but when this does occur, a different interpretation would be
necessary—for example, a contrastive one.
We sent a package to him. (not her)
Chapter 19: Sentences with Indirect Objects
383
It is important to remember that the semantics of the verb must be taken into
consideration. In their corpus study, Gries and Stefanowitsch (2004) found that give
tends to favor the double-object construction, whereas bring tends to prefer prepositional
objects and send tends to alternate between the two constructions. Bresnan, Cueni,
Nikitina, and Baayen (2007) report that in their corpus data, the verb bring is nearly
three times more likely to have a recipient that is given than the verb take, while take is
over seven times more likely to have a recipient that has not been previously identified
than bring—even though the two verbs belong to the same broad semantic class of
transfer of possession. They add that this may be because of the differing points of
view implied by the two verbs: the goal of bringing is usually located near the speaker,
making it more likely that the recipient is given information while the goal of taking
is usually located away from the speaker, making it more likely to be new information.
2.	According to Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad, and Finegan (1999), constructions in
which both the direct and indirect object are pronouns occur primarily in conversation
and fiction, as opposed to news and academic writing.
We sent him (’im) it. (acceptable to most if the indirect object is phonologically reduced)
Furthermore, in conversation, if both objects are pronouns, they are over twice as
likely to be found in prepositional constructions than in double-object constructions.
We sent it to him.
3.	If the direct object is a long complex phrase or clause (i.e., dominant), a postverbal
indirect object is necessary to avoid awkwardness:
?/*l told that he would be coming to John's girlfriend.
I told John's girlfriend that he would be coming.
Clauses are always more dominant than NPs and generally provide new information,
so the clausal direct object occurs at the end of the sentence. On the other hand, if the
indirect object is heavily modified, postverbal position is less likely:
I bought a present for my new little niece, the first daughter of my eldest brother.
?/*l bought my new little niece, the first daughter of my eldest brother, a present.
The speaker who elaborates either the direct or indirect object has already given it
dominance. Such objects, therefore, occur in the dominant final position if the verb
permits the preferred order.
In their corpus study of the ditransitive verbs give, offer, and tell, Biber et al. (1999)
found that in double-object constructions, the indirect object was much shorter than it
was in prepositional constructions. In fact, in 85 percent of the cases, the indirect object
in the double-object construction consisted of only one word (most likely a pronoun).
The converse was found for the direct object, which was two or more words in length
in 85 percent of the double-object cases.
The results for prepositional constructions did not show such a striking difference:
In 45 percent of the cases^the prepositional indirect object was one word long and in
55 percent of the cases, it was two or more words long. The direct object was one word
long in 55 percent of the examples and two or more words long in 45 percent of the
examples.
... Nonetheless, Biber etal.'ร (1999) results for these three representative di transitive verbs
show that indirect objects tend to be longer when they are in prepositional constructions
and direct objects are longer when they are in double-object constructions. Biber et al.’s
findings clearly lend support for the observation that longer constituents are commonly
found at the ends of sentences, in keeping with their dominance or “end weight.”
384
The Grammar Book
4.	The main verb must belong to the class of verbs permitting both postverbal and
prepositional position for indirect objects, (i.e., the verbs in the first column in the
table on page 376).
We should note here that some of those verbs that occur only in prepositional
constructions still allow the prepositional indirect object to precede the direct object,
especially if the latter is elaborated (e.g., it is a clause, or it is several phrases long). In
such a case, however, the indirect object always retains its preposition so we know that
some stylistic option other than indirect object alternation has occurred in such cases:
They mentioned the new restaurant on Putney Road to me.
*They mentioned me the new restaurant on Putney Road.
They mentioned to me the new restaurant on Putney Road.
Authentic examples of this stylistic option are rare and almost always occur in writing
rather than speech (Williams, 1994).
5.	Lakoff (1969) notes that in conjoined sentences, there are also constraints on indirect
object alternation. If the verb is deleted in the second sentence, both sentences must
have their indirect objects in the same position:
I gave Ann a laptop, and Jan a tablet.
?l gave Ann a laptop, and a tablet to Jan.
I gave a laptop to Ann, and a tablet to Jan.
?l gave a laptop to Ann, and Jan a tablet.
In other words, the constructions have to be parallel to be stylistically appropriate.
Where Is the Indirect Object Most Likely to Occur?
Researchers examining the use of the double-object constructions in different genres have found
the postverbal construction occurs more often in spoken data and the prepositional construction
more often in written data (Bresnan et al., 2007; Siewierska, 2013). In support of there being
more prepositional constructions in writing, Deshors (2014) notes that “prepositional dative
constructions serve as default constructions when grammatical contexts are more complex and
therefore more cognitively taxing. This view is mainly based on the findings that prepositional
constructions are systematically found with factors that are harder to process such as new
recipients, passive voice, longer patients and longer recipients” (p. 302). It could also be that
speakers favor common monosyllabic words of Germanic origin while writers also incorporate
more multisyllabic Latinate words. Another possible explanation is that the verbs and
constructions that evoke the sense of transfer are used more in speaking than in writing.
Alternation in Varieties of English
Deshors (2014) used a multifactorial analysis of corpus data to investigate dative use in three
World Englishes (Hong Kong, Indian, and Singapore English), two varieties of learner English
(French and German learners), and native British English. Specifically, she was interested in
whether the speakers of different varieties of English relied on different grammatical features
in their choice of whether to use double-object or prepositional-object constructions with the
verb give. She examined 11 semantic and morphological factors (e.g., voice, patient animacy,
length of the recipient, etc.) to determine which factors most influenced their choices.
Her results showed that factors involved in using double-object and prepositional dative
constructions interact differently in the different varieties. Those factors that contributed
most to syntactic variation across the varieties were recipient accessibility (i.e., whether the
recipient was given or new), length of recipient and patient, and voice.
Chapter 19: Sentences with Indirect Objects
385
Conclusion
As we have seen many times before, the more closely we examine a construction, the more
complicated it seems to become. As usual, more research is needed; for example: is there a
better principle (or set of principles) to help US determine which verbs allow indirect object
alternation and which do not?
In the meantime, it would seem sensible to bear in mind the following three learning
challenges: (1) whether verbs take dative, benefactive, or eliciting indirect objects; (2) which
verbs do—and which do not—allow both indirect object constructions, and (3) the possible
passive variants of sentences with indirect objects. It will also be helpful if you can give your
students some understanding of the discourse principle of dominance and the placement
of given and new information so that they have a reason that will give them guidance when
trying to decide whether to put the indirect object in postverbal position or in a prepositional
construction in cases where both constructions are possible.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form/Use. To develop your students’ sense of when indirect object alternation is
appropriate or inappropriate, group them in pairs to manipulate and discuss sentences
with words such as the following written on cards or strips. Then ask students to decide
whether or not the to can be deleted and what any subsequent word order changes
would be.
John gave
John gave
it
to
Mr. Jones
the new password
to
me
Mary described
the movie
to
me
Sam told
that the meeting was postponed
to
us
This exercise can also be done very effectively with the entire class by using a document
projector.
2.	Use. Sketch pictures, clip pictures from magazines, or find images online that naturally
elicit indirect objects such as the following:
Teacher: What is Jill doing?
. [Nancy (some) flowers
Student: She's giving ]
I (some) flowers to Nancy
386
The Grammar Book
(Either word order would be an appropriate response.) With more advanced students, the
teacher should continue:
Teacher: (removes card from view) Do you think Nancy is happy?
Student: Yes.
Teacher: Why?
Student: Because Jill gave her flowers! (The word order with to would be less appropriate.)
z. Form. To help students develop a sense of using the to preposition in those contexts
where the indirect objects is emphasized in a response, try a drill like this:
a.	Student 1: Would you lend me your car?
Student 2:1 can't. I've already promised to lend it to Harvey.
b.	Student ไ: Would you lend me your textbook?
Student 2:1 can't. I've already promised to lend it to Judy.
4.	Form. Using verbs like buy and make, you can elicit the addition of a benefactive for
phrase in the following manner:
a. Teacher: Ian bought some candy. b. student 2: Clara made a dress.
Student: Who did he buy it for?	Student 3: Who did she make it for?
Teacher: Himself.	student2: Me.
Student: Oh, he bought it for himself! Student 3: Oh, she made it for you!
5.	Form. To practice the use of direct objects as passive subjects, students can give things—
that the teacher provides—to each other with an appropriate follow-up question (Who
was the______i_______________given to?)-.
a. Teacher: Paolo, give the candy to Maria, b. Teacher: Said, give the ruler to Roberto.
Student ไ: Who was the candy given to?	student3: Who was the ruler given to?
Student 2: It was given to Maria.	student 4: It was given to Roberto.
6.	Form. To practice the use of indirect objects as passive subjects, use consumer gripes as
a context. One student can role-play the consumer affairs officer and the others can state
their complaints.
a. Student ไ: What's your
complaint’
problem ?
gripe
Student 2:1 was sold a bad car by AZ Used Cars.
b. Student ไ: What's your?__________________
Student 3:1 was sold a defective TV set by Jones Appliances.
c. Student ไ: What's your_____:___________?
Student 4:1 was sold a fake diamond by Bijou Jewelers.
7.	Meaning/Use. To help learners practice deciding whether verbs take to, for, or of
with indirect objects, have students paraphrase sentences like the following so that the
indirect object becomes the most important (i.e., new or dominant) information. They
should imagine dialogues where A first says the indirect objects very softly or mumbles
them.
A: I gave Ying the book.
S.-Whc?
A: 1 gave the book to Ying.
A: I baked Harry a pie.
S.-Who?
A: I baked a pie for Horry.
Chapter 19: Sentences with Indirect Objects
387
Other sentences that could be used for this exercise are:
I asked Bill a question.
I sold Jane my car.
I read Susie a story.
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.	
1. Provide original example sentences to illustrate the following terms. Underline the	
pertinent word(s) in your examples.	
a. direct object	g. indirect object alternation
b. eliciting indirect object	h. verb that requires an indirect object
c. benefactive indirect object	i. verb that requires both direct and
d. dative indirect object	indirect objects
e. passive with indirect object	j. verb of transfer
as subject	k. double-object construction
f. dominance	I. prepositional construction
2.	Draw tree diagrams for the following sentences:
a.	I handed Sue the note.
b.	He was offered a job by the supervisor.
c.	The information was given to him before the trial.
d.	We bought Horace a watch.
e.	Did Martha ask George a question?
3.	Why are the following sentences ungrammatical (or at best awkward)?
a.	*John hasn’t sent his brother it.
b.	*Mary bought for me the book.
c.	*Roger asked a question to Phyllis.
4.	List all the active and passive sentences—with and without indirect object
alternation—that would be related to the following information.
a.	verb: send (past tense); agent: mother; direct object: the parcel; dative indirect
object: Bob
b.	verb: bring (past tense); agent: Bill; direct object: some flowers; benefactive
indirect object: Agnes '
388
The Grammar Book
Test your ability to apply what you know.
5.	What is the problem with the following ESL student utterances?
a.	*Explain me that rule again, please.
b.	*Are you going to give to me an answer?
c.	*Why didn’t you open him the door?
d.	‘We didn’t know, so we asked to Harry.
e.	*Please excuse me my poor English.
6.	B. Fraser (personal communication) has suggested that the indirect object alternation
rule for verbs taking the preposition to is based on phonological considerations and
will apply only if the verb is:
a.	monosyllabic; or
b.	disyllabic with stress on the initial syllable; for example:
Tell John the answer. *Explain John the answer.
Offer us something else. “Communicate Ann the answer.
TWhisper Ann the answer.
Can you think of any exceptions to this rule? What about verbs that take the
prepositions for and of ?
7.	ESL/EFL students sometimes have difficulty in distinguishing pairs such as the
following—especially when they are listening. Think of ways that would help students
learn what to listen for to clearly distinguish such sentences.
Mary was giving a sweater to John
Mary was given a sweater by John.
8.	One of your students asks you what kind of verb beg is (dative? benefactive?
eliciting?) and whether or not it can take an indirect object. How will you respond?
Bibliography
REFERENCES^
Biber, D., Johansson ร., Leech, G., Conrad, ร., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and
written English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ltd.
Bresnan, J., Cueni, A., Nikitina, T, & Baayen, R. H. (2007). Predicting the dative alternation. In G.
Bouma, I. Kraemer, & J. Zwarts (Eds.), Cognitive foundations of interpretation (pp. 69-94). Amsterdam,
Netherlands: Royal Netherlands Academy of Science.
Coppock, E. (2009). The logical and empirical foundations of Baker’s paradox (Unpublished doctoral
dissertation). Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Croft, พ. (2012). Verbs: Aspect and causal structure. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Deshors, ร. c. (2014). A case for a unified treatment of EFL and ESL: A multifactorial approach. English
World-Wide,, 35(f), 279-307.
Erteschik-Shir, N. (1979). Discourse constraints on dative movement. In T. Givón (Ed.), Syntax and
semantics (Vol. 12, pp. 441^-66). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Goldberg, A. E. (1995). Constructions: A construction grammar approach to argument structure. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Chapter า 9: Sentences with Indirect Objects
389
Goldsmith, J. (1980). Meaning and mechanism in grammar. In ร. Kuno (Ed.), Harvard studies in syntax and
semantics (Vol. 3, pp. 433-449). Harvard University Linguistics Department: Cambridge, MA.
Gries, ร. Th., & Stefanowitsch, A. (2004). Extending collostructional analysis: A corpus-based perspective
on ‘alternations’. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 9, 97-129.
Herriman, J. (1995). The indirect object in present-day English (Doctoral dissertation). University of
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
Huddleston, R., & Pullum, G. K. (2002). The Cambridge grammar of the English language. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Lakoff, R. (1969). Manual for teachers of English as a foreign language. Unpublished manuscript.
Malchukov, A., Haspelmath, M., & Comrie, B. (2010). Ditransitive constructions: A typological overview.
In A. Malchukov, M. Haspelmath, & B. Comrie (Eds.), Studies in ditransitive constructions: A comparative
handbook (pp. 1-64). Berlin, Germany: De Gruyter Mouton.
Pinker, ร. (2007). The stuff of thoiight: Language as a window into human nature. New York, NY: Viking.
Siewierska, A. (2013). Local pronouns in ditransitive scenarios: Corpus perspectives from English and
Polish. Linguistics.) 51, 25-60.
Siewierska, A., & Hollmann, พ. (2007). Ditransitive clauses in English with special reference to Lancashire
dialect. In M. Hannay & G. J. Steen (Eds.), Structural—functional studies in English grammar (pp. 83-102).
Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins.
Stowell, T. (1981). Origins of phrase structure (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Williams, R. ร. (1994). A statistical analysis of double object alternation. Issues in Applied Linguistics, 5(1),
35-59.
Yang, c. (2010). Three factors in language variation. Lingua, 120, 1160-1177.
SUGGESTIONS
_________________________________________________________________
For additional analyses of the meanings of the ditransitive construction, consult:
Colieman, T, & De Clerck, B. (2008). Accounting for ditransitive constructions with envy and forgive.
Functions of Language, 75(2), 187-215.
Croft, พ. (2003). Lexical rules versus constructions: A false dichotomy. In H. Cuyckens, Th. Berg, R. Dirven,
& K.-U. Panther (Eds.), Motivation in language: Studies in honour of Gunter Radden (pp. 49-68).
Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins.
For discussions of how indirect objects are used not only in English, but in other languages, see:
Colieman, T, & De Clerck, B. (2009). “Caused motion?” The semantics of the English ίο-dative and the
Dutch Ziw-dative. Cognitive Linguistics, 29(1), 5-42.
Malchukov, A., Haspelmath, M., & Comrie, B. (2010). Ditransitive constructions: A typological overview.
In A. Malchukov, M. Haspelmath, & B. Comrie (Eds.), Studies in ditransitive constructions: A comparative
handbook (pp. 1-64). Berlin, Germany: De Gruyter Mouton.
Van Bell, พ., & Van Langendonck, พ. (1996). The dative (Vols. 1-2). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John
Benjamins.
For an historical overview of research on the indirect object, see:
Mukherjee, J. (2005). English ditransitive verbs: Aspects of theory, description, and a usage-based model.
Amsterdam, Netherlands: Rodopi.
For a further explication of the effect of information structure on syntax, see:
Erteschik-Shir, N. (2007). Information structure: The syntax-discourse interface. Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press.
Thompson, ร. (1988). Information flow and ‘dative shift’ in English discourse. In ร. A. Thompson (Ed.),
Discourse and grammar: Santa Barbara papers in linguistics (Vol. 2, pp. 141-163). Santa Barbara, CA:
University of California, Santa Barbara.	,
390
The Grammar Book
For a probabilistic treatment of dative constructions, see:
Bresnan, J., & Ford, M. (2010). Prediction syntax: Processing dative constructions in American and
Australian varieties of English. Language, 86(1), 168-213.
For some examples of exercises for teaching indirect objects, see:
Badalamenti, V., & Henner-Stanchina, c. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 1
(4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Cake, c. D. (2009). Grammar connection: Structure through content 5. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage
Learning.
Elbaum, ร. N. (2011). Grammar in context 2 (5th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Endnotes
1.	Herriman (1995) mentions other examples that do not conform to the traditional definition. For instance,
the verbs flash and cast may be followed by an indirect object that tells US at whom the action in the verb
is being carried out (e.g., flash someone a smile, cast someone the evil eye).
2.	Siewierska and Hollmann (2007) stress the importance of distinguishing between British English and
American English in discussions of indirect objects. They cite British examples such as She gave to him a
book, She gave a book the man, and It was given him. They may be uncommon in British English, but they
are absent in American English.
3.	Here, we interpret give as the specific transfer of something from one person to another—not as the
general give, which means "to donate." เท this latter sense, an explicit indirect object, while possible, is
not required. These two meanings of give would have separate lexical entries.
4.	Huddleston and Pullum (2002), who view indirect objects from a strictly structural perspective, different
from what we do here, use the term prepositional complement instead of prepositional indirect object.
5.	เท some dialects of English—especially British—The book was given Mary (by Chen) is another acceptable
version of this sentence. According to Huddleston and Pullum (2002), this construction is considered
more acceptable if the direct object is a pronoun: The book was given me by my aunt. เท American English,
retention of the preposition to is preferred.
6.	Students have asked us why objects of from and with in sentences like the following are not also
considered indirect objects:
a.	I took the book from her.
b.	I left the book with her.
เท sentence (a), from her expresses the source, not the recipient of the book. We would not be able to say
"I took her the book" and have the same meaning as in (a). เท (b) the with her expresses the location of
the book rather than receivership or possession of it. If we say "I left her the book," what we really mean
is "I left the book for her," where she is indeed the intended recipient. From examination of sentences
such as these, it can be concluded that only verbs taking the prepositions to, for, and of can have indirect
objects in English. The students'first language may often be the source of these questions and of the
related errors they make in English. For example, in German it is possible to have a postverbal—in this case
postauxiliary—indirect object expressing the equivalent of "steal from": Er hat mir das Auto gestohlen — He
stole the car from me. Literally, this is He has me the car stolen, which can be more freely translated as He stole
me the car. เท English, this sentence would mean, "He stole the car for me," not "He stole the car from me."
7.	As well as having metaphorical uses, constructions with indirect objects also appear in many common
idioms: readX the riot act, lendX an ear, promise X the moon, give X the cold shoulder, and showx the ropes.
8.	Of course, "dominance" can also be achieved by phonological means (i.e., stress) just as it can through
syntax. For example, contrary to Erteschik-Shir's syntactic principle, one could say:
Pass the salt to me. (i.e., not the pepper!)
Pass me the salt, (i.e., not Roger!)
9.	Sentences of this form are apparently much more acceptable in British than American English.
Chapter 19: Sentences with Indirect Objects
391
Adjectives
Introduction
As you saw in Chapter 2, adjectives are words that describe a quality of a noun. All languages
have adjectives (Baker, 2003; Dixon, 2004), although it is not always so easy to distinguish
them from other parts of speech. Recall in Chapter 18 (the passive voice) that certain past
participles used with the passive voice are also used as adjectives with identical forms:
The beans were refried.
by someone (passive)
present state of the beans (adjective)
Indeed, Paul (2010) only recently argued that adjectives should be treated as a separate part of
speech for Mandarin Chinese and should not be conflated with intransitive verbs.
While adjectives typically precede and modify nouns in English,
A large package arrived yesterday. (large is the adjective.)
as we saw in Chapter 2, it is also possible for a noun to precede another noun and to modify
it. Our example there was
The glass jar is dirty. (Note that the adjective form would be glassy.)
And, as we will see, although many adjectives in English can apply to different degrees, e.g.,
The porridge was hot.
The porridge was too hot.
not all adjectives can be graded:
The shop is open.
*The shop is too open.1
Furthermore, as Doetjes (2008) points out, the too + adjective in English is different from
other languages, such as French, in that a semantically similar form to the too of English is
used not only directly before adjectives (as with English), but also directly before verbs, and
before nouns as well (p. 123):
trop grand
trop danser
trop de livres
However, in other ways, adjectives in English are simpler than those of many languages.
English adjectives remain invariant in form, no matter which position they occupy in a
sentence:
The moon is full tonight.
The full moon shone brightly.
393
This is not true of other languages. In German, for instance, adjectives that come before
the noun must agree with the noun in case, gender, and number, but those that occur in the
predicate are invariant:
English: A blue car
German: Ein blaues (+ nominative case + neuter + singular) Auto
English: The car is blue.
German: Das Auto ist blau.
English adjectives no longer inflect for gender, person, or number, although they once did.
Thus, the forms of adjectives in English are less complicated than they are in some other languages.
While this seems easy enough, ESL/EFL learners do have to learn certain things about
English adjectives—that they precede nouns, for instance, which is not true of Romance
languages, among others. In fact, as we will see, some English adjectives can occur only before
a noun; others appear only after a copular verb or as a predicate adjective. Many adjectives can
occupy more than one position, but depending on where they are placed, they may convey
different meanings. Finally, when more than one adjective is used, as in
A spectacular full moon seemed to rise from the sea.
they often must be sequenced in a particular way—a sequence that may cause learning
challenges for ESL/EFL students.
In short, what seems at first to be a straightforward part of speech becomes more
complicated as we dig deeper, something that should not surprise you at this point in your
reading of this book.
The Form Of Adjectives
MORPHOLOGY
_____________________________________________________
As we saw in Chapters 2 and 3, adjectives do not have any typical form; however, derivational
affixes commonly associated with adjectives include -al (mental, special), -able/-ible (commendable,
possible), -ar (particular, popular), -ful/-less (hopeful, hopeless), -ic (scientific, basic), -ish (foolish), -ive
(attractive, expensive), -OUS (dangerous, delicious), and -y (pretty, dirty) (Leech, 1989).
More recently, Moon (2011) studied adjectives formed with the derivational suffix -like
(e.g., childlike). Although it has been suggested that such formations lie on the boundary
between affixation and compounding (Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad, & Finegan, 1999,
p. 533), there is no denying that attaching -like to a noun is a productive process for forming
new adjectives. In her corpus study, using the 450-million word Bank of English corpus
(BoE), Moon found not only that there was a large number of adjectives with -like, but also
that such adjectives often collocated with particular nouns (e.g., jewel-like with color and vise-
like with grip). She added that from decades of corpus research, we have come to expect such
phraseological patterns.
Adjectives also have two inflectional morphemes: the -er of the comparative (larger) and
the -est (largest) of the superlative; although these days, it seems that more and more speakers
of English are opting for the periphrastic forms (more + adjective for the comparative and
most + adjective for the superlative), regardless of the length of the adjective. We will say no
more at this point about these constructions because we devote two full chapters to issues of
comparison and degree (Chapters 34 and 35), although it is perhaps worth mentioning that
other languages do not restrict their comparative and superlative morphology to adjectives
(see Dixon, 2004, for references).
394
The Grammar Book
SYNTAX	___________
As we saw in our phrase structure rules, there are two basic positions for adjectives in a
sentence:
1.	Attributive position (before a noun)
NP -> (det3) (APn) N (-pl) (PrepP)
the funny clowns
a perfect match
In fact, as is evident in our rule, it might be more properly said that nouns can be
preceded by adjective phrases. The reason for this refinement is that adjectives themselves can
be modified, so that in the following example, perfectly modifies wonderful, and together they
modify opportunity:
A perfectly wonderful opportunity
2.	Predicative position (after be copula and other copular or linking verbs—seem, appear,
feel, look, etc.)
VP -> cop AP
The clowns are very funny.
The weather turned cold.
Sometimes the copular verb is deleted, here in its infinitive form, so that the adjective
follows a noun directly—what we called in Chapter 6 an “object noun predicate”:
They considered Stuart [to be] mad.
A predicative adjective in postnominal position can also result from a reduced relative
clause (discussed later in this chapter):
The news [that is] available at this time is not good.
In the following sections, we go into further detail with regard to the two basic positions
(attributive and predicative) of adjectives in English clauses.
Attributive Adjectives
Not all adjectives are syntactically flexible. Prenominal, or attributive, position is the most
characteristic position for English adjectives, but some adjectives primarily occur attributively,
and others only occur predicatively.
The following categories of adjectives occur primarily in attributive position (based on
Bolinger, 1967).
1.	Those adjectives that show the reference of the head noun has already been determined:
the
very
particular
same
self-same
man I was seeking
exact
2.	Those adjectives that show us the importance or rank of the head noun:
major
main
their
chief
primary
faults
principal
Chapter 20 -.Adjectives
395
In an extensive study of the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA), Liu
(2010) affirmed the attributive position for the five adjectives mentioned, which we have
listed in descending order of frequency; however, he did find a fairly low number of instances
where major and primary could occur predicatively:
You know, marriage and motherhood are pretty major.
Positions involving oversight of EE [environmental education] have been eliminated
or the coordinator's responsibilities changed so that EE is no longer primary.
Liu (2010) also made a number of other interesting observations regarding these five
adjectives, such as with which words they collocate (e.g., primary care; principal investigator)
and their frequency (major is almost ten times more frequent than principal).
3.
Those adjectives that show the head noun is recognized by law or custom:
the
lawful
rightful
legal
true
heir
4.	Those adjectives that qualify the time reference of the noun:
the future king	the former chairperson
the present monarch	the previous occupant
5.	Those adjectives that qualify the geographical reference of the noun:
a Southern gentleman
a rural mail carrier
the urban crisis
Two other subcategories that are mentioned but not specifically defined by Bolinger
(1967) are as follows:
6.	Those adjectives that intensify or emphasize the head noun:
a total stranger	a mere child
sheer fraud	utter nonsense
7.	Those adjectives that show the uniqueness of the head noun:
the sole survivor
the only nominee
a single individual
Of course, as we have said, nouns can be modified by other nouns, becoming noun
compounds. These modifying nouns, too, are attributive and may not occur after the copula be·.
a medical doctor	*a doctor is medical
an atomic physicist	*a physicist is atomic
a reserve officer	*an officer is reserve
Saying that the adjectives are prenominal simply means that they occur before a noun.
Thus, wherever nouns can occur, so..can adjectives. They can modify both subjects and objects.
subject: Thoughtful guests
indirect object:	give their deserving hosts
direct object:	personal gifts
object of the preposition:	of special value.
Predicative Adjectives (Following a Verb)
Once again, most adjectives can appear in several different positions in a sentence.2 Just as
with exclusively attributive adjectives, however, certain adjectives can only be predicative.
There are three such categories.
396
The Grammar Book
1.	Adjectives that begin with an «-prefix:3
The boy is awake.	*the awake boy
The boat is adrift.	*the adrift boat
Note that Huddleston and Pullum (2002) observe that if one of these adjectives is
premodified, it can appear attributively (p. 559):
their wide-awake patient
2.	Health adjectives (Chalker, 1984):
Larry feels faint.
He is not well.
z. Adjectives that must be followed by prepositional phrases or infinitives (i.e., ones that are
more complex, syntactically):
He's bound for China.
Debbie seems inclined to agree.
Occasionally, complex adjectival phrases can appear prenominally:
My good-for-nothing cousin
but they are the exception rather than the norm, and they are usually hyphenated.
English is different in this respect from many other languages. For example, Cinque
(2010) shows that often pronominal adjectives in Greek and Bulgarian can be complex:
o kirios kata protereótita logos (Greek)
the main by priority reason
'the main reason in terms of priority'
glavnata pd znacenie pricina (Bulgarian)
main the in significance reason
'the main reason in terms of significance'
Predicative Adjectives (Postnominal)
As we have already seen, predicative adjectives can also occur directly after a noun when the
copular verb has been deleted. There are two kinds. The first kind of postnominal adjective
consists of adjectives modifying object nouns:
They considered Stuart mad.
This pattern occurs only with certain verbs. One group are verbs showing mental
assessments or personal preferences, such as consider, like, think, prefer, declare, report, believe,
imagine, hold, want, call, and so on:
Sandy thought it odd.
They declared him sane.
They held him accountable.
Another group of verbs that permit the adjective to follow the object directly are certain
causative verbs, such as make, turn, get, keep:
Hay fever makes me crazy.
The frost turned the leaves brown.
His diet kept him healthy.
See Chapter z 1 for more on the special characteristics of causative verbs.
The second kind of postnominal adjective can be said to be derived from relative clauses
(see Chapter 29). Suffice it to say here that they follow the noun directly, having lost the
relative pronoun and the be verb of the relative clause:4
Chapter 20: Adjectives
397
The news available at this time is not good.
.7
[that is]
Here are two more examples:
People strong in character should run for political office.
[who are]
Join the committeexoncerned with local development issues.
[that is]
It should be apparent why relative clauses are sometimes called adjective clauses. Adj ectives
and relative clauses serve similar functions in providing qualifying information about nouns.
As with the other positions, a few categories of adjectives always occur postnominally
(Chalker, 1984):
1.	Adjectives in phrases of measurement:
He is six feet tall.
The ruler is twelve inches long.
Note that entire adjectival measure phrases can appear before a noun, but when they do,
the noun is in its singular form, regardless of the cardinal number expressed:
They have a one-year-old child.
He is a six-foot-tall man.
It is a twelve-inch-long ruler.
Actually, this is true of more than measure phrases. Nouns serving to modify other
nouns are unmarked for number in prenominal position.5 This is a minor point, but a
source of errors for ESL/EFL students:
I need an egg carton.	This shoebox will do.
*1 need an eggs carton.	"This shoesbox will do.
2.	Adjectives in certain fixed expressions (mostly borrowed from French):
attorney general heir apparent president-e/ect	notary public
3.	Adjectives following indefinite pronouns, where the adjective derives from a reduced relative
clause:
Let's do something [that is] more interesting.
I can't think of anything [that is] exciting to do.
Participles
You may have noticed that the adjectives in our last two examples end in -ing. We have
encountered this form previously only as the progressive aspect, where we knew it as a present
participle. It is a present participle here as well, although here, it serves an adjectival, as opposed
to a verbal, function. As such, it can be found in the positions that other adjectives can fill:
Attributive: He has led an interesting life.
Predicative: His life has beeirinteresting.
Predicative: Marshall has made life interesting.
(postnominal)
Before we distinguish present participles functioning as adjectives from present
participles functioning as verbs, remember that the past participle can also function both
adjectivally and verbally (refried). Past participles functioning as adjectives can occupy the
same positions as many other adjectives:
Attributive: The well-worn book was a favorite of all the children.
Predicative: The book was well worn.
398
The Grammar Book
Predicative: The book, well worn from much use, was a favorite.
(postnominal)
In addition, both present and past participles can be modified by nouns or adverbs to
create compound participial adjectives:
noun + present participle: a man-eating tiger
noun + past participle: a flea-bitten dog
adverb + present participle: a fast-rising star
adverb + past participle: a much-loved teacher
Some adjectives look as if they were verbal past participles, but they actually aren’t:
the one-legged man	the crooked lane
the naked truth	the wicked witch
the green-eyed monster	the bearded iris
As we saw in Chapter 18, the pronunciation of certain of these adjectives (legged,
crooked, naked, wicked) is distinctive. Where phonological rules wouldn’t predict it, the
-ed is pronounced syllabically as /id/. Sometimes the only thing that determines whether an
attributive adjective is a verbal participle or an adjectival is its pronunciation:
a learned behavior	a learned scholar
(/Isrnd/ is a verbal participle)	(/larnid/ is an adjectival participle)
Distinguishing Adjectival Participles from Verbal Participles
Consider the following sentences:
-ing adjective: The magician is amazing.
-ing verb: the magician is amazing US with his magic tricks.
-en adjective: The security guard was relieved· (i.e., he stopped worrying)
-en verb: The security guard was relieved by the night watchman, (i.e., replaced)
One way to differentiate adjectival participles from verbal participles is to add the adverb
very before the italicized forms in these sentences:
The magician is very amazing.
*The magician is very amazing US with his magic tricks.
The security guard was very relieved.
*The security guard was very relieved by the night watchman.
This test is more successful in distinguishing identical -ing forms than it is identical -en
forms, however, as there appears to be increasing acceptance of the use of the adverb very with
a by phrase that would normally mark a passive use of the past participle.
Her behavior shocked all of us.
We were all (very) shocked by her behavior.
An additional test to determine whether the -en form is adjectival or verbal is to look at
the preposition following it. -En forms functioning as adjectives take a variety of prepositions
(e.g., amazed at, interested in, etc.), whereas -en forms functioning as passive verbs normally
take only the by phrase; although, as you saw previously, having a by phrase is no guarantee
that the past participle is a verb:
adjective: We were amazed at his success.
adjective/verb?: We were (very) amazed by the performance, (no explicit agent in the by phrase)
verb: He was greeted by his many fans after the show, (explicit agent in the by phrase)
Chapter 20: Adjectives
399
The identity of form can sometimes create ambiguous sentences:
Martha Stewart is entertaining.
adjective: She is an entertaining person.
verb: She is entertaining guests.
We were relieved.
adjective: We felt a sense of relief.
verb: We were relieved by other workers, (i.e., they came to take our places)
Of course, when these sentences occur in context, it’s highly unlikely that they will be
perceived as ambiguous.
OTHER STRUCnJRAUAC^^
As you can see in our phrase structure rule,
AP -> (ADV") ADJ (PrepP)
an adjective can be preceded by one or more adverbs:
Lenox china is very expensive.
Wedgwood china is really very expensive.
And an adjective can be followed by a prepositional phrase:
I was really surprised at her appearance.
She got me interested in quilting.
For certain adjectives, the prepositional phrase is obligatory:
*He was averse.
He was averse to my suggestion.
Some adjectives always co-occur with the same preposition (e.g., conscious ofi; others take a
variety of prepositions, often with a shift of meaning, such as good with, good to, good for, or good at.
We also know from our phrase structure rules that some noun phrases also can take
prepositional phrases:
a man of honor
These seem very similar semantically to attributive adjectives:
an honorable man
The similarity is due to the fact that the function of prepositional phrases following nouns is
adjectival, unlike the function of prepositional phrases in the verb phrase, which is adverbial.
The Meaning of Adjectives
ATTRIBUTIVE VERSUS PREDICATIVE POSITION
As we said earlier, many adjectives can appear in both attributive and predicative position;
however, with a few adjectives, there is a change in meaning:
That responsible person (trustworthy)
That person is responsible.^ could mean trustworthy, but it could also mean to blame.)
Bblinger (1967) noted that there is often something semantically more permanent or
characteristic about the attributive adjectives that directly precede nouns than the postnominal
adjectives that directly follow nouns, which tend to reflect temporary states or specific events.
400
The Grammar Book
For example:
The stolen jewels (a characteristic of the jewels)
The jewels stolen (identified by a specific act—maybe they were recovered later)
The only navigable river (usual fact about a given region)
The only river navigable (temporary state due to a drought or some other event)
The guilty people (a characteristic, classifying modifier of the people)
The people guilty (the people are described in terms of one act or event)
Predicative adjectives are potentially ambiguous, since if we say:
These jewels are stolen.
The river is navigable.
These people are guilty.
we cannot tell whether the adjective is being used to describe something that is permanent and
characteristic of the subject noun or something that is temporary or occasional. Changing the
adjective to either attributive position or immediate postnominal position can disambiguate
in such cases. As Bolinger (1967) puts it, attributive position tends to reject the temporary and
the occasional. For example in the following pair, we understand that pink is the characteristic
color of the house, not a temporary condition that is created by the light from the sunset:
The pink house Ψ The house was pink in the sunset.
This is borne out further by Chalker’ร observation that health adjectives are usually used
predicatively (if they are meant to convey a temporary condition):
He is sick.
If we change the adjective to attributive position, the quality is construed as much more
enduring:
He is a sick man.
Consistent with this observation about the semantics of adjectives in attributive position,
compound attributive adjectives formed with present participles tend to reflect habitual or
customary action, as opposed to isolated events:6
Your friend writes plays. -> Your playwriting friend
The man broke a leg. -> *The leg-breaking man
Carnivores are animals that eat meat. -> Carnivores are meat-eating animals.
My brother bought a house. -> *My house-buying brother
Other languages use the adjective position to mark meaningful differences, of course. In
Spanish, for instance, pronominal or postnominal adjectives can differ in meaning:
El viejo amigo (describes a friend you have had for a long time)
El amigo viejo (describes a friend who is elderly)
Compare this with the three-way ambiguity of the English phrase an old friend, which
obliges English speakers to paraphrase it with a relative clause to make its meaning clear.
an old friend
a friend who is old
a friend whom I have had for a long time
a former friend (i.e., a person who was a friend long ago and
possibly is no longer a friend)
PARTICIPLES (PRESENT VERSUS PAST)____________________________________________________
A problem for many learners of English is the adjectival use of -ing and -en participles derived
from “emotive” verbs. The term emotive is used to refer to verbs such as the following:
Chapter 20: Adjectives
401
aggravate	bore	convince	frighten	mystify	surprise
alarm	calm	defeat	insult	overwhelm	terrify
amaze	captivate	disappoint	interest	please	tire
amuse	charm	disturb	intrigue	puzzle	worry
annoy	comfort	embarrass	involve7	satisfy	
astonish	concern7	encourage	love	shock	
bewilder	confuse	excite	mislead	stagger	
A tendency that many English learners have is to overgeneralize the -ing participle and
produce sentences such as the following:
*1 am interesting in sports, (i.e., interesting for interested)
Students have to learn that when they want to use an adjective to refer to the experiencer—
the one experiencing the emotion—then the -en participle should be used. If they want to use
an adjective to refer to the cause of the experience, the -ing participle should be used. In the
chart below, there is a semantically related sentence in the left-hand column that contains the
emotive verb without a participial form, followed by columns with -en and -ing adjectives.8
PARTICIPLES WITH EMOTIVE VERBS: EXPERIENCER VERSUS CAUSE
Sentence with emotive verb	-en participle refers to the expe- riencer (the object of the active sentence with the emotive verb)	-ing participle refers to the cause (the subject of the active sentence with the emotive verb)
Sports interest Francis.	Francis is interested in sports.	Sports are interesting to Francis.
Ethnic jokes don't amuse me.	1 am not amused by ethnic jokes.	Ethnic jokes aren't amusing (to me).
Ted's loud stereo annoys his neighbors	Ted's neighbors are annoyed by his loud stereo.	Ted's loud stereo is annoying (to his neighbors).
In an interesting corpus study contrasting the use of surprised that and surprising that in
the British National Corpus, Mindt (2008) suggests that whereas both participles express a
degree of unexpectedness, the past participle differs from the present in that surprised + that-
clause expresses an emotion, whereas surprising + that-c\mse conveys a judgment:
I'm surprised that you have never remarried. (H97 3497)
It's surprising [that] the wife put up with it. (HRS 206)
She further claims that although the adjectives are quasi-synonymous, they occur in different
linguistic contexts and have distinct co-occurrence patterns.
Givón (1993) places the majoRparts of speech on a continuum, saying that verbs tend to
encode the least static lexical meanings and nouns the most static, with adjectives (and related
adverbs) somewhere in between:9
Verbs	Adjectives/Adverbs	Nouns
least static meanings	most static meanings
402
The Grammar Book
Most English adjectives are like nouns in that they describe fairly permanent inherent
qualities. This is especially so, as you saw, when they are in the attributive position. This
observation also helps explain why it is odd to use the progressive aspect or imperatives with
adjectives:
The Earth is round.
*The Earth is being round.
*Be short.
Some adjectives, however, can be used predicatively to refer to a temporary state, a
change in progress, or something immediate:
She is just being stubborn.
He is looking stronger, (with the comparative form of the adjective)
Be careful.
It is also possible to give a more dynamic sense to certain adjectives by using the copular
verb get + adjective to indicate a change of state, as opposed to be + adjective, which indicates
a condition or a state:
He was dry. —> [It rained.] He got wet. —> He is wet.
RESTRICTIV E/NONRESTRICTHfE	"
Semantically, adjectives can be either restrictive or nonrestrictive. The former are necessary
for defining which noun is being referred to:
I live in a brick house.
The house decorated by the Johnsons is quite unusual.
Nonrestrictive adjectives merely add additional information without being essential for
identification:
I live in the corner house, which is brick.
The house, decorated for the holidays, is quite unusual.
Some nonrestrictive adjectives can occur prenominally, too:
our distinguished speaker
our clever receptionist
where there is only one speaker or receptionist.
We go into this semantic distinction in greater detail in Chapters 28 and 29, where we
discuss restrictive and nonrestrictive relative clauses, respectively.
POLARITY __________
In Chapter 10, we spoke of adjectives of negative and positive polarity. The term polarity
merely refers to positive and negative contrasts in a language. Thus, adjectives can be paired
by contrasting poles:
Positive polarity	Negative polarity	Positive polarity	Negative polarity
(unmarked)	(marked)	(unmarked)	(marked)
big small;	little	fast	slow
old	young	tall	short
old	new	wide	narrow
long	short	high	low
good	bad	loud	quiet
hard	soft	rough	smooth
Chapter 20: Adjectiveร
403
The adjectives with positive polarity are unmarked because they are used more
frequently in any language, learned earlier by children, and used in neutral contexts, such as
How old are you?
The adjectives of negative polarity, on the other hand, are marked, meaning that they
are less frequently used, being reserved for unusual contexts:
You say that your daughter is too young to pay full fare. Just how young is she?
Notice that the asymmetry is also displayed in answers to questions with adjectives
of different polarity:
How old are you?	Xery
(unmarked)	Very	young.
How young are you?	|,yer
(marked)	[Very	young.
The choice for positive or negative wording matters in all sorts of language use situations.
For example, when ground beef is described as 75 percent lean, consumers report that it
tastes better than when being described as 2 5 percent fat (as reported in Kamoen, Holleman,
Nouwen, Sanders, & van den Bergh, 2011). We say more about the polarity of adjectives in
the discussion of comparisons in Chapter 34.
_________________________________________________________
GRADABILITY __________________________________________________________
Earlier in this chapter, we suggested that the adverb test (i.e., placing very before the word in
question) could be used to see if a participle was acting as a verb or adjective. In fact, many
gradable adjectives (and adverbs, too) can be placed on a continuum of intensity, with the intensity
increasing or decreasing depending on the adverb chosen. Here is an example with rare·.
less intense	more intense
somewhat rare rare quite rare very rare extremely rare
In their analysis of intensifiers found in the Corpus of Spoken Professional American
English (CSPAE), Yaguchi, lyeiri, and Baba (2010) report on the wide variety of forms
available to grade adjectives in Present-Day English. They assert that the choice often reflects
the speaker’s or writer’s attitude, as in their examples (note the nonstandard use of real and
awful, instead of really and awfully in the second and fourth examples, which Yaguchi et al., say
are more common in informal situations, but do occur in public, professional speech):
I want to make that absolutely clear. (CSPAE, White House)
If we can find them, I'll be real happy. (CSPAE, Committee of Reading)
.. .we have a really strong tradition here of student self governance... (CSPAE, Faculty Meeting)
No. I thought it was awful simple, with four children. (CSPAE, Committee of Mathematics)
While this works well for many adjectives, not all adjectives can be so modified. Some
adjectives, in fact, are not gradable, such as the following:
1.	Reference adjectives:
*The very former senator from the state of Washington
2.	Adjectives with an absolute meaning:
*A very alternative way of looking at the matter
Cognitive linguist Paradis (2001) likens the distinction between gradable/ungradable adjectives
to that between count-noncount nouns (car versus milk) and events and states (arrive versus
know) with verbs. These categories have to do with the human perception of boundedness.
404
The Grammar Book
According to Paradis, boundedness in adjectives is a fundamental characteristic associated
with gradability. Noncount nouns, stative verbs, and gradable adjectives are unbounded. Two
basic types of gradable adjectives are distinguished: those that are associated with a boundary
(e.g., true, brilliant) and those that are not (e.g., nice, messy). Scalar adverbs, such as very and
fairly, harmonize easily with the latter, unbounded group:
very nice
fairly messy
Totality adverbs, such as absolutely and totally, more naturally modify bounded adjectives:
absolutely true
totally brilliant
However, the property of boundedness in adjectives is not fixed; it can be changed
through context, so that we can use scalar adverbs with bounded adjectives:
He is extremely Swedish.
She is very pregnant.
The Use of Adjectives
ORDER OF ATTRli^^
As we know from our phrase structure rules, it is possible to have more than one adjective
phrase modifying a noun. In this attested example from Feist (2009), multiple adjectives
precede the noun instrument (in this case, a tambourine):
your actual tinny round percussion instrument
It is clear that the order is not random:
*your percussion actual round tinny instrument
Furthermore, the order of attributive adjectives before a noun is different in English than
it is in other languages. For instance, some languages, like French, have a mixed order: some
attributive adjectives referring to age, size, and evaluation precede the noun, while other
attributive adjectives referring to color or origin follow. For example:
une grande voiture jaune	une vieille femme Italienne
(big) (car) (yellow)	(old) (woman) (Italian)
'a big yellow car'	'an old Italian woman'
In certain cases, two adjectives may precede a noun in French and one may follow:
une jolie petite voiture jaune
(pretty) (little) (car) (yellow)
'a pretty little yellow car'
In Arabic, according to Svatko (1979), all attributive adjectives come after the noun, and up to
three adjectives are possible in this position; however, Svatko adds that the Arabic ordering system
is less rigid than the English one; as a result of all these differences, Arabic speakers beginning
their study of English make adjective ordering errors in prenominal sequences. For example,
*an American interesting movie * *a wooden big bowl
Feist’s (2009) example with the noun instrument is unusual in its length. Wulff’s (2003)
multifactorial analysis, using data from the British National Corpus (BNC), revealed that noun
phrases containing more than two prenominal adjectives are relatively rare. In a 10-million-
word subcorpus of the BNC that she examined, Wulff found 9,647 adjective pairs, but only
426 of them were followed by a third adjective. Still, as we saw with the examples of Arabic
Chapter 20: Adjectives
405
speakers’ adjective orders, there is something to be learned about prenominal adjective order,
even when only two adjectives precede a noun.
Feist (2009) suggests it is helpful to think of there being zones before a noun in English.
He starts with Quirk, Greenbaum, Leech, and Svartvik’s (1985) depiction of four zones, which
Feist claims is also supported by Halliday’s research:
Determiners	Premodifiers				Head
	Zone 1: precentral	Zone II: central	Zone III: postcentral	Zone IV: prehead	
our	numerous	splendid		tourist	attractions
all this			costly	social	security
a	certain			church	tower
these			crumbling grey	church	towers
some		intricate	old, interlocking	Chinese	designs
To these, he assigns semantic labels as follows (all of Feist’s examples are attested):
Determiners	Premodifiers				Head
	Reinforcer	Epithet	Descriptor	Classifier	
your	actual	tinny	round	percussion	instrument
a	mere	useless	gibbering	stop-the-war- at-any-price	pacifist
	sheer	desperate			necessity
a	complete	bloody			fool
		little	black	iron	fences
a		shabby	dark	city	suit
a		lissome	young	TVNZ	reporter
some		gangbuster	new	McKinsey	idea
the		beautiful	sunny	winter	weather
the		huge	annual	ram	sales
		ugly	trailing	overhead	wires
		smooth	panning	camera	movements
her		lacy.	tin-roofed	row	house
a		Distinctive	checked	baseball	cap
the		filthy	colonial	military	compounds
		traditional	creamy	vanilla	ice-cream
Returning to his example of the tambourine, Feist (2009) elaborates on each of the
zones:
your actual tinny round percussion instrument
406
The Grammar Book
Your, of course, is a determiner. Feist classifies actual as a reinforcer. The epithet zone has
a scalar meaning; tinny fits here. Round belongs in the descriptor zone, and percussion has a
referential meaning and occupies the classifier zone.
Another point that we should mention about adjective order is that attributive adjectives
are sometimes conjoined with and when there are two adjectives from the same category that
both partially modify the same noun (i.e., using either of the two adjectives alone would be
semantically misleading):
an orange and white marble
a wooden and metal implement
Also, two or more attributive adjectives are sometimes separated by commas in writing if
there is repetition (intensification) or if the two adjectives are from the same zone and are not
incompatible. For example:
a big, big ice cream cone
a charming, attractive host
____________________________________________
CASES WITH VARIABLE ORDER
1 I porcelain Chinese 1
alargei __________. . 1 vase
9 [ Chinese porcelain J
chests
Bailey (1975) reports that certain adjectives appear to have a variable order with regard to
certain descriptor adjectives:
1.	Proper adjectives10 and the way they order with material adjectives such as wooden, brick, and
glassy, for example:
[พoodenJapanese
* ese [Japanesewooden
2.	Proper adjectives and adjectives of color, such as
_ โ German white ไ ....__
a	\ wine
[ white German J
3.	Adjectives denoting shape—such words as round, oblong, wide, má flat—may, in combinations
with other adjectives, be rearranged according to the demands of the context:
a J *ar9e I oblong box
[yellow J
around Iblue111 table /a |blu®
[ smâll J	[small
Further study is needed to determine the semantic constraints and discourse contexts
that will explain the variable order for these types of adjectives.
an oblong . 'ar9e
yellow
box
round table
_____________________________________________________________	______
..
THE PRIMARY ZTREZzM^^
_______
Another interesting finding from Bailey’s study is that her subjects produced strings such as
the following in two different contexts with different stress patterns:
Context 1: Three large triangles—one blue, one red, and one yellow— produced "the
targe YELLOW triangle."
Context 2: Three yellow triangles—two small and one large— produced "the LARGE
yellow triangle."
That is to say, the ordering of measurement and color adjectives is more or less fixed,
but English speakers assign primary stress to one adjective or the other depending on context;
that is, the adjective that most clearly limits and defines the noun with respect to the other
nouns in the same context gets the primary stress.
Chapter 20: Adjectives
407
Conclusion
Although the forms of English adjectives aren’t complicated compared with those in other
languages, some teachable points can help ESL/EFL students master them more efficiently.
Primary among these are matters of meaning and use, particularly the meaning of adjectives
associated with particular positions, the meaning differences between present and past
participles, and the sequencing of descriptive adjectives of different types when using more
than one in the attributive position.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form. Tim Butterworth and Darlene Schultz suggest that a teacher who wants to have
students practice adjectives should put on a desk a number of different objects and tell
them to concentrate on the objects. After a few minutes, the teacher covers the objects
with a cloth and ask students to remember as many of the objects as they can and describe
them. For example:
a gold(en) cufflink
a little blue stuffed animal
2.	Form. Firsten and Killian (1994) recommend a role-play in which one person plays the
role of a traveler at an airport or train station who has lost his or her luggage, while
another student plays the role of an agent in the “Lost-and-Found” office. The agent has
to ask very specific questions about the lost luggage and its contents, and the traveler has
to be able to answer the questions in great detail.
3.	Form. To work with the need to hyphenate prenominal measure phrases, tell students to
treat the hyphens as if they were parentheses in math, where the inner (i.e., hyphenated)
material is interpreted first, before the larger phrase:
four year old children
four [year-old] children
[four-year-old] children
Have them hyphenate other measure phrases depending on the meaning, such as:
five hundred pound wrestlers (Hyphenate this to describe sumo wrestlers.)
two foot long hot dogs (Hyphenate this to show what is so famous about hot dogs from
Coney Island.)
4.	Meaning. In order to give high-intermediate or advanced ESL/EFL students a feeling
for attributive versus postnominal position of those adjectives that can occur in both
positions, exercises such as ffie following can be provided. The students should be asked
to put the adjective specified in the attributive position if a characteristic or permanent
meaning is conveyed, and in the postnominal position if a temporary or specific
interpretation is called for.
..a. available. We didn't purchase any new equipment last month because there was so
little (1)money (2).________________
b. elected. At the beginning of each board meeting, the chairperson introduces the
(1)officers (2).__________	_____________
408
The Grammar Book
5.	Meaning. To help students understand the meaning of present participle versus past
participle adjectives, Thewlis (2007) says to give students a short list of some common
emotions or feelings, such as boredom, confusion, depression, excitement, and
embarrassment. They then form groups and make two lists—(1) situations that may cause
them to feel this way, and (2) their reactions when they do. For example, boredom:
Boring Situations	Bored Reactions
long meetings	doodle
movies I have seen already	fall asleep
some lectures	think about other things
The groups then compare their responses and discuss similarities and differences (e.g.,
Long meetings are boring. I doodle when I am bored.).
6.	Form/Meaning. For more advanced students, give them the following passage from
Mark Twain’s Life on the Mississippi.
After all of these years I can still picture that old time to myself now, just as it was then: the
town drowsing เท the sunshine on a summer's morning; the streets empty, or pretty nearly
so; one or two clerks sitting in front of the Water Street stores with their splint-bottomed
chairs tilted back against the walls, chins on breasts, hats slouched over their faces, asleep
...; two or three wood flats at the end of the wharf, but nobody to listen to the peaceful
lapping of the wavelets against them; the great Mississippi, rolling its mile-wide tide along,
point above the town and the point below, bounding the river-glimpse and burning it into
a sort of sea, and withal a very still and brilliant and lonely one.
Ask students to identify the adjectives and discuss their form and position.
7.	Meaning. Try a variation of the game “Mad-Libs.” To do this, write a passage, leaving
blanks where adjectives belong. Without showing the passage to the class, elicit an
adjective of color, an adjective of shape, a proper adjective, an adjective with -ing, an
adjective with -e-r, an adjective that can be preceded by very, and so on. Then the students
fill in the blanks using the adjectives that have been elicited. Usually, a humorous story
results. Following this class exercise, the students prepare their own similar passages
(individually or in groups) and have other students supply them with adjectives to fill in
the blanks.
8.	Use. Have students go online and search for a humane society site. Have them note
descriptions of animals that are available for adoption or notices of animals that have
been lost or found. Here are some actual examples that we have found:
Missing: Large Male Brown Tiger Striped Cat
Lost: Fat furry black mixed Pomeranian
See who can find the longest description. Have students create their own examples.
9.	Use. Have each student in the class write a sentence that describes another student,
using two or more adjectives in sequence. The other students have to guess who is being
described; for example:
He is an athletic, eighteen-year-old Mexican student.
Chapter 20: Adjectives
409
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1.	Provide an original sentence illustrating each of the following terms. Underline the
pertinent พord(ร) or word parts in your example.
a.	attributive adjective	d. present participle adjective
b.	predicative adjective	e. past participle adjective
c.	postnominal adjective	f. gradable adjective
2.	Why are the following sentences ungrammatical or at best awkward?
a.	"The asleep children can have lunch later.	d. "Jessica is my thirteen-years-old
b.	"This problem is main.	friend.
c.	"An overly fond of chocolate person is b ?He is completely nice.
called a “chocoholic.”
3.	How is the following sentence ambiguous?
Hazel is trying.
4.	Explain the difference:
Tom Sawyer painted the fence white. Tom Sawyer painted the white fence.
Test your ability to apply what you know.
5.	If your students produce sentences like the following, what do they still have to learn
about using adjectives in order to say what they want to say in Standard English?
a.	"She received a big nice bunch of b. "Snowball is my white hairs cat.
roses for Valentine’s Day.	c. *1 an1 boring in algebra class.
6.	Why is the following amusing?
A: How good are the Boston Red Sox this year?
B: (disgusted fan) You mean how bad are they.
7.	A student asks you to explain why she heard a native speaker say,
She avoided things unfamiliar....
instead of
She avoided unfamiliar things.
How would you answer?
8.	Examine the following. How is-, quite different from other adverbs preceding
adjectives? " '
Erik was quite generous.	Erik was quite a generous man.
Erik was very generous.	Erik was a very generous man.
Erik was extremely generous.	Erik was an extremely generous man.
9.	A-student asks you to explain the difference between used to and be used to. What
test could you use?
I used to eat spicy Indian food.	I am used to spicy Indian food.
410
The Grammar Book
Bibliography
REFERENCES
Bailey, K. M. (1975). The ordering of attributive adjectives in English: A preliminary study (Unpublished English
215 paper). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Baker, M. (2003). Lexical categories. Verbs, nouns, and adjectives. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Biber, D., Johansson ร., Leech, G., Conrad, ร., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and written
English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ltd.
Bolinger, D. (1967). Adjectives in English: Attribution and predication. Lingua, 1 1-34.
Boyd, J. K., & Goldberg, A. E. (2011). Learning what NOT to say: The role of statistical preemption and
categorization in A-adjective production. Language, 87(1), 55-83.
Chalker, ร. (1984). Current English grammar. London, England: Macmillan.
Cinque, G. (2010). The syntax of adjectives. A comparative study. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Davies, M. (2008). The corpus of contemporary American English: 450 million words, 1990-present. Retrieved
from http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/
Dixon, R. M. พ. (2004). Adjective classes in typological perspective. In R. M. พ. Dixon & A. Aikhenvald
(Eds .), Adjective classes: A cross-linguistic typological study (pp. 1-49). Oxford, England: Oxford University
Press.
Doetjes, J. (2008). Adjectives and degree modification. In L. McNally & C. Kennedy (Eds.), Adjectives and
adverbs (pp. 123-155). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Feist, J. (2009). Premodifier order in English nominal phrases: A semantic account. Cognitive Linguistics,
20(2), 301-340.
Firsten, R., & Killian, p. (1994). Troublesome English. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall Regents.
Givón, T. (1993). English grammar. Amsterdam, Netherlands/Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Huddleston, R. D., & Pullum, G. K. (2002). The Cambridge grammar of the English language. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Kamoen, N., Holleman, B., Nouwen, R., Sanders, T, & van den Bergh, H. (2011). Absolutely relative
or relatively absolute? The linguistic behavior of gradable adjectives and degree modifiers. Journal of
Pragmatics, 45(13), 313 9-3151.
Leech, G. (1989). AnA-Z of English grammar & usage. London, England: Edward Arnold.
Liu, D. (2010). Is it a chief main, major, primary, ex principal concern? A corpus-based behavioral profile
study of the near-synonyms. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 15(1), 56-87.
Mindt, I. (2008). Appropriateness in discourse: The adjectives surprised and surprising in monologue and
dialogue. Journal of Pragmatics, 40, 1503-1520.
Moon, R. (2011). English adjectives in -like, and the interplay of collocation and morphology. International
Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 16(4), 486-513.
Paradis, C. (2001). Adjectives and boundedness. Cognitive Linguistics, 12(1), 47-65.
Paul, พ. (2010). Adjectives in Mandarin Chinese. The rehabilitation of a much ostracized category.
In p. Cabredo Hofherr & o. Matushansky (Eds.), Adjectives·. Formal analyses in syntax and semantics
(pp. 115-152). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins.
Quirk, R., Greeenbaum, ร., Leech, G., & SvartvikjJ. (1985). A comprehensive grammar of contemporary
English. London, England: Longman.
Svatko, K. (1979). Descriptive adjective ordering in English and Arabic (Unpublished master’s thesis).
University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Thewlis, ร. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form., meaning, and use 3 (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Wulff, ร. (2003). A multifactorial corpus analysis of adjective order in English. International Journal of
Corpus Linguistics, 8{2), 245-282.
Chapter 20: Adjectives
41
Yaguchi, Μ-, lyeiri, Y, & Baba, γ (2010). speech style and gender distinctions in the use of very and real/
really. An analysis of the Corpus of Spoken Professional American English. Journal of Pragmatics, 42,
585-597.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
For helpful linguistic analyses of adjectives, see:
Bolinger, D. (1972). Degree words. The Hague, Netherlands: Mouton.
Cabredo Hofherr, p., & Matushansky, o. (Eds.). (2010). Adjectives'. Formal analyses in syntax and semantics.
Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins.
Kennedy, c. (1999). Projecting the adjective. The syntax and semantics of gradability and comparison. New York,
NY/London, England: Garland.
McNally, L., & Kennedy, c. (Eds.). (2008). Adjectives and adverbs. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
For a discussion of the differences with adjectives in other languages, consult:
Bouchard, D. (2002). Adjectives, numbers, and interfaces. Why languages vary. Amsterdam, Netherlands: North
Holland.
For explanations and exercises on the ordering of attributive adjectives, see:
Houck, N., & Hilles, ร. (2009). Grammar connection: Structure through content 4. Boston, MA: Heinle,
Cengage Learning.
Thewlis, ร. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 3 (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage
Learning.
For exercises that work on the differences between present participle and past participle adjectives, consult:
Carlisi, K. (2008). Grammar connection: Structure through content 3. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Wisniewska, I., Riggenbach, H., & Samuda, V (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form·, meaning, and use 2 (4th ed.).
Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Endnotes
1.	Of course, most sentences can always be given an interpretation, but this would require some sort of
implied or explicit qualification; e.g.,
The shop was too open to the wind.
as opposed to the more conventional interpretation of "open for business."
2.	What we mean is that it is syntactically possible. Presumably, for any given sentence, information status
would influence where it is placed. For instance, when the noun is new information, it and the adjective
modifying it are likely to be included in the predicate.
3.	These a adjectives are from Old English. There are even a few adjectives that don't have the same
etymology but by analogy are treated'-in the same way:
The children were afraid of the thunderstorm.
*The afraid children
For a plausible account of how children learn to deal with these exceptions, see Boyd and Goldberg (2011).
4.	We should acknowledge that not all postnominal adjectives can be said to derive from reduced relative
clauses:	^..
The Johnsons have bought a house resembling a barn.
*The Johnsons have bought a house that is resembling a barn.
The man in line in front of me purchased several items totaling $205.
*The man in line in front of me purchased several items that were totaling $205.
See Chapter 29 for further discussion of this point.
412
The Grammar Book
5.	There are, however, a few exceptions. For example, we do say the parts department.
6.	We agree with Bolinger (1967) that customary action is one source of compound adjectives, but we
would also cite isolated events as another source, provided they have some historical significance or
newsworthiness and are not mundane isolated events. For example:
He batted in the run that won the game. -> The game-winning run
Her time in the race broke a record. Her record-breaking time
7.	Concern and involve appear as adjectives only in their past participle form.
s. It may also be useful to point out to students that both the -ing and ~en forms can function as manner
adverbs if an -ly suffix is added:
Ted's stereo is annoyingly loud most of the time.
Corey stared excitedly at the hand he had just been dealt.
9. Givon's continuum provides a functional explanation for the notion of parts of speech and also helps to
explain cross-linguistic differences in parts of speech, such as why the English adjective tall has a noun
equivalent เท many West African languages, why Japanese inflects some adjectives the same as verbs,
and why many adjectives เท English can also function as nouns (e.g., Blue is my favorite color). เท other
words, adjacent categories may overlap in certain ways.
10.	Proper adjectives—"adjectives of origin" (our earlier example was Swedish; here, they are Chinese and
Japanese) refer to nationalities, religions, geographical regions, and directions (sometimes even cities—
Venetian), months, seasons of the year, etc. They are written with a capital letter.
Chapter 20: Adjectives
413
Prepositions
CHAPTER
Introduction
Prepositions are notoriously difficult to learn. Long after ESL/EFL students have achieved a
high level of proficiency in English, they still struggle with prepositions. Why do such little
words as in, on, and at, cause so many problems?
One answer to this question lies in the fact that the work of prepositions is often
performed in other languages, such as German and Russian, through inflections. We alluded
to this point in Chapter 2 when we pointed out that English, having lost many of its inflectional
affixes over the-years, has assigned to prepositions the function of showing role relationships.
For example, we noted in Chapter 16 that the preposition of can mark possession; in Chapter
18, we showed that it was the responsibility of the preposition by to mark a particular noun
as the agent in a passive sentence; and in Chapter 19, we examined three prepositions—to,
for, and of— that can mark indirect objects. ESL/EFL students, therefore, have to learn new
forms for familiar functions.
Second, in their spatial meaning, prepositions do not always match up well from one
language to another. A Spanish speaker, for instance, could say en el agua for both in the water
and on the water. A Czech speaker would use three different prepositions where an English
speaker would use just one:
I'm going to America. = Jedu do Ameriky.
I'm going to Slovakia. = Jedu na Slovensko.
I'm going to Grandma's. — Jedu k babicce.
Or consider the following difference between German and English:
English to = German ZU English at - German an (or เท or be/)
(but) John is at home. — Johann ist ZU Hause.
In addition, there are language-specific gaps when expressing some universal spatial meanings.
For instance, Zelinsky-Wibbelt (1993) notes that compared to English and French, German
is underdetermined with respect to expressing spatial relations with prepositions. Not having
correspondence from one language to the next becomes even more problematic when the
meaning of prepositions is extended beyond expressing spatial relations to establishing
relationships of a more abstract nature.
Consider the following:
English to = French à English for - French pour
(but) a glass for cognac - UN verre à cognac
415
Third, prepositions are polysemous (Taylor, 1993; Tyler & Evans, 2003). One preposition
can have multiple meanings or senses. For example, it would be difficult to provide the exact
same definition for over in each of the following sentences:
The mirror is over the sink.
The path goes over the hills.
He put his hand over his heart.
She has power over me.
We traveled over a hundred miles.
They argued over the meaning of the word.
It can be challenging for learners to keep track of different meanings of a preposition and
to distinguish these meanings from those of other prepositions. For example, how is one to
distinguish the many uses of over from the uses of above?
Then, too, even proficient English speakers exhibit variable performance with regard
to which prepositions they use for a particular meaning. For instance, do you say going out to
lunch or going out for lunch? Do you say symbol of something or symbol for something? Variation in
the language to which English language learners are exposed can cause much confusion on the
part of ESL/EFL students, especially when the use of prepositions by native speakers departs
from what the prescriptive rules dictate. A learner of English shook his head in exasperation
recently when he learned that it was possible to say symbol for something, whereas earlier he
had been taught always to use of in such a context. For instance, students might be told by
their teacher never to include at in the following question:
Where are you at?
Yet, they might hear this question (with at at the end) uttered by English speakers.
The Form of Prepositions
BASIC	--
You have encountered prepositions in prepositional phrases many times thus far in this book.
You have seen that prepositions can follow nouns (the mayor of Philadelphia}, verbs (He ran
up the hill.), and adjectives (She is good at math.). By reviewing the phrase structure rule for a
prepositional phrase, we can make several observations about the form of prepositions.
PrepP -> prep NP
First of all, English prepositions are free morphemes, not bound inflectional affixes
as their counterparts are in many other languages. The reason that prepositions have the
name they do is that they precede nouns—they are pre-positions.This contrasts with other
languages, such as Japanese, that have postpositions, which follow nouns.This is not to say that
English prepositions must always come before nouns. As you have already seen in Chapter 13,
it is possible for a preposition to be “stranded” when a wZr-question word is fronted:
Who(m) are you speaking to?
Where are you from?
Second, the rule tells US that prepositions are followed by NPs. Since the NP is the
“object” of the preposition, if the NP is a pronoun, it is an object pronoun. If it is a verbal
form, it is a gerund:
for us / to me	for cutting cheese / to seeing you
416
The Grammar Book
Third, the symbol “prep” in our rule does not necessarily represent a single word.
Although many prepositions, are single words, some complex prepositions consist of two or
more words that function as single prepositions, such as because of, such as, as for, in regard to,
out of} In fact, some prepositions that once existed as two words have coalesced: into and onto
are examples that readily spring to mind.
The other phrase structure rules that are relevant to our discussion of the form of
prepositions are the ones demonstrating that prepositional phrases follow copular verbs and
certain intransitive verbs and transitive adjectives, where they are needed to complete the VP
and AP, respectively:
cop + prep: The car is in the garage.
Verb + prep: He lay on his side.
Adj + prep: I am averse to the idea.
As noted by Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad, and Finegan (1999), prepositional phrases
can, in some instances, even be premodifiers of nouns. In the following sentence from the
Contemporary Corpus of American English COCA, in your face modifies promotion:
Women's sports goes above the rim with in your face promotion, prime time TV, and
giant corporate sponsors. (ABCNightline, July 24,1997)
CO-OCCURRENCE WITH NOUNS
When it comes to using prepositions, a major challenge for learners is choosing the right one.
This is so often a difficult task because learners need to know more than just the meanings
of prepositions; they need to be familiar with collocational patterns and fixed expressions.
For example, with certain noun phrases that are preceded or followed by a preposition, there
may be only one possible option; examples are in my opinion, to my mind, from my point of view,
objection to, awareness of belief in. Sometimes, noun phrases are both preceded and followed
by prepositions to form multiword clusters, such as with respect to, at odds with, in return for.
Some of these multiword preposition clusters include the following combinations (based on
Frodesen & Eyring, 2007):			
in + noun + of in case of in charge of	on + noun + of on account of on behalf of	เท the 4- noun + of in the course of in the habit of	on the + noun + of on the advice of on the basis of
in favor of	on grounds of	in the name of	on the strength of
As for prepositional phrases that postmodify nouns (e.g., the game of the century), a select			
group of only six prepositions do the vast majority of the work. In their grammar based
on a 40-million word corpus, Biber et al. (1999) report that 90 percent of postmodifying
prepositional phrases begin with of, in, for, on, to, or with, and that of is the most frequent,
accounting for 60-65 percent(pp. 635-637). The high frequency of of is in part explained
by its variety of uses. We have already seen it used to express possession (e.g., the sonnets of
Shakespeare, the son of the well-known politician) and quantification (e.g., a gallon of gas, two cans
of oil). We will see other uses for of in the section on meaning.
Jackendoff (2008) notes a special construction of noun-preposition-noun, in which the
nouns lack determiners. Although a number of idioms fit this description (e.g., head over heels,
hand in glove), the construction to which Jackendoff is referring is used productively with a
limited set of prepositions: by, for, to, after, and upon. There are, however, certain constraints.
Chapter 21: Prepositions
417
Adj + prep
to be dependent on
to be free from/of
to be afraid of
to be sorry for
to be content with
Chief among them, the same noun is used in both positions. This noun is neither in the plural
nor normally considered a noncount noun. So we could have man for man or car after car but
not * *men for men or * water after water.
As was noted in Chapter 3, a number of verbs and adjectives co-occur with particular
prepositions. As such, they should be taught along with the verbs and adjectives. Here are
some examples:
Verb + prep2·3
to rely on
to detract from
to consist of
to substitute for
to part with
There are some cases where the same verb can be used with different prepositions and where
there is little or no change of meaning:
Joe competes with/against his older brother too much.
Sometimes the same verb with two different prepositions will have significantly different
meanings; for example:
provide for: You should provide for your old age now. (make provisions for)
provide NP with: The Red Cross provided US with blankets, (gave blankets to us)
Finally, it is possible for some verbs to be optionally followed by a preposition:
I believe that.	It wasn't at all what she had planned.
I believe in that.	It wasn't at all what she had planned on.
Here, however, there is a meaning difference. Further, the preposition has the effect of
lessening the transitivity of the verb, creating a distance between the verb and its arguments
(O’Dowd, 1994).
DELETION OF PREPOSITIONS	_____
As we have seen before, it is possible to delete the preposition. Sometimes the deletion is
optional; at other times, the preposition must be deleted.
Optional deletion:
•	When the preposition for expresses a span of time:
We have lived here (for) 12 years.
(For) how long have you owned this house?
•	When the preposition on is used before days of the week (when the day is used
alone or when the day of the week modifies another temporal noun such as morning,
afternoon, or nightj:
Brent went cross country skiing (on) Saturday.
He bought a new pair of Skis (on) Friday night.
This is not an acceptable option in British English.
•	In responses to questions that would cue temporal use of in, at, on, or for:
(For) How long have you lived here?	(For) Two years.
When do you wake up? / (At) What time did you wake up?	(At) 6 A.M.
418
The Grammar Book
Obligatory deletion:
•	When the temporal noun phrase contains a determiner used deictically (i.e., as seen
from the perspective of the speaker such as last, next, this1') or when the head noun
of the noun phrase contains before, after, next, last, or this as part of its meaning (e.g.,
yesterday, tomorrow, today, tonight).
I was busy (*on) last Friday.
We will be in Eugene (*on) tonight.
•	When the temporal noun phrase contains a universal quantifier like every or all:
We stayed in Provo (*for) all week.
•	When a locative noun, such as home or downtown, or the pro-adverbs here and there are
used with a verb of motion or direction:5
We went (*to) home.
Phyllis walks (*to) here every day.
LEXICAL COMPOUNDINC
We cited examples of lexical compounds with prepositions in Chapter 3. As a reminder of
the frequent employment of prepositions in compounding, we offer here examples of two
prepositions commonly involved in both noun compounds and verb compounds:
over + noun	over + verb	under + noun	under + verb
overcoat ;	overdo	underdog	underestimate
overlord	overrate	undertow	underrate
overachiever	overeat	undershirt	underscore
oversight	overcome	undergrowth	underwrite
The Meaning of Prepositions
CORE MEANINGSANirPOli^^
At this point, it is appropriate to revisit the concept of prototypicality, which was
introduced in Chapter 3. You will recall that prototypical examples are the best examples
of characteristics that the members of a particular category have in common. Thus,
for example, a robin (to North American English speakers at least) would be a more
prototypical bird than a penguin. Relating this observation to our present concern, we note
that prepositions prototypically deal with locating objects in space. For most prepositions,
a core meaning that signals a relationship between physical entities can be identified. While
their meanings are often extended beyond space, experience has shown that anchoring
the meaning of prepositions in spatial relationships is the first step in helping students
learn to deal with areas where the meaning is more abstract (Boers & Demecheleer, 1998;
Lam, 2009; Matula, 2007). Associating spatial schemata with prepositions, where possible,
also helps teachers avoid a common pitfall, which is to define a preposition using other
prepositions.
As we noted in the introduction to the chapter, prepositions are polysemous. Rather
than viewing one preposition as having multiple unrelated meanings, many linguists
Chapter 21: Prepositions
419
have attempted to map out how a central core meaning is extended over time to include
other related meanings (e.g., Deane, 2005; Lakoff, 1987; Vandeloise, 2003). These related
meanings form a polysemy network (Tyler & Evans, 2003). But first, we begin with core
spatial meanings. Because of our own space limitations, attention is paid mainly to those
prepositions that are most frequent in English: of, in, to, for, 'พith, on, at, by, and from (Francis
& Kucera, 1982).
LOCATING ÃN^^^T^N^ÃCk ———^^
Locating an object in space involves two or more entities. For example, if we say There is a
cottage by the river, we are dealing with the two entities cottage and river. A prepositional phrase
helps to establish a relationship between entities. Taylor (1993) notes that the relationship
is inherently asymmetrical, in that one entity is selected for foregrounding, while the other
entity serves as a background. Langacker (1987) refers to the former as the trajector and the
latter as the landmark. In our example above, the preposition by signals a spatial relationship
between the trajector cottage and the landmark river.
According to Dirven (1993), at, on, and in are the basic and most general place
prepositions. Each signals something about how the landmark is to be understood.
At. At denotes a point of orientation, suggesting the landmark be viewed as a point in space:
Meet me at the corner.
One might ask how a street corner, which seems to be naturally conceptualized as a
two-dimensional or three-dimensional space, can instead be viewed as a point in space.
Lindstromberg (2010) suggests that we take our perspective and zoom out (as we might do
with a Google map). From a distance, the corner becomes just a point with which to orient
ourselves. The following figure represents the core spatial meaning for at, where TR stands
for trajector and LM for landmark:
TR LM
Applying this image to our example sentence above, the meeting (as the trajector) and the
corner (as the landmark) occupy the same point in space.
On. On denotes physical contact between trajector and landmark, necessitating viewing the
landmark as a one-dimensional line or two-dimensional surface:
Don't sit on the desk.
In this case, one might wonder why a three-dimensional desk should be viewed two-
dimensionally. The answer is that the preposition puts into focus the surface of the desk,
which acts as the landmark for the trajector of a sitting person. It should be noted that the
landmark supports the trajector in this core meaning of on. This is reflected in the following
figure, where the trajector is positioned upon the landmark:
---IB---LM
In. In denotes the enclosure of the trajector within the landmark, requiring the landmark be
viewed as a three-dimensional container:
Stephanie is in the room.
420
The Grammar Book
Key to the meaning of in is that the trajector (Stephanie) is contained by the landmark (room).
This is reflected in the figure below:
EXTENSION OF MEANINGS
While the spatial sense of these prepositions is most prototypical, their spatial meanings can be
extended metaphorically from physical to mental space. Further, the “extensions of meanings
of a preposition from physical space via time into more abstract domains do not occur in any
haphazard way but follow a path of gradually increasing abstractions, whereby the link with
each prior meaning remains obvious” (Dirven, 1993, p. 76). Thus, when prepositions are used
in a nonspatial sense, their meanings are not random, but rather are highly motivated.
At. We begin with at. Lindstromberg (2010) presents a number of meanings for this
preposition. Through them, we see how the core spatial meaning of at is extended. Consider
the following:
a.	point along a route: at the first stop, at the journey'ร end
b.	point on à scale: at20,000 feet, at ไ:30
c.	point of focus: look at the stars, don't stare at strangers
d.	target: throw the ball at the player, yell at someone
e.	place for activity: at work, at a competition
It is a small step to go from the core meaning of at to the first two extended meanings above.
All that is necessary is that the landmarks are understood not as isolated points in space but
rather as points along a line. We clearly see metaphor here; the line in (a) is a route and the line
in (b) is a scale marking height or time. The landmark in (c) is not only a point of orientation
but a point of focus. This focus is required in (d) as well, where the landmark is a target. After
all, throwing at someone means trying to hit that person (as opposed to throwing a ball to
the person so that he or she can catch it). In the final extended meaning above (e), we see the
landmark as a point of orientation that signifies some kind of activity. One is presumably at
work in order to carry out work tasks or duties. One is at a competition in order to compete or
to watch the competition.
On. Similar meaning extensions are found with on. Below are some of the extensions discussed
in Lindstromberg (2010):
a.	rotation of vertical axis: a fly on the wall, a fly on the ceiling
b.	exaggerated contact without support: a house on the lake, I live on this street
c.	basis: the outcome depends on what you do
d.	topic: a lecture on free will
e.	burden: put pressure on him, drinks are on me
Starting with a fly on the floor, we see that the spatial meaning of on can be rotated to explain
the examples in (a):
fly on the floor -gçj fly on the wall TRILM fly on the ceiling
Chapter 21: Prepositions
421
In (b), tie sense of contact between the trajector (house) and the landmark (lake) is not literal
and the sense of support is absent (unless, of course, we are talking about a houseboat that
actually floats on the lake). For (c), Lindstromberg notes how the landmark is extended from
something physical to something more abstract. Just as a desk can serve as a base for a sitting
person, what you do in the example serves as the basis for the outcome. The sense of support
from the core meaning of on is crucial here. The case of (d) seems similar. The target is
supported by the landmark. In the example in (d), we expect the lecture to address the topic of
free will and be supported by information, ideas, questions, etc. regarding this topic. In (e), the
senses of contact and support extend to the metaphor of burden. We see a trajector (pressure)
like a physical burden that the landmark (him) must bear.
In. The following meanings for in are also considered in Lindstromberg (2010):
a.	functional inclusion or containment: a stake in the ground, she held a book เท her hands
b.	span of time: in July, เท the morning
c.	action in time: complete the task in 30 minutes, the train leaves in i0 minutes
d.	state: in love, เท frustration
e.	path,or movement: walked in the mall
In (a), we see an extension from the core meaning of complete enclosure of the trajector
within the landmark to one of partial enclosure. For example, with a stake in the ground, part
of the stake is probably sticking out above the ground. Enough of the stake, however, is in
the ground that we understand it to be functionally contained by the ground. In is often
used when talking about time. Such use, as in (b), treats spans of time like containers. These
serve as landmarks that enclose the trajectors. Note how this is different from expressions
that use on (e.g., on July 4th), which Yule (1998) suggests signify a more restricted period or
unit of time. Lindstromberg points out that when phrases such as morning or afternoon are
followed by specifying phrases, they prefer the preposition on (e.g, on the morning of the 4th).
He speculates that the postmodified specification gives US a more distant perspective. Rather
than morning as a container in which a trajector may be enclosed, it is perceived as a unit of
time—one morning distinct from mornings on other dates.
When using in for actions in time (c), we see two different meanings. In the first, an
action will be performed and completed before the period of time ends (complete the task in
30 minutes). This fits well with the preposition’s core meaning of containment. The trajector
(completion of the task) is enclosed in the landmark (a period of 30 minutes). The second
meaning suggests that the action will be performed after the period of time ends (the train leaves
in 10 minutes). This is an extension of the core meaning; the trajector (the train’s departure)
sits at the edge of the landmark (a period of 10 minutes). Prepositional phrases like those in
(d) reflect the common metaphor in which states are containers (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980).
Into. Prepositional^, phrases in (e) can be contrasted with those that start with into. As
Lindstromberg explains, in emphasizes containment, whereas into emphasizes the path to
containment. For instance, walking into the mall suggests that the activity started outside and
ended inside the mall, while walking in the mall could have started outside or could have been
performed entirely inside the walls of the mall.
OTH ERF REQU ENTSPAT^^
We now briefly consider four other frequently occurring prepositions (to, with, by, from)
and examine how the core spatial meaning of each preposition can be related to additional
nonspatial meanings.
422
The Grammar Book
To. The core spatial meaning of to is represented in the following figure:
TR ►•lm
The horizontal arrow pointing toward the dot signals that the trajector is oriented toward
the landmark. As such, the landmark may be understood as the goal for the movement of the
trajector:
Reach to the right.
Tyler and Evans (2003) discuss a number of extended meanings of to and give the following
examples:
a.	location: เท this picture, Diana is standing to my left.
b.	contact: Apply the soap directly to the stain for best results.
c.	attachment: He added a fence to the garden.
d.	event: The captain went to the boaters' rescue.
e.	comparison: The design of this sweater is inferior to that one.
It can be noted that (a) differs from the core spatial meaning because the trajector (Diana) is
not necessarily oriented toward the landmark. For each of the meanings (b-d), it seems the
target moves or is moved toward the landmark with the purpose of achieving a goal. Tyler and
Evans point out that when making comparisons, we often move one object closer to another
in order to examine both. This might explain how the use of to in (e) developed to eventually
include comparisons where there is no movement.
With. The spatial meaning of with involves proximity, but with the additional sense that the
trajector and landmark are related to each other as part of a functional group. Lindstromberg
(2010, p. 215) gives the following examples to emphasize this:
Anne's over there with Jane.
Anne's in her room with a book.
?Anne's in the garden with a table.
The first two sentences are fine because it is easy to picture a functional group of two people
talking, or of a reader and a book. The last sentence, however, sounds a bit odd because a
person and a table are not so easily understood as part of a typical functional group. In the
figure below, the two dots near each other represent the trajector and the landmark:
	
TR.·	*LM
The surrounding square signals that the trajector and the landmark are somehow related.
We can think of the square as framing a functional group. Lindstromberg calls such groups
“ensembles” and shows how these are crucial to extended meanings of with. Here are some
of those meanings:
a.	part: a desk with four legs
b.	possession: a family with two dogs
c.	material: to work with stone
d.	device: to cut with a knife
e.	manner, to walk with a limp
f.	ingredient: a curry with chicken and vegetables
For each of these, we see an ensemble. It may be an ensemble for a thing (e.g., a desk and its
parts) or for an activity (e.g., stonework and material).
Chapter 21: Prepositions
423
By. The spatial meaning of by, like that of with, involves proximity. Consider the following
examples:
a house by the sea
the parking lot by the stadium
a camp by the lake
It is understood that there is not much distance between house and sea, between parking lot
and stadium, and between camp and lake. Lindstromberg (2010) observes that the location
for the relationship between the trajector and the landmark is situated on a horizontal plane.
For instance, by sounds odd in a scenario where we are dealing with a vertical orientation
such as:
?The crane is by the top of the building.
The crane is near the top of the building.
The following figure emphasizes viewing the trajector and the landmark on a horizontal plane:
TR* *LM
บทlike near, by allows for the possibility of contact between the trajector and the landmark.
Lindstromberg (2010) points out that you can take somebody by the hand but not near the hand.
When used with verbs of movement, by can signal that the trajector goes near the landmark
and continues past it:
We drove by the accident.
Given the possibility of contact, the trajector may spend time at the landmark before resuming
its movement:
I went by the post office to mail the letter.
Notice how odd the sentence would sound if we used near instead of by. Some of the nonspatial
extended meanings of by include:
a.	passing time or gradual increase: day by day, little by little
b.	deadline: complete the assignment by Decembers 1st
c.	means or manner: by train, by wrapping duct tape around it
d.	rate or amount of change: fell by 10%, break the record by 5 seconds
In (a), we see a metaphorical extension where the passing of time and the increasing of
quantity are viewed as movement along a path. For example, we can imagine a series of days
one after another, stretching out into the future along a horizontal path. The meaning in
(b) also contains metaphorical movement along a path, but here it is understood that the
trajector will not continue on past the landmark. The extended meaning of means or manner
in (c) may have come about from the sense of path in combination with the allowance of
contact between the trajector and the landmark. To go somewhere by train, after all, one
needs to board a train physically. The meaning in (d) might be considered an extension of
manner. For example:
How did the stock market fall? Rapidly, dramatically, by 10%!
From. From is a source preposition that denotes separation from a point of orientation.
The follywing figure shows that we can view the core spatial meaning of from as the
reverse of to·.
LM*	kTR
424
The Grammar Book
The dot, as the landmark, represents the place or source from which the trajector has moved.
As such, from may be used to express changes in location:
We walked from Victoria station to Buckingham Palace.
In the sentence above, both Victoria Station and Buckingham Palace are treated as points of
orientation. If we wanted to emphasize the three-dimensional nature of these buildings, we
might instead say:
We walked out of Victoria Station and into Buckingham Palace.
Of course, we can talk about source without mentioning goal:
Anna is from Italy.
Here the landmark Italy is the point of orientation for the trajector Ama. The change of
location suggested by from is extended to reflect changes in time or state:
The festival lasted from Thursday to Sunday.
Paper is made from wood.
In the first sentence, the landmark (Thursday) is the starting point for the festival; in the
second sentence, the landmark ('wood) is the source from which the process of papermaking
begins. In the following sentence, we see that source can be extended to cause:
The dog is wet from the rain.
Over/Above. Some prepositions have similar meanings and can often be used interchangeably
in certain contexts:
The ceiling is over/above our heads.
In other contexts, however, such prepositions carry different meanings:
They raced over the bridge.
They raced above the bridge.
Those racing in the first sentence might be runners or bicyclists; they physically cross the
bridge. In the second sentence, we are more likely to imagine airplanes or birds; they cross
the bridge in the air without touching it. Tyler and Evans (2003) propose a difference in the
core meanings of these two prepositions; while both prototypically mean that the trajector
is higher than the landmark, over suggests the trajector is “within potential reach” and above
suggests the trajector is “not within potential reach” (p. 111).
This subtle difference in the core meaning (the presence or absence of potential contact
between the trajector and the landmark) translates to differences in the polysemy networks of
over and above. For example, we see a “covering” meaning in some uses of over:
Put the sheet over the couch.
?Put the sheet above the couch.
Given the absence of contact in the meaning of above, the sheet in the second sentence would
be suspended in air. Among other examples of differences in meaning between over and above,
Tyler and Evans (2003) provide the following sentences:
Camilla has authority over/?above purchasing.
The nearest bridge is about half a mile above/?over the falls.
While a higher vertical position is often associated with a position of control or authority,
control usually requires close proximity or even contact. Thus, over is preferred in the first
sentence. In the second sentence, an emphasis on distance (rather than proximity) favors
above. In effect, we see how meaning differences between prepositions can be related back to
their core meanings.
Chapter 21: Prepositions
425
NONSPATIAL PREPOSITIONS
Two prepositions that happen to be among the most frequent words in English, of and
for, don’t have as obvious a prototypical spatial sense as do other common prepositions.
Of. Of originally had a meaning that expressed separation in Old English, but over time,
this spatial meaning disappeared (Lindstromberg, 2010). Today, this preposition, as
noted by Langacker (2008), signals an intrinsic relationship between the trajector and
the landmark. To represent the core meaning for of the figure below is adapted from Tyler
and Evans (2003):
In this figure, the trajector signified by the dot is part of the landmark signified by the square.
Lindstromberg (2010) discusses the “integrative function” of of in which the preposition
integrates the trajector and the landmark. Here are some of the examples of integration that
he provides (pp. 205-208):
a.	part - whole: the eye of a storm, the meaning of a word
b.	product - source: a product of France, a result of hard work
c.	act(ion) - agent: the howling of dogs, an act of a fool
d.	act(ion) - patient: the delivery of goods
e.	subset - set: a kind/type/sort/variety/brand/make/breed ofx
f.	example - type: a sample/specimen/piece/bit of tissue
g.	group/amount/unit - entities/stuff/emotion/action: a herd of cows, a bit of patience
Thompson (1992) proposed the following three basic, more general meanings for of:
1.	concerning; about
a story of a princess
They told of her heroism.
2.	derived or coming from (X of Y)
the President of the United States
the headlights of the car
3.	having (Y of X)
a man of courage
a mother of two
Analyzing the use of of in authentfotexts, both written and oral, Thompson was able to assign
61 percent of the instances of of to one of the three basic meanings. When of was spoken, it
was most often used for the second meaning. The written samples had a wider distribution
of use—although the second meaning was still used in the majority of samples, followed
by the first and then the third, of the instances of the second meaning, most common was
its possessive or genitive use (e.g., the views of the chairman, the umbrellas of Christo) and its
partitive use (e.g., a can of worms), accounting for 42 percent of the samples, followed by its
originating use (e.g., the people of Uganda), which made up 25 percent of the samples.
426
The Grammar Book
It should be possible for learners to map any of these meanings for of to the figure for
of above. While doing so may take a bit of creativity, it may help to impart the idea that there
is some consistency in meaning (albeit abstract) behind the various uses of this nonspatial
preposition.
For. The same approach can be taken with for, another preposition with a range of
nonspatial meanings. Tyler and Evans (2003) note that “the preponderance of senses
associated with for are primarily concerned with motives, intentions and purposes”
(p. 153). The following figure is an attempt to reflect this intentional aspect found in the core
meaning offor:
TR--------^LM
As in the figure for to, the horizontal arrow pointing toward the dot signals that the trajector
is oriented towards the landmark. In this figure, however, the small vertical arrow atop the
dot signals that the landmark is not the singular goal for the (metaphorical) movement of
the trajector. That is, the trajector does not move toward the landmark simply to reach the
landmark; rather, the trajector moves to the landmark in order to achieve a larger purpose or
intention. Tyler and Evans (2003) consider the following nonspatial meanings oifor:
a.	purpose: She returned for the prize.
b.	intended recipient: Susan bought the gown for Carol.
c.	benefit: She raised money for charity.
In these examples, the landmarks (prize, Carol, charity) correspond to the achievement of
intentions (that a prize be claimed, that Carol possess a new dress, that charity benefit from
donations). Even in uses oifor that are seemingly spatial in meaning, the goals for the travel
(i.e., the hills and Alaska) are related to the TR’s purpose or intention:
They headed for the hills.
She set out for Alaska.
Although the trajectors given here may never reach the landmarks, what is critical is that the
trajectors intend to reach them.
SEMANTICS OF CASE
Another approach to the meaning of prepositions is to examine the second of their major
functions. In addition to expressing spatial relationships and their extended meanings,
prepositions can be used to assign case; i.e., to mark roles that relate sentence constituents.
Fillmore (1968) describes many uses of prepositions as being caselike in nature. We have
borrowed his semantic cases and have added a few others that we feel are useful. Note
that a preposition may signal more than one semantic case6 and that only highly frequent
prepositions signal cases. We do not claim that this list is an exhaustive one for semantic cases
in English:
ใ. by (agentive): It was composed by Tchaikovsky.
2.	by (means): We went there by bus.7
3.	for (benefactive): I bought the gift for Marty.
4.	for (proxy): He manages the store for the Bakers.
5.	from (ablative): Sherry bought the car from Dave.
6.	from (source): Maria is from Mexico.
Chapter 21: Prepositions
427
7.	of (eliciting): He asked a favor of US.
8.	of (separation): They cleared the field of trash.
9.	of (genitive): The hood of the car was dented.
10.	to (dative): I gave the hat I was knitting to my best friend.
11.	to (direction, goal): We drove to Charlotte, North Carolina.
12.	with (instrument): He broke the window with a rock.
13.	with (comitative): I went to town with Jack.
14.	with (joining): The storm covered the mountains with snow.
In some types of sentences, the order of cases is significant with respect to the prepositions
that occur:
Unmarked order: Craig planted beans in his yard. (- somewhere in his yard)
agent patient locative
Marked order: Craig planted his yard with beans. (= all over his yard)
agent	locative patient
Here, the noun functioning as patient, or the thing affected by the action of the verb
(i.e., beans'), normally does not take a preposition; however, it does take with when a marked
order of cases occurs, altering the meaning of the sentence somewhat. Conversely, the locative
in his yard takes the preposition in when the normal order of cases is followed, but it does not
when the marked order occurs.The following pair is another example of this phenomenon:
Unmarked order: Meg emptied the groceries out of the beg. (= one by one, no rush implied)
agent	patient locative
Marked order: Meg emptied the bag of groceries. (= quickly, all at once)
agent locative patient
The verbs and the underlying cases of the nouns remain the same. However, the meaning
of the sentence changes slightly. In each of the marked orders, the action emphasizes the
completeness of the patient with regard to the location—with signals that the patient
completely covers the location, and of separates the patient completely from the location.
MORE PREPOSITIONS
We close this section with the following chart, which gives a glimpse of spatial meanings and
extended meanings for other common prepositions. The chart is only partial; more meanings
exist for each of the prepositions listed. An unabridged dictionary is a helpful resource for
identifying all the meanings of a particular preposition. Lindstromberg (2010) is another
excellent source for meanings of prepositions.
	Space	Time	Degree/Quantity	Other
about	trajector moves all around landmark: He ran about the yard.	approximately: about 1 o'clock	approximately: about 70 degrees	concerning: a book about mathematics
against	trajector in firm contact with landmark:The ladder leaned against the wall.	conflict: to work against the clock	conflict: two against four	highlight: against a background of...
The Grammar Book
428
	Space	Time	Degree/Quantity	Other
around	circular or semicircular movement oftrajector in relation to landmark: The wind blew around the treetop.	approximately: around 1 o'clock	approximately: around $2	aimless movement: to stroll around the grounds
before	trajector เท front of landmark: He stood before US.	earlier than: before 1960	preceding place on scale: 11 comes before 12.	in front of powerful landmark: before the committee
below	trajector lower than, and notin potential contact with, landmark: below the surface		less than: below zero	less good: performed below expectations
between	trajector at intermediate point in relation to two landmarks: between the house and the street	time period: between 1 and 2 o'clock	range: between 100 and 110 lbs	discernment: to choose between right and wrong
near	trajector close to and , not in contact with ■ landmark: the tree near the house	close to: near midnight	close to: near 100 degrees	close to a state: near consciousness
past	movement oftrajector near landmark and beyond: She ran past the sign.	after: quarter past 10		orientation: The castle is past the cathedral.
through	movement oftrajector into and then outside oflandmark:The plane flew through the cloud.	duration: through the years		experience negative situation: to go through an ordeal
toward(s) (toward is preferred in Am. E., towards in Br. E.)	movement oftrajector in direction of landmark: They walked toward the wall.	approaching time of day: toward morning	movement on scale: toward 0 degrees Celsius	orientation: seats toward the back
under	trajector lower than and เท potential contact with landmark:The basement is under the house.	less than: to take under an hour	less than: under $20	unpleasant condition: under attack
Chapter 21: Prepositions
429
The Use of Prepositions
VARIATION IN~iisi	———  
As we noted at the outset of this chapter, there are issues of use as well concerning prepositions.
For one thing, there appear to be instances (like the ceiling over/above our heads) where more
than one preposition is acceptable in a given context. Here are some other instances:
spatial proximity: a house near/by the lake
time/degree approximation: happened around/about 10 o'clock; cost around/about $ 100
telling time: a quarter to/often (of for telling time is not used in British English!
telling time: a quarter after/past ten
location along something linear: the towns on/along the Rhine
temporal termination: work from 9 until/till/to 5
location lower than something: below/beneath/under/underneath the stairs
location adjacent: next to/beside the stream
The prepositions in each set here appear to have the same meaning. Yet, we should remember that
the interchangeability of prepositions is restricted. These prepositions are not interchangeable
in all contexts—as we saw earlier with racing over/above the bridge. Furthermore, the choice of
prepositions within a set may be subject to dialect variation. Not all speakers of English will
accept all the alternatives that we propose here.
Throughout this book, we have been invoking the linguistic principle that a language will
not tolerate having more than one form with exactly the same meaning and use. It is possible
that this principle does not always apply synchronically. While languages do not permit the
uneconomic situation of having more than one form with the same meaning and use, languages
do change, and at any one point in time, it is possible that one or more of the redundant forms is
in the process of dying out with the other(s) remaining or gradually becoming more common.
CO-OCCURRENCE AND PREPOSITIONS
According to Kennedy (1991), it is important to study the “linguistic ecology” of prepositions. One
way to do so is to use computer corpora. Kennedy examined the Lancaster-Oslo/Bergen (LOB)
corpus for incidence of the prepositions between and àvAglr. Although their meanings sometimes
overlap, his analysis revealed that there was a striking difference between the words that these
two prepositions co-occur with. Kennedy found that nouns typically precede between (difference
between), whereas verbs are the most common word class preceding through (flash through).8 In
fact, a quick check of the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA) reveals that the
most frequent word to occur immediately before each preposition fits this collocational pattern:
between is most frequently preceded by relationship, and through is most frequently preceded by go.
Both between and through are most commonly used in their spatial senses; however,
other nonphysical relations are also very frequent. For example, between may be used to
signify interaction (communication between management and employees), comparison (there is
little to choose between the two), sirnilarity (the important parallel between Handel and Beethoven),
and difference (the discrepancy between expected and observed scores), while through may be used
to express means (through the medium of the English language) or causation (dilapidation through
lack of maintenance). Kennedy (1991) goes on to point out that while grammars and dictionaries
already provide descriptively adequate accounts of the grammatical functions and possible
430
The Grammar Book
meanings in context of between and through, corpus study goes beyond systemic possibility by
adding to linguistic description a statistical dimension based on use in context.
The statistical dimension of corpus work has implications for how prepositions are taught.
Kennedy (1991) suggests that to treat prepositions as roughly substitutable parts of speech can
be very misleading. As we noted in Chapter 3, we may not have as open a choice as we think
in the words that we use in grammatical frames. It may be then that we shouldn’t teach certain
prepositions in isolation but rather teach them in relation to their occurrence with other words.
Kennedy (1990), for instance, in studying the preposition at accounted for 43 percent of its
2576 tokens.
Indeed, Mueller (2011) found that Chinese, Korean, and Spanish-speaking English
learners performed better when they had to supply a preposition on a fill-in-the-blank test
if the preposition appeared in frequently-occurring phrases than when it appeared in less
commonly used ones [frequencies attested to by the BNC and the American National Corpus
(Reppen, Ide, & Sunderman, 2005)]. For example, students used “with” more often in the
second item than the first reportedly because the co-occurrence of happy and with is more
common than upset and with.
My brother is upset with his girlfriend.
I don't think he is very happy with her grades.
Mueller claimed that “even fairly advanced learners” behaved similarly.
Then, too, Taylor (2002; 2004; 2012) has identified certain productive collocations,
which could be taught to English learners. For instance, a useful one with a preposition that
we have already mentioned is X by X, where X is a unit of measurement and the construction
itself relates to rate at which a process unfolds, e.g., day by day, page by page, moment by moment.
PREPOSITIONS: A MULTILEVEL STRATEGY
Another finding from Kennedy (1991) will allow US to segue to our final point in this chapter.
Kennedy observes that the traditional rule that tells English speakers to use between with
two entities and among with more than two is not observed in the LOB corpus. Between is
frequently used where among might be expected; for example:
[he] would help to establish an enduring peace between nations
In keeping with the previous discussion on the value of using corpora to conduct linguistic
research,Todaka (1996) analyzed instances of between and among in the Brown corpus. Todaka
agrees that the traditional prescriptive rule has some influence, but he says that it does not
fully reflect the distribution of these two prepositions in the data.Therefore, he recommends a
multilevel strategy. At the word level, the central sense that differentiates the two prepositions
is that objects with the semantic features of [+ explicit, + separable] take between; when the
objects are conceived as [+ collective], among is used:
A quarrel between the six attorneys... (the attorneys are explicit and are seen as individuals)
Among the recipients of the Nobel Prize for Literature, more than half are practically
unknown to readers of English, (the recipients of the Nobel Prize are seen collectively)
At the phrase/sentence level, it is possible to account for some of the instances that cannot be
explained through the semantic feature analysis by examining their occurrence in collocations.
For one thing, between takes leftward collocations and among takes rightward collocations:
a relation between: among others
a distinction between: among + plural noun + on the whole (e.g., among
English-speaking people on the whole)
a distance between: among + ranking adjective (e.g., among the best)
Chapter 21: Prepositions
431
Then, according to Tod aha, at the level of discourse, what determines the choice of
prepositions, when it can’t be explained by semantic features or collocations, is whether or
not the object’s individual members are identifiable from the discourse context. When they
aren’t, among is more likely to be used:
among all Western Hemisphere languages (the individual languages are not identifiable
from the context)
When the object’s members are identifiable, between is used:
... And lastly, with hypnotherapist and client, there rarely is an affective bond
established, whereas in faith healing there almost always is a terrific bond that forms
immediately between people.
The object, people, is [-explicit]. However, between is used because it is clear from the
context that the people to whom the speaker is referring are the faith healer and the people
consulting the healer. As such, the individuals referred to in the object are identifiable,
while not necessarily explicit.
Conclusion
It may be more obvious now that you’ve read this chapter why prepositions cause such
difficulty for ESL/EFL students. Even relatively advanced-level students continue to omit
the preposition, as in
*1 served the army until June 2004.
(in)
or use the wrong preposition, as in
*lt is predicted that the degree to social adaptation will determine...
(of)
or use a superfluous preposition, as in
*1 studied in biology for three years.
(0 (or majored in?))
Nonetheless, as we have tried to show in this chapter, there is discernible systematicity
in how the core meaning of certain prepositions is extended beyond representing spatial
relationships. Calling attention to it where it exists will doubtless lighten the learning burden.
Perhaps learning the various meanings and meaning extensions of prepositions is the
greatest challenge. However, a pedagogical strategy that enables students to pay attention to
their co-occurrence, collocational, and discourse behavior will no doubt facilitate learners’
acquisition of these difficult lexicogrammatical forms.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form. Distinguishing between obligatory and optional deletion of prepositions can be a
challenge for beginning and intermediate level learners. To practice this skill, ask students
to determine which sentences are acceptable from a list such as this:
On Saturday we went shopping.
*On yesterday we went swimming.
Tomorrow we will go hiking.
*On every day we have done something interesting.
432
The Grammar Book
2.	Meaning. To help students learn spatial meanings and make basic distinctions between
prepositions, a chart with iconic images (like the figures presented in the “Meaning”
section of this chapter) can be used in class. Such a chart can assist learners in making
connections between the choice of preposition and the dimensions of the landmark.
As Yule (1998) suggests, students can be asked if reference points (landmarks) should
be considered as points, surfaces, or areas (p. 163). For example, what is the best
conceptualization for beach and water in these sentences?
We were at the beach.//We were on the beach.
We saw some boats in the water. // We saw some boats on the water.
3.	Meaning. Clay modeling can also be used to emphasize spatial relationships. Serrano-
Lopez and Poehner (2008) asked learners of Spanish to make models that reflected
underlying spatial concepts for Spanish prepositions. They can then be guided to create
models for English prepositions. In creating their own three-dimensional representations,
students are able to explore relationships between trajectors and landmarks in a very
hands-on way.
4.	Meaning. Various techniques exist for training students to see the core meaning of
a preposition within different uses of that preposition. Tyler and Evans (2004) make
suggestions for how to present extended senses for over. For the sense of A-B-C trajectory,
they recommend using a flip book (or a video clip that can be segmented into individual
frames) with images of a cat jumping over a wall. After showing all the images of the cat
moving from one side of the wall (point A) to the other side of the wall (point C), ask
students how the cat moved to point c. Then focus on the pages (or frames) where the cat
is suspended over the obstacle of the wall (point B). Note that these images correspond to
the core meaning of over, and that to use the preposition for this extended sense, the cat
must land on the other.side of the wall.
Yule (1998) encourages learners to examine prepositions used in time expressions
(e.g., at 10 o’clock, on September 3rd, in January) and to think about the landmarks
within the prepositional phrases. How should the landmarks be perceived? Should
they be conceptualized as a specific point in time (10 o’clock), a restricted unit of time
(1September 3rd), or an extended period of time (January)? This activity can be continued
by asking learners to sketch the landmarks in a way that represents the core spatial
meanings of the prepositions. Thus, 10 0 ’clock might be drawn as a dot—reflecting the
landmark of at as a point of orientation, September 3n/ as a flat square—reflecting
the landmark of on as a two-dimensional surface, and January as a box—reflecting the
landmark of in as a three-dimensional container. Such sketches should help learners make
connections between spatial and more abstract meanings of prepositions.
5.	Meaning. Lindstromberg (1996) outlines a systematic approach to teaching the
prototypical meanings of the prepositions,9 and how to treat their more abstract meanings
derived by metaphorical extensions. He illustrates his approach with the preposition on.
We don’t have the space to report every step of the approach, but here is a synopsis.
Lindstromberg first uses classic approaches, such as the use of Total Physical Response
and schemata, to make the protypical place and goal meaning of a preposition clear; for
example:
Chapter 2Ί: Prepositions
433
Put it on the table.
Later, also using pictures, he introduces more metaphorical extensions:
• on = about or concerning·. An article on holidays in France
• the burden metaphor: The engine died on US.
• the basis metaphor: The argument is based on copious data.
• the vehicle metaphor: It's hard to get through the day on one sandwich.
Finally, along the way, Lindstromberg contrasts prepositions with overlapping meanings,
such as on top of versus on. As Lindstromberg himself notes, the use of schemata to represent
prepositional meaning long predates prototype theory. However, what may be innovative is to
use a schemata series to show how the prototype meaning holds throughout its metaphorical
extensions.
6.	Meaning. Anotherwidelyusedtechnique for giving students practice in using prepositions
to express spatial relationships is to ask students to draw pictures or manipulate bits of
paper to create designs. Give~eàch student five pieces of paper in the shapes of a triangle,
square, circle, star, and rectangle. Then ask students to pair up. Ask Student A to arrange
the shapes in any pattern he or she likes. Student B does not watch.Then Student B has
to try to construct the same, pattern that Student A has created following A’s directions.
ThL students are seated back to back. When the five pieces of paper have been placed, the
students should compare A’s original to B’s copy. Then it is B’s turn to create and describe
a new pattern for A.
434
The Grammar Book
7.	Meaning. Given the numerous meanings or senses that one preposition can convey,
learners regularly encounter unexpected uses of prepositions. Such experiences can be
discussed and explored in the classroom. Ask students to look through texts outside of
class and to collect one or two uses of a preposition that they find strange or unexpected.
Back in class, have students share their examples and challenge them to make connections
to core meanings. Doing so often allows students to consider metaphor and metaphoric
extensions in language. If you have your own classroom, you may wish to keep a
“preposition chart,” to which you or the students can add examples from time to time.
8.	Use. Because of restricted collocation patterns, learners often have difficulty choosing the
right preposition. Dictionaries that include information on collocations can be a useful
tool for choosing prepositions appropriately. Online concordances, like the one found at
Tom Cobb’s Compleat Lexical Tutor (http://www.lextutor.ca/), are another helpful tool.
Encourage students to do their own concordances and to try to identify patterns. For
example, if a student is trying to decide between using central to and central for, he or she
could perform concordances for each and find that the former is the preferred collocation.
In another example, a student could compare arrive at with arrive in. A concordance should
reveal that the former tends to be used with buildings and events (e.g., arrive at a hotel, at a
party) and more abstract entities (e.g., arrive at the answer, arrive at a good decision), while the
latter appears more often with cities, states, and countries (e.g., arrive in New York, arrive in
Guatemala).
9.	Use. For reviewing prepositions, find a short biographical statement of someone of
interest to your students. Delete all the prepositions, which will primarily refer to time and
place. Have your students work in pairs or small groups to fill in the missing prepositions.
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1.	Provide an original sentence illustrating each of the following terms. Underline the
pertinent word(s) or word parts in your example:
a.	complex preposition
b.	deletable preposition
(i.) optional
(ii.) obligatory
c.	literal spatial meaning of in
d.	metaphorical extension of in
e.	collocation with preposition
f.	preposition-noun-preposition construction
g.	co-occurring verb and preposition
h.	co-occurring adjective and preposition
2.	Identify the trajectors and landmarks for the following prepositional phrases:
a.	I saw the computer on the desk.
b.	This is a time for healing.
Chapter 21: Prepositions	435
c.	Lessons in managing one’s anger are helpful.
d.	In our house is a large piano.
e.	The game began with the referee’s whistle.
Test your ability to apply what you know.
3.	If your students produce the following sentences, what norms of Standard English
have they not followed?
a.	*We discussed about our plans.
b.	*stuart lives on 160 Western Avenue.
c.	*Because of the teacher gave US a lot of homework, I can’t go.
d.	*After my evening class, I went to home.
e.	I live in Washington, D.c. *1 like living in here.
4.	A student asks you what of means in the following sentence. What would your answer
be?
It's just the tip of the iceberg.
5.	There are several pairs of prepositions that ESL/EFL students often confuse:
Source meanings of from and out of:
Paper is made from wood, (source not visibly obvious)
This table is made (out) of wood, (source visibly obvious)
Temporal meaning of in and within:
Come back in 30 minutes. (30 minutes from now)
Come back within 30 minutes, (between now and 30 minutes from now)
Since/For to express spans of time:
I have lived here since 1960. (refers to beginning of span)
I have lived here for decades, (refers to duration of span)
Choose one of these and create an exercise that would help students to detect the
difference and be able to use them correctly.
6.	Describe spatial meanings and nonspatial meaning extensions for prepositions not
treated in detail in the chapter (such as under/
7.	How is the following sentence ambiguous?
I'll tell you the story in five minutes or less.
8.	A great number of idioms include prepositions. Think of a few such idioms (e.g., at a
moment’s notice, on the dot, in a, hurry, by the way, etc.) and see if you can make any
connections between the meanings of the idioms and the core spatial meanings of
prepositions.	--
436
The Grammar Book
Bibliography
REFERENCES	_________________________________________
Biber, D., Johansson, ร., Leech, G., Conrad, ร., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar ofspoken and
written English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ltd.
Boers, E, & Demecheleer, M. (1998). A cognitive semantic approach to teaching prepositions. ELT Journal,
52(3), 197-204.
Davies, M. (2008). The corpus of contemporary American English (COCA): 425 million 'พords, 1990-present.
Retrieved from http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/
Deane, p. D. (2005). Multimodal spatial representation: On the semantic unity of over. In B. Hampe &
J. E. Grady (Eds.), From perception to meaning: Image schemas in cognitive linguistics (pp. 235-284). Berlin,
Germany: Mouton de Gruyter.
Dirven, R. (1993). Dividing up physical and mental space into conceptual categories by means of English
prepositions. In c. Zelinsky-Wibbelt (Ed.), The semantics of prepositions: From mental processing to natural
language processing: Natural language processing (Vol. 3, pp. 73-97). The Hague, Netherlands: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Fillmore, c. J. (1968). The case for case. In E. Bach & R. Harms (Eds.), Universals in linguistic theory
(pp. 1-90). New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Francis, พ. N., & Kucera, H. (1982). Frequency analysis of English usage. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Jackendoff, R. (2008). Construction after construction and its theoretical challenges. Language, 84(1), 8-28.
Kennedy, G. (1990). Collocations: Where grammar and vocabulary teaching meet. In ร. Anivan (Ed.),
Language teaching methodology for the nineties (pp. 212-229). Singapore: RELC.
Kennedy, G. (1991). Between and through·. The company they keep and the functions they serve. In K.
Aijmer & B. Altenberg (Eds.), English corpus linguistics (pp. 95-110). London, England: Longman.
Lakoff, G. (1987). พomen, fire, and dangerous things. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Lam, Y. (2009). Applying cognitive linguistics to teaching the Spanish prepositions por and para.Language
Awareness, 18(1), 2-18.
Langacker, R. พ. (1987). Theoretical prerequisites: Foundations of cognitive grammar (Vol. 1). Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Langacker, R. พ. (2008). The relevance of cognitive grammar for language pedagogy. In ร. De Knop & T
De Rycker (Eds.), Cognitive approaches to pedagogical grammar: A Volume in Honour of René Dirven
(pp. 7-35). Berlin, Germany: Mouton de Gruyter.
Lindstromberg, ร. (1996). Prepositions: Meaning and method. ELT Journal, 50(3), 225-236.
Lindstromberg, ร. (2010). English prepositions explained (Rev. ed.). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John
Benjamins.
Matula, ร. (2007). Incorporating a cognitive linguistic presentation of the prepositions on, in, and at in ESL
instruction: A quasi-experimental study (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Georgetown University,
Washington, DC.
Mueller, c. M. (2011). English learners’ knowledge of prepositions: Collocational knowledge or knowledge
based on meaning? System, 39(4), 480-490.
O’Dowd, E. (1994). Prepositions and particles in English: A discourse-based, unifying account (Doctoral
dissertation). University of Colorado, Boulder, co.
Rauh, G. (1993). On the grammar of lexical and non-lexical prepositions in English. In c. Zelinsky-
Wibbelt (Ed.), The semantics of prepositions: From mental processing to natural language processing: Natural
language processing (Vol. 3, pp. 99-149). The Hague, Netherlands: Mouton de Gruyter.
Chapter 21: Prepositions
437
Reppen, R., Ide, N., & s underman, K. (2005). American National Corpus (Second Release). Philadelphia,
PA: Linguistic Data Consortium.
Serrano-Lopez, M., & Poehner, Μ. E. (2008). Materializing linguistic concepts through 3D clay modeling:
A tool-and-result approach to mediating L2 Spanish development. In J. p. Lantolf & E. M. Poehner
(Eds.), Sociocultural theory and the teaching of second languages (pp. 321-346). London, England: Equinox.
Taylor, J. (1993). Prepositions: Patterns of polysemization and strategies of disambiguation. In c. Zelinsky-
Wibbelt (Ed.), The semantics of prepositions: From mental processing to natural language processing: Natural
language processing (Vol. 3, pp. 151-175).The Hague, Netherlands: Mouton de Gruyter.
Taylor, J. (2002). Cognitive grammar. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Taylor, J. (2004). The ecology of constructions. In G. Radden & K.-U. Panther (Eds.), Cognitive
linguistics research: Studies in linguistic motivation (pp. 50-73). Berlin, Germany: Mouton De Gruyter.
Taylor, J. (2012). The mental corpus: How language is represented in the brain. Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press.
Thompson, B. (1992). Of: Common, Complex, and ? Definable (Unpublished independent professional
project). School for International Training, Brattleboro, VT.
Todaka, Y (1996). Between and among: A data-based analysis. Word, 47(1), 14—40.
Tyler, A., & Evans, V. (2003). The sem.antics of English prepositions: spatial scenes, embodied meaning and
cognition. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Tyler, A., & Evans, V. (2004). Applying cognitive linguistics to pedagogical grammar: The case of over. In
M. Achard & ร. Niemeier (Eds.), Cognitive linguistics, second language acquisition, and foreign language
teaching (pp. 257-280). Berlin, Germany: Mouton de Gruyter.
Vandeloise, c. (2003). Containment, support, and linguistic relativity. In H. Cuyckens, R. Dirven, &
J. R. Taylor (Eds.), Cognitive approaches to lexical semantics (pp. 393-425). Berlin, Germany: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Yule, G. (1998). Explaining English grammar. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Zelinsky-Wibbelt, c. (Ed.). (1993). The semantics of prepositions: From mental processing to natural language
processing: Natural language processing (Vol. 3). The Hague, Netherlands: Mouton de Gruyter.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
For linguistic analyses of English prepositions in addition to those cited above, see:
Bertel, D. A., Gibbs, R. พ., & Sanders, p. (2001). The embodied approach to the polysemy of the spatial
preposition on. In H. Cuyckens & B. Zawada (Eds.), Polysemy in cognitive linguistics: Selected papers from
the 5th International Cognitive Linguistics Conference (pp. 241-260). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John
Benjamins.
Brugman, c. (1981). The story of over (Master’s thesis). University of California, Berkeley, CA. Later
published in 1988 as The story o/over: Polysemy, semantics, and the structure of the lexicon. New York, NY:
Garland.
Herskovits, A. (1986). Language and spatial cogtition. An interdisciplinary stiidy of the prepositions in English.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Rauh, G. (Ed.). (1991). Approaches to prepositions. Tubingen, Germany: Gunter Narr Verlag.
Talmy, L. (1983). How language structures space. In H. Pick & L. Acredolo (Eds.), spatial orientation:
Theory, research, and application (pp. 225-282). New York, NY: Plenum Press.
Taylor, J. (1988). Contrasting prepositional categories: English and Italian. In B. Rudzka-Ostyn (Ed.), Topics
in cognitive linguistics (pp. 299-326JLAmsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins.
For helpful resources on collocations, see:
Simpson-Vlach, R., & Ellis, N. c. (2010). An Academic Formulas List (AFL). Applied Linguistics, 31(4),
487-512.
Sinclair, J. McH. (2004). Trust the text: Language, corpus, and discourse. London, England: Routledge.
438
The Grammar Book
Γ
For specific teaching suggestions, see:
Badalamenti, V.) & Henner-Stanchina, c. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning., and use 1 (4th ed.).
Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Firsten, R. (2008). Grammar connection: Structure through content 2. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning) and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
O' Sullivan, J. K. (2007). Grammar connection: Structure through content 1. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage
Learning.
Reppen, R. (with Gordon, D.). (2012). Grammar and beyond 1. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Endnotes
1.	O'Dowd (ใ 994), noting that we can't use out alone as a source preposition—that is, to mean "from"
(*/ took it out the box)—argues that the sequence out of is actually a particle followed by a preposition.
We will be discussing particles in the next chapter when we deal with phrasal verbs.
2.	In the next chapter, we deal with constructions consisting of verb + particle, such as writeoff, which
appear to be the same as verb + preposition co-occurrences, but which function differently.
3.	Some verbs can take an object NP before the preposition, e.g., accuse someone of, charge someone with,
prefer something to, protect someone from.
4.	These determiners can be preceded by a preposition เท nondeictic use; for example, in on the last Sunday
of the month, last means "final," not the Sunday before the moment of speech. For the same reason, that
isn't included-in our list since it is usually used anaphorically (e.g., I was ill on that Sunday), not deictically.
5.	Note that the concept of motion or direction is important since home may take the preposition at with a
stative verb:
Is Jackie (at) home?
Also, here and there can take prepositions in other environments:
Yes. She is (in) there.
6.	Rauh (1993) notes that indeed it is the prepositions that assign roles themselves and not just that
prepositions express roles assigned by verbs, as is often assumed.
7.	Note that on foot and on horseback are exceptions to by bus, by car, by taxi, by train, by plane, etc. Also,
there are other prepositions, such as through, which also express means, such as:
She has accomplished a great deal through hard work, (i.e., by working hard)
8.	Although, as Kennedy notes, looking only at adjacent words can be misleading since discontinuous
collocations, sometimes several words apart, are quite common. For instance, in the following example
from Kennedy's data, there is more of a collocational association between the verb move and the
preposition through than there is between the pronoun it and through.
I found that I had moved, without realizing it, through the gateway.
9.	Although he also includes what we call particles, which we discuss in the next chapter.
Chapter 21: Prepositions
439
Phrasal Verbs
Introduction
Consider the following sentences and their analyses, adapted from O’Dowd (1994). How
would you describe the role of up in each?
a.	She walked up the street to get a bite to eat.
b.	I live up in Springfield.
c.	When are you going to clean up your room?
d.	I am sorry that I messed you up.
The most generally agreed upon interpretation would be that up is a preposition in the first
two sentences. In (a), it is the preposition in the adverbial PrepP of direction up the street.
In (b), it is once again a preposition. This time, its object, presumably north, has been deleted.
In (b), the PrepP up north is an adverbial of position.
The up’s in (c) and (d) are different, structures with which we have not yet dealt in this
text. These up ’ร we will call particles, which when combined with the verbs clean and mess, form
phrasal verbs. Despite sharing the same form, the meaning of up in (c) is quite different from
that of (d). In (c), the up is syntactically optional, and its contribution to the meaning of the
sentence is quite modest. The verb could stand on its own with almost the same meaning; that’s
not true with the particle in (d). In this sentence, up seems to form an integral part of the verb
(mess up), despite its separation from the verb by the intervening pronominal direct object you.
It may already be obvious that we are once again dealing in this chapter with a
construction that is very difficult for ESL/EFL students. For one thing, the meaning of
phrasal verbs is often noncompositional; that is someone can know the meaning of the verb
and the apparent meaning of the particle, but when they are put together, a unique meaning
is derived.
Jennifer gave up. (to give up - to surrender)
For another thing, there are very few non-Germanic languages1 that have phrasal verbs. Thus,
most ESL/EFL students will find such verbs strange and difficult. Yet they are ubiquitous in
English; no one can speak or understand English (at least the informal register) without
a knowledge of phrasal verbs. Because they don’t realize this, some nonnative speakers of
English have a tendency to overuse single lexical items where a phrasal verb would be much
more appropriate; for example:
a.	I arose early this morning.
b.	I got up early this morning.
While sentence (a) is accurate and meaningful, (b) is more appropriate in contemporary usage.
441
That learners avoid using phrasal verbs has been reported both in the English
of native speakers of non-Germanic languages (Dagut & Laufer, 1985; Liao & Fukuya,
2004) and in the English of native speakers of Germanic languages (Hulstijn & Marchena,
1989; Laufer & Eliasson, 1993).
An additional challenge for learners is the issue of polysemy. Due to the fact that
many phrasal verbs have more than one meaning (or sense), an ESL/EFL student must
often learn multiple definitions for the same form. Consider the following examples of
make up found in the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA):
Rogers thinks her husband's expenditures make up a big part of their debt. (Money,
August, 20051
But the defense had a lot of ground to makeup. (NBC Dateline, April 23,2010)
But right now, at least, a better comparison might be to the wild West, where, in the
absence of authority, people make up their own rules. (ABC Nightline, May 2,1994)
According to WordNet 3.1, make up has nine distinct senses. Such polysemy in phrasal verbs
is common. In fact, Gardner and Davies (2007) identified 559 different meanings for the
100 most frequent phrasal verbs in the British National Corpus.
A final learning challenge involves the conditions governing optional or obligatory
separation of the verb and the particle for phrasal verbs used transitively.
a.	Turn out the lights. Separation optional (direct object is not a pronoun)
b.	Turn the lights out.
c.	Turn them out.	Separation necessary (direct object is a pronoun)
d.	*Turn out them.
While most analyses of phrasal verbs highlight the pronominal status of the direct object
to account for the ungrammaticality of (d), we go beyond this explanation to invoke a
pragmatic principle in the section on the use of phrasal verbs in this chapter to explain
why (d) is unacceptable. We do this heeding the advice that we offered in Chapter 1—to
give students “reasons, not rules.”
The Form of Phrasal Verbs
SYNTACTIC anãlysiFõFphrasâlverbs
As you have just seen, a phrasal verb (PV) is made up of two (or more) parts that function
as a single verb. Phrasal verbs are sometimes called two-word verbs because they usually
consist of a verb plus a second word, the latter often referred to as an adverb. We will refer
to the second part of the phrasal verb as a particle to show its close association with the
verb and to distinguish it from prepositions and other adverbs, although we acknowledge
that, as you have just seen with up, the same word can fit into more than one category.2
To be able to analyze sentences with phrasal verbs, we need to refine our phrase structure
rule for the VP by generating a PV as an alternative to a V:
442
The Grammar Book
The PV category is then expanded in a new phrase structure rule as a verb and particle (Prt):
PV->V«Prt>>
The symbols on either side of the particle indicate that although the particle is part of the
phrasal verb, it need not be contiguous with it. Here is the basic structure of a sentence in
which the particle follows the verb directly:
Jamie turned out the light.
SUBJ
NP
N
'■> Jamie
Now here is a tree where the particle is not contiguous with the verb, but rather is separated
from it by an intervening direct object:
Jamie turned the light out.
SUBJ
NP
N
Jamie
It is worth noting that the majority of phrasal verbs are formed from a limited number of verbs
and particles (Gardner & Davies, 2007; Liu, 2011). Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad, and
Finegan (1999) identify the following verbs and particles as the most productive, presented in
descending order of frequency (p. 413):
Verbs: take, get, put, come, go, set, turn, bring
Particles: up, out, on, in, off, down
Chapter 22: Phrasal Verbs
443
SYNTACTIC FEATURES OF PHRASAL VERBS
Transitive and Intransitive Phrasal Verbs
Like single-word verbs, phrasal verbs can be transitive:
Harold turned on the radio.
Barbara passed out the new assignment.3
I called off the meeting.
[Others include do over (repeat), look over (examine),^// out (complete), find out (discover), etc.]
Phrasal verbs can also be intransitive:
My car broke down.
He really took off.
The boys were playing around in the yard.
[Others include come back (return), come over (visit), make up (reconcile), pass out (faint), etc.]
Of course, just as some regular ergative or change-of-state verbs (e.g., open, increase) may
be either transitive or intransitive depending on the role of the agent, some phrasal verbs can
have this dual function, too; for example:
An arsonist burned down the hotel, (transitive)
The hotel burned down, (intransitive)
Phrasal Verbs That Require Prepositions
Also like single-word verbs, adjectives, and nouns, many phrasal verbs take a specific
preposition. Examples of this type of construction are:
go in for
make up for
stand up for
check out of
check up on
close in on
cut down on
drop in on
look down on
look in on
pick up on
get back to
get down to
give in to
break up with
catch up with
come up with
end up with
get along with
get away with
keep up with
make away with
put up with
run up against
In these expressions, the phrasal verb and preposition must be learned as a unit.4
The only thing that can be added to such a string is an adverb or adverbial phrase between
the particle and the preposition:
I haven't kept up fully with the work.
Mort has cut down almost completely on his smoking.
Here’s how a tree would look with a “three-word phrasal verb” (i.e., a phrasal verb that takes
a preposition):
Donna broke up with Joe.
ร ■
SUB]	PRED
NP	AUX	VP -
Y	T	\ PrepP
Donna	-past	V 1	Prt	prep	NP
		break	up	with	N
					Joe
The Grammar Book
444
The Separability of Phrasal Verbs
Thus far, we have been discussing characteristics that phrasal verbs share with regular verbs;
however, there is one syntactic characteristic peculiar to transitive phrasal verbs: sometimes the
particle can be separated from the verb by the direct object and sometimes it cannot. Separation
is obligatory when the direct object is a pronoun, a requirement that we will explain later.
Separable Phrasal Verbs
Mark threw away the ball.	*Mark threw away it.
Mark threw the ball away.	Mark threw it away.
Rachel looked up the information. *Rachel looked up it.
Rachel looked the information up. Rachel looked it up.
[Others include take up (discuss), leave out (omit), pass out (distribute), bring back (return), turn
down (refuse), etc.]
The largest, most productive category of phrasal verbs are these transitive, separable
ones. However, we also posit a smaller category of inseparable phrasal verbs, where the
particle cannot be separated from its verb. Some linguists would argue that the inseparability
is due to the fact that what we are calling a particle is really a preposition, and thus would
naturally precede its object. Because the two words appear to have a syntactic affinity (see the
section on Syntactic Tests later) and together have a meaning beyond what each word
contributes individually, we feel that it makes good pedagogic sense to have a category of
inseparable phrasal verbs.
Inseparable Phrasal Verbs
I came across an interesting article last night. I came across it last night.
*1 came an interesting article across last night. *1 came it across last night.
Josh ran into an old friend.	Josh ran into him.
*Josh ran an old friend into.	*Josh ran him into.
[Others include get over (recover), go over (review), look into (investigate), go for (attack), etc.]
We have already illustrated the two trees for the separable phrasal verb turn out. Here’s
a tree for a sentence with an inseparable phrasal verb. Since the particle must follow the verb
directly in an inseparable phrasal verb, only one tree is possible:
Angela ran across a classmate.
รบBJ
NP
N
Angela
Phrasal Verbs That Are Always Separated
A few phrasal verbs seem to occur only with the verb and particle separated:
How can I get I**1® messa9e \ through to him? (get... through - convey; transmit)
lit	J
*How can I get through the message to him?
Chapter 22: Phrasal Verbs
445
We'll see {this ordeal] through together, (see... through = survive)
?We'll see through this ordeal together.
The reason for the obligatory separation is presumably to avoid the ambiguity with the
inseparable phrasal verbs that have the same form but a different meaning:
get through the lesson (get through = finish)
see through his excuse (see through = not be deceived by)
Such phrasal verbs where the verb and particle are always separated compose a small subcategory
of phrasal verbs.
DISTINGUISHING PHRASAUvERBsTROMViERB^rPREPOSlflON SEQUENCES
Syntactic Tests
At the begining of this chapter, you saw that a particular word can behave as a preposition in
some contexts and a particle in others. Despite the overlap, there is reason to try to arrive at a
common understanding of what distinguishes its prepositional use from that of its particle use
in a phrasal verb. The following are some of the tests that have been applied (adapted from
O’Dowd, 1994, p. 19).
Only prepositions (not particles) allow:
Adverb insertion	We turned quickly off the road. *We turned quickly off the light.
Phrase fronting	Up the hill John ran. *Up the bill John ran.
fronting	About what does he write? *Up what does he write?
Only particles in separable phrasal verbs (not prepositions) allow:
Passivization5	The light was turned off. "The road was turned off.
Verb substitution	The light was extinguished. (= The light was turned off.)
NP between the two parts	We turned the light off. "We turned the road off.
In their own list of tests, Darwin and Gray (1999) include these, which fail for phrasal verbs:
Verb insertion	They figured out the answer. "They figured and worked out the answer.
Particle repetition	We turned off the light. "พe turned off the light, off the TV, and off the stereo.
Where questions	John ran up the bill. Where? "Up the bill.
446
The Grammar Book
The rationale for many of these tests is tire fact that a preposition makes a natural unit with
the NP object that follows it, whereas a particle makes a natural unit with the verb that
precedes it. For instance, when we apply ช^-fronting:
About what does he write?
we produce a somewhat stilted but nevertheless grammatical question because we have
fronted a natural unit consisting of a preposition and its object. When we apply this same test
to a sentence containing a phrasal verb, however, the question is ungrammatical:
*Up what does he write?
because it is not possible to separate the particle up from the verb write, with which it forms
a natural unit.
Since we are positing a three-way distinction among separable PVs, inseparable PVs,
and verb-plus-preposition sequences, we recommend adopting the following hierarchy of
tests. Consider the following examples:
Peter looked up the new word.
Peter looked at the newspaper.
Peter looked into the matter.
1.	Can you put the object noun between the verb and the"P"?
Peter looked the new word up.
*Peter looked the matter into.
*Peter looked the newspaper at.
Yes — Separable PV (look up)
No = Inseparable PV (lookinto) or V + prep (look at)
2.	Can you front t;he"P"in a พ/?-question?
At what did Peter look?	—»	Yes = V + prep (look at)
*lnto what did Peter look. —>	No — Inseparable PV (lookinto) (lookinto - investigate)
Another reason for the difficulty in distinguishing particles from prepositions is that their
syntactic roles are evolving (O’Dowd, 1994); that is, some of the items that O’Dowd calls
“Ps” are becoming more particle-like and others more preposition-like. For now, let
us say that it is perhaps more helpful to view phrasal verbs and verbs taking prepositions
as opposite ends of a continuum rather than as a categorical dichotomy. Indeed, O’Dowd
rejects the hard-and-fast distinction between prepositions and particles; however, she also
acknowledges the tendency for particular “P’s” to specialize in one syntactic role or another:
Used more as prepositions <---------------------------->	Used more as particles
with, of,	to, in, on,	through, around, over,	up, out, down,
for, from	about, by	off, across, along	away, back
Just as Hopper and Thompson (1984) have made the case that the discourse context plays
a decisive role in determining whether to construe a particular word, e.g., “lead,” as a noun
or verb, O’Dowd (1994) suggests that it may be impossible to distinguish a particle from a
preposition, apart from the way it behaves in a particular context. O’Dowd hypothesizes that
the preposition-particle distinction is evolving as a two-way extension from a single element
corresponding to what Bolinger (1971) called an “adprep.” The specialization of certain “Ps”
as either prepositions or particles reflects their greater degree of grammaticization in one
direction or another.
Phonological Test
Another formal difference between a verb + preposition and a phrasal verb is that a particle
may receive stress, whereas a preposition usually doesn’t:
Chapter 22: PhiGSGl Verbs
447
He looked up the word, (phrasal verb)
He looked up the road, (verb + preposition)
Although this test often works to disambiguate prepositions from particles, again there are
enough exceptions or marked cases where the preposition is stressed for contrastive purposes:
He looked up the road, not down.
that the test is not always reliable.
Another problem for ESL/EFL students is that they have been taught to put stress on the
content word. Therefore, they tend to stress the verb rather than the particle (Dickerson, 1994):
*1 planned to turn it down.
Particularly when it is in final position, the particle tends to be stressed:
I planned to turn it down.
The Meaning of Phrasal Verbs
THE PRODUCTIVI
Phrasal verbs are a highly productive lexical category in English. Indeed, Bolinger (1971) refers
to the constant new coinage of phrasal verbs as “an outpouring of lexical creativeness that
surpasses anything else in our language” (p. xi). As noted previously, certain verbs such as take
and get and certain particles such as up and out are the most productive items in this outpouring.
However, we have no way of knowing in advance exactly which verb will join with which
particle to form a new phrasal verb. Furthermore, there is also a certain unpredictability as to
what the meaning of a new phrasal verb will be since many of them are noncompositional or
idiomatic—their meanings are different from what combining the meaning of the verb with
the meaning of the particle would lead US to expect. For example, it is not immediately obvious
how run and out combine to give the meaning of “to deplete,” (e.g., We ran out of milk.').
One pedagogical strategy resulting from the apparently hopeless task of deciphering
the meaning of phrasal verbs has been to ask ESL/EFL students to commit to memory long
lists of such verbs, along with their meanings. Fortunately, this is not the only solution. There
is some systematicity in how meaning is represented in phrasal verbs, and we now turn to
exploring this topic.
SEMANTIC CATEGORIES OF PHRASAL VERBS
First of all, the systematicity that does exist becomes easier to perceive when phrasal verbs are
not treated monolithically. At least three categories of phrasal verbs can be discerned: literal,
aspectual, and idiomatic.
Literal Phrasal Verbs
The first category is comprised of verbs that appear to be a combination of a verb and a
directional PrepP. Nevertheless,-for pedagogical purposes, we will classify them as phrasal
verbs because they function syntactically like verb-particle constructions. Since the particle
retains its prepositional meaning, the result is a phrasal verb whose meaning is fully
compositional (Jackendoff, 1997). Some examples of literal phrasal verbs are sit down, stand
up, take down, climb up, fall down, and pass through. These should not be especially difficult for
students to comprehend and to produce.
448
The Grammar Book
Aspectual Phrasal Verbs
The second category is one where the meaning is not as transparent, but it is not completely
idiomatic either. This category consists of verbs to which certain particles contribute
consistent aspectual meaning. (Recall our discussion of the aspectual meaning of verbs,
such as of accomplishment and activity verbs, and of aspect, e.g., perfect versus progressive,
in Chapter 7.) This category in turn can be subdivided into a number of semantic classes,
depending on the semantic contribution of the particle:6
•	Inceptive (to signal a beginning state)
John took off.
(Others include set out, start up)
•	Continuative (to show that the action continues)
—the use of on and along with activity verbs
Her speech ran on and on.
Hurry along now.
(Others include carry on, keep on, hang on, come along, play along)
—the use of away with activity verbs with the nuance that the activity is “heedless”
They danced the night away.
(Others include work away, sleep away, fritter away)
—the use of around with activity verbs to express absence of purpose
They goofed around all afternoon.
(Others include mess around, play around, run around)
—the use of through with activity verbs to mean from beginning to end
She read through her lines เท the play for the audition.
(Others include think through, skim through, sing through)
•	Iterative (the use of over with activity verbs to show repetition)
He did it over and over again until he got it right.
(Others include write over, think over, type over)
•	Completive (the use of the particles up, out, off, and down to show that the action is complete)
—turns an activity verb into an accomplishment
He drank the milk up.
(Others include bum down, mix up, wear out, turn off, blow out)
—reinforces the sense of goal orientation in an accomplishment verb
He closed the suitcase up.
(Others include wind up, fade out, cut off, clean up)
—adds durativity to a punctual achievement verb
He found out why they were missing.
(Others include check over, win over, catch up)
It is clear in these examples that each particle contributes to the meaning of the verb with which
it is paired. But how? What enables this contribution of aspectual meaning? The answer lies
in metaphor. Like prepositions, particles also extend their meaning beyond spatial relations. In
essence, particles allow US to see in concrete terms that which is abstract (Rudzka-Ostyn, 2003).
For illustrative purposes, let US examine how up contributes to the inceptive and the
completive aspects. It may at first seem odd that the same particle is used in the following:
Start up your engines!
Drink up! We must be going.
Chapter 22: Phrasal Verbs
449
The first is an imperative to start something (a car engine), whereas the second is an imperative
to finish something (a drink). The use of up for both, however, makes sense if we connect
physical direction to human goal-directed experience. Things are often raised or lifted in
order for US to do something with them; at the same time, things are often raised or lifted
when we are finished with them (Lindner, 1981). From a cognitive linguistics perspective, such
physical human experience translates into orientational metaphors like ACTIVE IS UP and
COMPLETION IS UP (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980). Particles, in turn, encode such metaphors
into the meaning of phrasal verbs (Yasuda, 2010). Returning to the phrasal verbs above, up in
Stan up emphasizes that something goes from inactive to active—a silent engine is now running;
up in drink up emphasizes completion—an entire beverage is consumed. For more examples of
nonspatial extended meanings of particles, see Neagu (2007) and Rudzka-Ostyn (2003).
White (2012) encourages learners to visualize such meaning extensions. He does this
by directing students to draw pictures that depict a phrasal verb’s meaning and that include
a space for action or activity called the zone of activity. Student drawings should reflect
metaphorical movement or position, as signaled by the particle, in relation to the zone of activity.
The two examples given above might be sketched in the following way:
ใ. Start up your engines!
2.	Drink up!
450
The Grammar Book
Idiomatic Phrasal Verbs
As we have been saying, many phrasal verbs are idiomatic, such as chew out, tune out,
catch up, put off. It seems difficult, if not impossible, to figure out the meaning of the verb
by combining the separate meanings of its parts. This is not to say that the situation is
hopeless, however. Cognitive linguistics holds that even idiomatic phrasal verbs may
be understood as compositional (Alejo-González, 2010) and, as such, are conceptually
motivated (Kõvecses & Szabó, 1996). This view is possible when we look for metaphor
not just in the particle, but in the verb as well. As noted by Morgan (1997), metaphorical
senses may exist in the particle, the verb, or both. Consider the following examples
from COCA:
I think we're at ล point, though, that voters are, you know, voters tune out these ads.
(CBS Face the Nation, October 27,2002-
Repairs on the space station had to be put off and assigned to a new crew because of
his medical problems. (PBS Newshour, July 22,1997)
Obviously, no actual tuning is taking place, and nothing is physically being put anywhere.
We can, however, motivate these phrasal verbs by appealing to general conceptual
knowledge. For instance, when we tune something like a musical instrument, we bring it
into focus and pay careful attention to it. Adopting the terminology in White (2012), we
could say the instrument is in our zone of activity. It follows that if we wish to stop paying
attention to something, we can tune it out (of our zone of activity). The second example
can be motivated with a food analogy. Putting food on a plate is placing that food into the
zone of activity (the activity of eating). When we put food off of the plate or outside the
zone of activity, that food is not ready for immediate consumption. By analogizing plans or
actions with food, it follows that putting them (e.g., repairs) «// means to postpone them. Of
course, because motivation is not the same as prediction (Kõvecses & Szabó, 1996), idiomatic
phrasal verbs are sure to remain a serious challenge for learners. Yet, attention to and
awareness of underlying metaphors should help learners make better sense of idiomatic
language (Boers, 2004).
POLYSEMOUS PHRASAL VERBS
As was noted in the chapter introduction, many phrasal verbs are polysemous. A verb such as
check out, for instance, can have many meanings. A partial inventory might include:
ใ. I need to check out by 1 P.M.
2.	I went to the library to get a book, but someone had already checked it out.
3.	Be sure to check it out before you buy it.
4.	Check it out!
5.	If you have fewer than 10 items, you can checkout in the express lane.
While the meanings of some of these verbs are related, they illustrate the point of the
polysemy. Just as one form can have many meanings, we know that it is also possible to
have several verbs with the same or similar meanings. This brings US to the question of use.
Chapter 22: Phrasal Verbs
451
The Use of Phrasal Verbs
REGISTER	—
Level of Formality
As was noted in the chapter introduction, phrasal verbs are extremely common in the informal
register. When the choice exists between a phrasal verb and a single-verb counterpart derived
from Latin,7’8 a native speaker will often use the phrasal verb. Corpus studies by Biber et al.
(1999) and Liu (2011) found phrasal verbs to be much more frequent in the registers of
fiction and spoken English than in newspapers and academic English. Yet it is important
to note that phrasal verbs are not completely absent from formal registers. Liu identifies
the following as extremely common in academic writing (presented in descending order
of frequency): point out, carry out, take on, make up, set up, bring about, take up, break down,
sum up, carry on, rule out, follow up.
Field
Another use of the term register is relevant here. As we saw in Chapter 2, register in systemic-
functional linguistics can also refer to the social activity in which the language is being used
and what is being talked about. Certain phrasal verbs are associated with a particular field
for which there are no concise alternatives. For instance, check out in example 1 will likely be
understood to mean checking out of a hotel room. It would be difficult to describe the same
action using any other verb. Liu (2011) suggests that a number of the most common phrasal
verbs found in newspapers (e.g., pay off, take over) may be so frequent in this register in part
because they “are expressions used to describe business dealings” (p. 678).
The field-specific use of the term register is also pertinent in explaining the non-use of
phrasal verbs in certain contexts. Airline personnel often favor Latinate verbs over phrasal
verbs, perhaps to assist international travelers to comprehend announcements. For instance,
in the days when cigarette smoking was permitted on all airplanes, passengers were requested
to “extinguish all smoking material,” prior to landing, rather than the more common “put out
your cigarette.” Thus, the field-specific use of the term register is pertinent in explaining the
use or non-use of phrasal verbs in certain contexts.
THE ISSUE OF PHRASA?^
Principle of Dominance Revisited
Erteschik-Shir’s (1979) principle of dominance, which we discussed with regard to indirect
objects in Chapter 19, accounts for "Cases when separable phrasal verbs require that an NP
direct object intervene between the verb and particle. If the direct object is a noun, it can
either go between the verb and the particle or after the particle. If the direct object is a
pronoun, its referent has already been made clear in the discourse context, and therefore it
would be nondominant. By virtue of its nondominance, it does not occupy the final position
in the sentence if this can be avoided; thus, a pronoun direct object is put between the verb
and its particle:
He poured out his heart. (direct object is a noun—either order is syntactically possible)
He poured his heart out.
452
The Grammar Book
He poured it out.	(direct object is a pronoun—it must be placed
*He poured out it.	between the verb and particle)
On the other hand, if the direct object contains a significant amount of new, complex, or
unpredictable information, its insertion between the verb and the particle would interrupt the
cognitive unity of the verb and particle and make processing very difficult:
?He poured a brand new can of green paint that was on sale out.
Thus, if the direct object is not a pronoun, and especially if it is a long and elaborate NP, it
would occupy the more dominant position after the particle. You will recall that this is the
conventional position for new, discourse-salient information:
He poured out a brand new can of green paint that was on sale.
Corpus studies by Cries (2003) and Lohse, Hawkins, and Wasow (2004) confirmed that the
length of the direct object (among other factors) predicts the likelihood that the particle
will not be separated from the verb. In fact, the studies found that when the direct object
is comprised of a noun phrase of three words or more, there is a dramatic increase in the
preference for the particle to come immediately after the verb. If the direct object is not
dominant, then the particle can occupy the dominant final position:
He cried his eyes out.
The ability of the particle to occupy this position is in keeping with the fact that it can
bear primary stress. Phrasal verbs thus afford English speakers the opportunity to put part
of the verb into end-focus position. Such syntactic flexibility does not exist for Latinate
verbs where all.the semantic features are conflated into a single word (E. O’Dowd, personal
communication).
Sentences with Separable Phrasal Verbs,
Direct and Indirect Objects
We also noted in Chapter 19 that indirect objects that are nondominant are likely to precede
direct objects. In the following, the indirect object—the country singer—marked by the definite
article as having already been introduced into the discourse, is nondominant:
The mayor of Nashville gave the country singer a tour of the city.
What happens when the direct object and indirect object occur in a sentence with a separable
phrasal verb? As you might expect, the order of particle, direct object, and indirect object
depends on the dominance of the objects.
If the indirect object is dominant, then the sentence could occur with the particle
directly following the verb and the indirect object in sentence-final position:
John paid back his loan to the bank.
To reinforce the dominance of the indirect object, the direct object could be followed by the
particle, separating the direct and indirect objects:
John paid his loan back to the bank.
If, on the other hand, the direct object is the dominant NP, then the order would be:
John paid the bank back his loan.
It is not likely that the verb and its particle would occur contiguously in such a sentence
because it would be in conflict with the fact that the indirect object is nondominant:
?John paid back the bank his loan.
Finally, it is possible to have a sentence order in which the particle follows both the direct and
the indirect objects:
John paid the bank his loan back.
Chapter 22: Phrasal Verbs
453
Here, the direct object, his loan, is more dominant than the indirect object, the bank, but his
loan is still less dominant than when it was in sentence-final position. It’s the particle back,
which is in sentence-final position and therefore dominant.
In short, while there is nothing wrong with the rule that says that if the direct object
is a pronoun it goes between the verb and the particle, it is simply incomplete and offers
no explanation for why the object should be placed in this position. Furthermore, it offers
no explanation for why one word order is preferred over another when there is a syntactic
choice—that is, when the direct object is a noun. We now know that there is a reason for
the rule and a greater generalization to be made. The rule is not arbitrary; rather, it reflects
the higher-order principle regarding the ordering of constituents with different information
status: when an object is nondominant, it will be placed between the verb and particle of a
separable phrasal verb.
Conclusion
Phrasal verbs are not unique to English, but they are different enough from verbs in many
languages of the world, and common enough in English, to pose a significant learning
challenge. Perhaps the most challenging dimension is in the meaning, for while there is
some semantic systematicity, there is still enough idiomaticity to cause difficulty for students.
Students will also be challenged to make appropriate choices when it comes to the dimension
of use—when to use a phrasal verb versus a single-word verb and when to split the particle
from its verb.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form. When learning new phrasal verbs, students can be asked to label them as
intransitive, inseparable transitive, and separable transitive. Grammar textbooks such
as Fuchs and Bonner (2006) and Wisniewska, Riggenbach, and Samuda (2007) provide
activities that reinforce these classifications. Of course, students should be sensitive to
the fact that some polysemous phrasal verbs appear in different forms. For instance, the
separable transitive Check it out! versus the intransitive It’s time to check out.
2.	Form/Meaning. Many teachers like to begin to introduce the concept of phrasal verbs
using Total Physical Response (TPR). Giving commands such as stand up, turn around,
turn on the light, turn off the light, go back to your chair, sit down, and so forth will get students
used to the fact that certain verbs in English are composed of two forms, and the exercise
will have students begin to associate meaning with certain common forms. In fact, Biber
et al. (1999) found that the majority of common phrasal verbs are activity verbs, which
are obviously conducive to TPR.
3.	Form/Meaning. Certain routines can be pantomimed in which a number of different
phrasal verbs can be incorporated. The teacher reads the routine the first time and mimes
the actions with the students. Later, the students can give the routine and mime it. Here
are two examples:
454
The Grammar Book
Morning Routine:
My alarm goes off at 6 A.M. I wake up. I turn off my alarm. I stretch in bed, and then I get
up. I go to my closet and take out my slippers. I put them on ...
Telephone Routine:
I want to call up my classmate. I pick up my phone, and I scroll through my contact list.
I pick her name out. My classmate doesn’t answer, so I hang up. I will call back later.
4.	Meaning. Margaret Olin (personal communication) suggests creating a “phrasal verb
wall.” Whenever the class or an individual student discovers a new phrasal verb, someone
should write the phrasal verb on a chart and indicate whether it is transitive/intransitive, and
separable/inseparable. Next, a picture should be drawn illustrating its meaning. Finally, a
sentence in which it is used should be added. The chart should be mounted on the wall (or on
a long roll of paper) and added to throughout the term.
ร. Meaning. When presenting phrasal verbs, you might consider organizing them by
orientational metaphors, as was done in Kõvecses and Szabó (1996), Boers (2000), and Yasuda
(2010). Some examples from these studies include:
Completion is up (chew up, dry up, eat up, use up)
Visible is up (open up, look up, show up, turn up)
The researchers found that such presentation facilitated students’ short-term learning of
phrasal verbs. Teachers wishing to implement this approach may wish to consult Rudzka-
Ostyn (2003), which lists phrasal verbs by particle and further distinguishes these by
conceptual metaphors.
6.	Meaning. Drawing may be used to promote deeper appreciation for the role of metaphor in
phrasal verbs. Give students a few phrasal verbs in context and ask them to draw pictures that
show the meaning of each. Instruct students to include in their drawings a representation of
how the particle reflects movement or position in relation to the zone of activity (White, 2012).
To make it clear what the task is, you may first need to sketch out a few examples yourself. For
example, sketches for the phrasal verbs in the following two sentences might look like this:
1.	Rhode Island, Connecticut, Massachusetts, Vermont, New Hampshire, and Maine make up
Chapter 22: Phrasal Verbs
455
2. After their argument, the couple made up.
This technique may be a particularly effective way to encourage students to see
connections between various senses of polysemous phrasal verbs. It also requires students
to infuse some creativity into their vocabulary learning.
7.	Meaning. Another way to tackle polysemy in phrasal verbs is to make use of concordancers.
Liu (2011) suggests an activity where students search an individual phrasal verb in online
corpora and then examine the concordance results line by line in order to determine each
specific meaning of the phrasal verb. Among other resources, the COCA (http://corpus.byu.
edu/coca/), the British National Corpus (http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/), and the Compleat
Lexical Tutor (http://www.lextutor.ca/) offer free online concordancing.
8.	Use. Linnea Henry and Lauren Parker (personal communication) have created a dialogue
that uses forms that are accurate and meaningful, but are not what a native speaker of
English would'probably say. The students are asked to first listen to the dialogue and then
to read it, choosing phrasal verbs from a list they are given so that they are more appropriate
for conversational English. Here is a partial list of verbs the learners are given: ask out, fix
up, call up, get up, etc., and our adaptation of their dialogue:
Linnea: Hey, Lauren, I heard, that guy finally asked you for a date.
Lauren: Yeah, well, actually, Pam arranged the meeting.
Linnea: How did it go?
Lauren: Well, first he telephoned me at 8 in the morning, and it was necessary for me to
leave my bed. I was quite annoyed. It was Saturday morning. Then he said he
wanted to have a date with me that night.
456
The Grammar Book
Linnea: So, what happened?
Lauren: Well, he was supposed to arrive at 7, but he didn't. He stumbled when he entered.
I think he may have been drinking. He came an hour late because he said that his
car had stopped working.Then he said there was no more gas in it.
Linnea: I would have abandoned him.
Lauren: Yeah. I told him to leave. I said that I couldn't take any more.
9.	Meaning/Use. Trebits (2009) recommends combining corpus-based data with practice
activities. She suggests activities that prompt students to make inferences about use as well
as meaning. Students can compare the concordance results for two similar phrasal verbs
(Trebits’s own example is set out and set up). Careful examination of the data will allow
students to identify what types of things appear as subjects for each phrasal verb and what
types of things appear as direct objects. Awareness of such patterns should assist students in
making appropriate decisions on a traditional gap-fill activity where missing particles must be
inserted. For specific examples of practice activities, see Trebits (pp. 478-479).
10.	Use. The following activity gives students practice with particle placement in separable
phrasal verbs. Prepare a number of cards, each listing a noun phrase. The noun phrases
should range from those that are long and complex to those that are simple. For example:
•	the old TV that no longer worked
•	the bread covered in green mold
•	an uneaten piece of pizza
•	piles of mountihg garbage
•	the broken chair
•	the trash
•	it
On the board, write two simple sentence frames, such as:
They threw_____out. (Pattern 1)
They th rew out. (Pattern 2)_____
Students take turns drawing a card and plugging it into one of the two sentence frames.
Teachers should monitor direct object placement. Are the students using Pattern 1 for
the shorter and Pattern 2 for the longer noun phrases?
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1.	Provide original example sentences to illustrate the following terms. Underline the
pertinent word(s) in your examples:
a.	verb + preposition
b.	transitive phrasal verb
c.	intransitive phrasal verb
d.	separable phrasal verb
e.	inseparable phrasal verb
f.	phrasal verb plus preposition
g.	literal phrasal verb
h.	aspectual phrasal verb
i.	idiomatic phrasal verb
j.	phrasal verb that is always separated
Chapter 22: Phrasal Verbs
457
2.	Draw tree diagrams for the following sentences:
a.	Graeme warmed the soup up.
b.	Anne puts up with murder.
c.	Deidre brought the cart back to the market.
d.	Rachel looked up the tree.
3.	Explain why the following sentences are ungrammatical or, at least, awkward.
a.	*We called our neighbors on.
b.	*1 looked the report that Phyllis wrote in Dallas last week over.
c.	*1 gave back Larry the money.
d.	?He showed just as all the work was done.
e.	?Amber placed back the things that had fallen down from the shelf.
Test your ability to apply what you know.
4.	If your students produce the following sentences, what would you tell them?
a.	*Donna can’t put up the noise anymore.
b.	?We discontinued our engagement.
c.	"After two hours the candle had burned off.
d.	*Kim worked out her muscles at the gym.
e.	"The child ate up it.
5.	Why is the term “two-word verb" somewhat inaccurate?
6.	Apply the syntactic tests in this chapter to the following sentences to determine if the
verb + “P" is a phrasal verb or a verb + preposition.
We came across that issue yesterday.
My brother and I always fought over the prize in the box of cereal.
7.	In Chapter 21, we contrasted the prepositions of English with the postpositions of
other languages like Japanese and Korean. Consider the following examples. Is it
really accurate to say that English has no postpositions? Explain your answer.
Bonnie roamed over the world.
Bonnie roamed the world over.
8.	Make up a routine like the two examples we gave in Teaching Suggestion 3, which
takes place at the library.
9.	We gave check out as an example of a verb that really has no single verb paraphrase
in its use in a liotel context. Can you think of any other phrasal verbs that have no
single verb counterparts?
458
The Grammar Book
Bibliography
REFERENCES
Alejo-González, R. (2010). Making sense of phrasal verbs: A cognitive linguistics account of L2 learning.
ALLA Review, 23, 50-71.
Biber, D., Johansson, ร., Leech, G., Conrad, ร., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and
written English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ltd.
Boers, E (2000). Metaphor awareness and vocabulary retention. Applied Linguistics, 27(4), 553-571.
Boers, E (2004). Expanding learners’ vocabulary through metaphor awareness: What expansion, what
learners, what vocabulary? In M. Achard & ร. Niemeier (Eds.), Cognitive linguistics, second language
acquisition, and foreign language teaching (pp. 211-232). Berlin, Germany: Mouton de Gruyter.
Bolinger, D. (1971). The phrasal verb in English. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Brinton, L. (1988). The development of English aspectual systems. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Clark, R. (1995). Course materials for English Applied Linguistics. School for International Training,
Brattleboro, VT.
Dagut, M., & Laufer, B. (1985). Avoidance of phrasal verbs: A case for contrastive analysis. Studies in Second
Language Acquisition, 7(1), 73-79.
Darwin, c. M., & Gray, L. ร. (1999). Going after the phrasal verb: An alternative approach to classification.
TESOL Quarterly, 33(1), 65-93.
Davies, M. (2008), The corpus of contemporary American English (COCA): 425 million words, 1990-present.
Retrieved from http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/
Dickerson, พ. (1994). Discourse stress and phrasal verbs. Ideal, 7, 56-66.
Erteschik-Shir, N. (1979). Discourse constraints on dative movement. In T. Givón (Ed.), Discourse and
syntax: Syntax and semantics (Vol. 12, pp. 441^467). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Fraser, J. B. (1976). The verb-particle combination in English. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Fuchs, M., & Bonner, M. (2006). Focus on grammar: An integrated skills approach 4 (3rd ed.). White Plains,
NY: Pearson Education.
Gardner, D., & Davies, M. (2007). Pointing out frequent phrasal verbs: A corpus-based analysis. TESOL
Quarterly, 41(2), 339-359.
Gries, ร. Th. (2003). Multifactorial analysis in corpus linguistics: A study of particle placement. New York, NY:
Continuum.
Hopper, p., & Thompson, ร. (1984). The discourse basis for lexical categories in universal grammar.
Language, 60(4), 703-752.
Hulstijn, J. H., & Marchena, E. (1989). Avoidance: Grammatical or semantic causes? Studies in Second
Language Acquisition, 77(3), 241-255.
Jackendoff, R. (1997). Twistin’ the night away. Language, 73(3), 534-559.
Kõvecses, z., & Szabó, p. (1996). Idioms: A view from cognitive semantics. Applied Linguistics, 17(3),
326-355.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Laufer, B., & Eliasson, ร. (1993). What causes avoidance in L2 learning: L1-L2 difference, L1-L2
similarity, or L2 complexity? Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 15(1), 35-48.
Liao, Y, & Fukuya, Y. J. (2004). Avoidance of phrasal verbs: The case of Chinese learners of English.
Language Learning, 54(2), 193-226.
Lindner, ร. (1981). A lexico-semantic analysis of English verb-particle constructions with UP and OUT (Doctoral
dissertation). University of California, San Diego, CA.
Liu, D. (2011). The most frequently used English phrasal verbs in American and British English: A
multicorpus examination. TESOL Quarterly, 45(4), 661-688.
Chapter 22: Phrasal Verbs
459
Lohse, B., Hawkins, J. A., & Wasow, T. (2004). Domain minimization in English verb-particle
constructions. Language, 80(2)9 238-261.
Morgan, p. (1997). Figuring owt figure out·. Metaphor and the semantics of the English verb-particle
construction. Cognitive Linguistics, §(4), 327-357.
Neagu, M. (2007). English verb particles and their acquisition: A cognitive approach. RESLA, 20, 121-138.
O’Dowd, E. (1994). Prepositions and particles in English: A discourse-based, unifying account (Doctoral
dissertation). University of Colorado, Boulder, co.
Princeton University, (n.d.). WordNet Search 3.1. Retrieved from http://wordnetweb.princeton.edu/perl/
webwn
Rudzka-Ostyn, B. (2003). Word power: Phrasal verbs and compounds: A cognitive approach. Berlin, Germany:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Trebits, A. (2009). The most frequent phrasal verbs in English language EU documents - A corpus-based
analysis and its implication. System, 37, 470-481.
White, B. (2012). A conceptual approach to the instruction of phrasal verbs. Modern Language Journal,
96(3), 419-438.
Wisniewska, L, Riggenbach, H., & Samuda, V. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 2
(4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Yasuda, ร. (2010). Learning phrasal verbs through conceptual metaphors: A case of Japanese EFL learners.
TESOL Quarterly, 44(2), 250-270.
SUGGESTIONS FOR~FliRTHER~READING	......
For a usage-based analysis of the development of idiomatic phrasal verbs, see:
Ishizaki, Y. (2012). A usage-based analysis of phrasal verbs in Early and Late Modern English. English
Language and Linguistics, 16(2), 241-260.
For works on metaphor, see:
Kõvecses, z. (2002). Metaphor: A practical introduction. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Littlemore, J., & Low, G. D. (2006). Metaphoric competence, second language learning, and
communicative language ability. Applied Linguistics, 27(2), 268-294.
MacArthur, F. (2010). Metaphorical competence in EFL: Where are we and where should we be going?
A view from the language classroom. AILA Review, 23, 155-173.
For works on polysemy, see:
Csábi, ร. (2004). A cognitive linguistic view of polysemy in English and its implications for teaching. In
M. Achard & ร. Niemeier (Eds.), Cognitive linguistics, second language acquisition, and foreign language
teaching (pp. 233-256). Berlin, Germany: Mouton de Gruyter.
Nerlich, B., Todd, z., Hermann, V, & Clarke, D. D. (Eds.). (2003). Polysemy: Flexible patterns of meaning in
mind and language. Berlin, Germany: Mouton De Gruyter.
Ravin, Y, & Leacock, £. (2000). PolysemyfAn overview. In Y. Ravin & c. Leacock (Eds.), Polysemy:
Theoretical and computational approaches (pp. 1-29). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
For dictionary reference works, see:
Cambridge international dictionary of phrasal verbs. (1997). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Longman phrasal verbs dictionary. (2000). Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education.
McGraw-JLilPs essential phrasal verb dictionary (2nd ed.). (2007). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Oxford phrasal verbs dictionary for English learners. (2001). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
For teaching suggestions, see:
Carlisi, K. (2008). Grammar connection: Structure through content 3. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
460
The Grammar Book
Cornell, A. (1985). Realistic goals in teaching and learning phrasal verbs. International Review of Applied
Linguistics in Language Teaching, 25(4), 269-280.
Dirven, R. (2001). English phrasal verbs: Theory and didactic application. In M. Pütz, ร. Niemeier, &
R. Dirven (Eds.), Applied cognitive linguistics II: Language pedagogy (pp. 3-27). Berlin, Germany: Mouton
de Gruyter.
Kurtyka, A. (2001). Teaching English phrasal verbs: A cognitive approach. In M. Pütz, ร. Niemeier, &
R. Dirven (Eds.), Applied cognitive linguistics II: Language pedagogy (pp. 29-54). Berlin, Germany: Mouton
de Gruyter.
Yasuda, ร. (2010). Learning phrasal verbs through conceptual metaphors: A case of Japanese EFL learners.
TESOL Quarterly 44(2), 250-270.
White, B. (2012). A conceptual approach to the instruction of phrasal verbs. Modern Language Journal)
96(3), 419-438.
Endnotes
1.	The Germanic languages include English, German, Dutch, Flemish, and the Scandinavian languages.
Some Bantu languages apparently also have phrasal verbs (P. Schachter, personal communication).
2.	Others have tried to accommodate the overlap among adverbs, prepositions, and particles by referring
to a certain word that follows the verb as an "adprep" (Bolinger, 1971), a "prepticle" (Clark, 1995), and even
just a "P" (O'Dowd, 1994).
3.	Sometimes a phrasal verb can be used both transitively and intransitively with different meanings, e.g.,
Barbara passed out the papers, (distributed)
Maxine passed out. (fainted)
It is best to consider such homophonous items as two different phrasal verbs with two separate lexical entries.
4.	Although the overwhelming majority of phrasal verbs taking prepositions are intransitive, there are
also a few idiomatic transitive phrasal verbs that take prepositions where the direct object pronoun it
intervenes between the verb and the particle, e.g.,
She put it over on him. (= She deceived/fooled him.)
i'll make it up to you. (- I'll return the favor/good deed.)
5.	This test refers to the passivization of direct objects. We know from Chapter 19 that it is possible for
indirect objects to be the subjects of passive sentences:
Dan's organization was awarded the contract.
6.	We have drawn from the following sources to compile this list: Fraser (1976), Brinton (1988), O'Dowd
(1994), and Jackendoff (1997).
7.	Of course, Latinate verbs are not true synonyms. Neither, for that matter, are other verb + adverb
sequences. As we saw in the discussion of the meaning of phrasal verbs, the particle often connotes
some aspectual sense. For instance, in check out in sentence 3, the particle conveys a sense of goal
orientation (the goal being the speaker's satisfaction), which is lost in a paraphrase like examine or even
the verb 4- adverb sequence check thoroughly.
8.	O'Dowd (1994) shows the Latinate verbs themselves are frequently made up of the same sort of
morphological composition as verb-particle combinations. For instance, one of the paraphrases of the
phrasal verb check out might be examine, which in and of itself carries the Latin directional preposition
ex- ("out of,""from") as its prefix.
Chapter 22: Phrasal Verbs
461
Nonreferential
Subjectsะ Ambient It
and Existential There
Introduction
The words it and there fill a number of grammatical roles in English. In Chapter 16, it was
called a personal pronoun, the same form being used for both subjects and objects:
A: Has anyone seen the newspaper?
6: The last time I saw it, it was in the living room.
In Chapter 6, we referred to there as a pro-adverb, since there can substitute for another
adverbial:
A: Where exactly did you see it?
B: (Pointing) I saw it there (on the coffee table).
While the forms themselves, then, may not be new, their meanings and uses as
nonreferential subjects (the focus of this chapter) are different and, therefore, warrant special
treatment of their own.
These subjects have gone by many names: “nonreferential,” “dummy,” “empty,” and so
forth. What these terms have tried to capture is that, unlike the referential it and there that
we have just exemplified, these subjects appear to have no clearly definable antecedent or
referent, hence the label “nonreferential”:
It's raining. (What is the fr that is raining? What does it refer to?)
There's a lot of noise here. (Where is there? What does there refer to?)
Without a clearly identifiable referent, it and there are free to serve very useful purposes in
English. Consequently, they occur frequently.
Despite their many occurrences, nonreferential it and there can cause difficulties for
ESL/EFL students. Speakers of Spanish and Italian, for instance, who speak languages
that do not require an explicit subject the way English does (for every nonimperative and
nonelliptical sentence), may produce sentences that are ungrammatical in English, such as
the following:
*ls raining.
Speakers of Cantonese might translate literally from their language into English and say:
*Rain is plentiful.
Speakers of other topic-comment languages—Japanese, for example—may preserve the
topic-comment structure of their native language and instead of producing sentences with
there, such as
There are 27 students in Taro's school.
produce sentences such as
463
*Taro's school is 27 students.
*Taro's school students are 27.
*ln Taro's school students are 27.
(Examples from Sasaki, 1990)
Another strategy that speakers of Japanese employ is to use the English verb have,
which allows for the topic-comment word order of Japanese while generating well-formed
sentences in English:
Taro's school has 27 students.
But even this type of sentence is not the conventional way of expressing the same
meaning in English as the sentence with a there in subject position:
There are 27 students in Taro's school.
Another problem for speakers of topic-comment languages is the formation of “pseudo
relatives” (Yip, 1995). It has long been known that some Chinese students of English use the
nonreferential there frequently (Schachter & Rutherford, 1979, p. 3). Many of these sentences
with there subjects appear to be missing a relative pronoun:
*There were lot of events happen เท my country.
There were a lot of events that happened เท my country.
It is understandable why an ESL/EFL teacher might be inclined to correct sentences
like this by supplying the relative pronoun that, in addition to making other modifications.
However, as Rutherford (1983) shows, such ungrammatical learner utterances do not stem
from omission of the relative pronoun, but rather from conforming to Chinese grammar. The
there is presumably seen by learners to correspond to a topic introducer in Mandarin Chinese,
which goes before a subject.
Then, too, the fact that English has two nonreferential subjects, it and there, is a
potential source of confusion to those ESL/EFL students who have no such structure—or to
those whose languages have only one such form, the meaning of which may overlap with the
meanings of English it and there. This state of affairs and students’ association between the
pro-adverb there and place, sometimes results in students producing errors such as
*There is very nice เท Korea.
Any similarities that the two nonreferential subjects share are far outweighed by many
obvious differences: it and there occur in different contexts and have different meanings—
which is why, although both are nonreferential, we will adopt different conventional names
(i.e., ambient “it” and existential “there”).
Finally, learners of English struggle with matters of use, such as when it is appropriate
to say
There's a book on the table.
rather than
A book is on the table.
By now, you know to look for*·1 difference in use between these last two sentences. The
guiding principle that we follow in this book is that if there are two forms in a language with
the same core meaning, there must be a difference in their use. We therefore explore in this
chapter when there is used and when it is not.
Because it and there overlap only in the fact that both are nonreferential subjects, we
depart from our usual means of organizing chapters and instead treat the form, meaning, and
use of each of these separately.
464
The Grammar Book
Ambient It
THE FORM OF AM^^ —————^
The form of the ambient it is fairly straightforward. Since nonimperative sentences require
a subject in English, it can fill this function when no other subject is present. This form
therefore acts as a subject, always taking a singular verb, usually a form of be:
It was a very blustery autumn day.
What time is it?
THE MEANING OF AMBIENT IT	___
Chafe (1970) and Bolinger (1977) refer to the nonreferential it as “ambient.” Ambient it is
grammatically necessary, but lexically vague. The meaning of ambient it derives from the rest
of the sentence, which makes it clear to the listener/reader what is being discussed. It is found
commonly in the following expressions:
Time	It is six-thirty. It is August 28.	It is early. It is Wednesday.	It will be my birthday. It was 1880.
Distance	It is about 100 miles to Boston.		
	It is just two stops on the Metro.		
Weather	It is cloudy.	It's getting dark.	It's 20 degrees!
	It is freezing.	It's going to snow.	It's windy.
Environment	It is never crowded at the Pontiac Hotel.		
	It gets a little rowdy on the ninth floor.		
At first glance, these its may appear to be referential. It is true that we could ascribe noun
antecedents to some of these. We could say that in the sentence:
It is six-thirty.
the it is a personal pronoun replacing the noun phrase the time·.
The time is six-thirty.
However, this analysis won’t explain the it in an associated wb-question:
What time is it?
*What time is the time?
And the same anomaly holds for other corresponding questions; for example:
It/The day is Saturday. What day is it?
*What day is the day?
Moreover, it is impossible to find referents for some cases of it·.
It is raining.
What is raining? (?The clouds are raining. ?The weather is raining. *The rain is raining.1)
It gets a little noisy, especially when everyone is warming up.
Chapter 23: Nonreferential Subjects: Ambient It and Existential There
465
What gets noisy? (The room gets a little noisy. ?The space gets a little noisy.
?The ambience gets a little noisy.)
Therefore, for both these reasons—first, the fact that unlike the personal pronoun it, the
nonreferential it requires no antecedent or anaphoric referent, and second, there is often no
conceivable referent for the it—linguists conclude that the nonreferential it takes its meaning
from the ambience or environment in which it occurs. “We can therefore acknowledge the
rationale for calling it a dummy—its meaning is too unspecific to articulate, and speakers have
no clear conception of its referent. But that precisely is its crucial semantic property . . . ."
(Langacker, 1991, p. 3 77). What Langacker means is that by virtue of ambient it being a linguistic
chameleon, it is extremely versatile in that this form can be identified with many different
aspects of the linguistic or situational context.2
_______________________________________________________________..
THE USE OF AMBIENT IT	__________
As we have seen, ambient it occurs in a number of simple statements and questions in
English dealing with time, distance, weather, and other environmental conditions. Use of
ambient it allows such questions or statements to be shorter and less redundant than they would
be if content nouns such as time and weather were used instead. Note that certain nouns do exist
to deal with these notions, which, when used, make a statement more formal or more precise:
The time is (now) 10 o'clock.
The weather today will be fair and cool.
Such formal statements are sometimes used in media. The issue of when speakers of
English use a content noun like time or weather versus when they use ambient it would be a
good topic for a future research study.
There is another nonreferential it that is used in subject position as well, one that has an
important discourse management function:
It is human to err; it is divine to forgive.
However, we prefer to call this it by another name, it-extraposition or anticipatory it,
because it anticipates the real subject (e.g., to err·, i.e., To err is human). This it, therefore, has a
different function, one that we address in Chapter 32, on complementation.
Existential There
__________________________________________________________________
THE FORM OF EXISTENTIAL
As we mentioned earlier, you have, encountered there before as a pro-adverb. As a pro-
adverb, it can be used, anaphorically (LeTs go to London. There, we can see the crown jewels.} and
deictically—its meaning is understood within the context in which it occurs. One of the
manifestations of this deictic meaning is that it is usually accompanied by some gesture, such
as finger pointing. It is also stressed:
THERE is the little boy who looks after the sheep.
Deictic there calls attention to a location relative to the speaker. Contrast deictic there with the
unstressed there in the next sentence:
There is a little boy who looks after the sheep; his name is Little Boy Blue.
466
The Grammar Book
The there in this sentence does not refer to any specific location. It is not accompanied by
any typical gesture, it is followed by an indefinite noun phrase, and it does not bear stress;
in fact, its vowel may well be reduced [or]. The there in the second sentence is called the
existential there.
In addition to these differences, the existential there has certain syntactic properties that
the deictic there does not share. One is that the existential there is the subject of the clause;
the deictic there is not. To prove this, we can see that since deictic there is an adverb, it can be
moved to another position in the sentence. This is not true of the existential there because as
the subject, it is clause initial:
Existential there: "A little boy who looks after the sheep is there. (Putting there at the end
of the clause forces a deictic interpretation to the there; that is, such an order is not possible
with existential there.)
Deictic there: The little boy who looks after the sheep is THERE.
Existential there can also be used in question tags, given its status as a subject:
Existential there: There is a little boy who looks after the sheep, isn't there?
Deictic there: "THERE'S the little boy who looks after the sheep, isn't there?
Another way that the existential there constructions differ from deictic constructions is the
possibility of negating existentials, but not deictics:
Existential there There isn't anyone in the building.
Deictic there: "THERE isn't the tenant.
Other languages have separate forms for existential and deictic functions. French, for
instance, has the deictic voila ("there is”) and the existential Uy a (“there is”). French also
has the deictic form void (“here is”) (Bergen & Blanche, 2005). English, too, has a deictic
here, which affords the possibility for another syntactic test for distinguishing the two, by
substituting here for there:
Substitute here for existential there: "Here's a little boy who looks after the sheep, (forces
a deictic interpretation)
Substitute here for deictic there: Here's the little boy who looks after the sheep.
In other words, deictic here can alternate syntactically with deictic there, but not with
existential there.
Bergen and Blanche (2005) add that semantically and pragmatically, the French
and English tóere-constructions bear a particularly close resemblance to one another, an
especially surprising fact given their different historical origins. Interestingly, they attribute
the similarity to the fact that as languages evolve, they may reach convergent evolutionary
solutions, especially for such vital functions as deictics and existentials.
There and Subject-Verb Agreement
As a subject, there is followed by a verb, most often the copula verb be. In terms of subject-
verb agreement, existential there is much more problematic than ambient it, which is always
followed by a singular verb. In contrast, as you saw in Chapter 4, in sentences with there
subjects, the verb may be singular or plural depending on the number of the noun phrase
following the verb. Whether or not the there is contracted with the singular present tense be
verb (i.e., there1'ร) is also a factor,
It is rather strange that the NP following the verb determines the form of the verb, in
that a basic property of subjects in English is their power to govern the agreement of the verb.
The explanation for this phenomenon is that the noun phrase following the verb would have
been the subject of the sentence rather than there had other considerations not intervened.
Chapter 23: NonreferentialSubjects: Ambient It and fx/sfento/There
467
We discuss these other considerations in the section on the use of existential there later in this
chapter. For now, the point is that the NP following the verb is not an object but rather is
notionally (though not morphosyntactically) the subject.3 Sometimes, such an NP is referred
to as the logical subject, as opposed to the grammatical subject.
To make matters more complex, there is also considerable variation from speaker to
speaker with regard to the form of the verb, with many speakers opting for a singular verb
when the verb is contracted with there, no matter what the number of the following noun is.
As we saw in Chapter 4, the processing constraints of spoken discourse encourage speakers
to simplify their choices (Crawford, 2005). Here is an example, from the British National
Corpus, where there’s is used with a plural logical subject (Martinez Insua & Palicios Martinez,
2003, p. 263):
There's six of the best. (CKG 24; wt. leisure)
Following there with a singular form of be might occur because speakers are treating
nonreferential there as analogous to nonreferential it, which is always followed by a singular
verb. Another explanation is that speakers choose the singular form of the verb due to the
awkwardness of articulating two consecutive weak syllables with final “r” sounds, which the
choice of contracting the plural form of the verb necessitates:4
There're problems here, (there're /õaror/)
It may also be the case that there and is have become fused into a single, monomorphemic
formula (Breivik, 1981). Whatever the reason, in a study of spoken discourse, Celce-Murcia
and Hudson (1981) confirmed that there ’ร predominates in informal speech, even when a plural
noun phrase follows the verb, which Meechan and Foley (1994) also found in their study
of speakers of Canadian English. However, examining a subcorpus of the British National
Corpus totaling 1 million words (divided equally between speech and writing), Martinez
Insua and Palacios Martinez (2003) found less nonconcord in British English, in both speech
and in writing, than in previous accounts. When British English speakers did use singular
verbs with plural notional subjects, they did so when the notional subjects were elaborate,
presumably because their length and their complexity added to the processing challenge of
composing such sequences:
...there's all sorts of text that one could mention (FLS ใ 27; sp. business)
Cos even in the shadow area you see there's still nice textures shown on the front
steps here and on this wall here is in shadow... (HM2 80; sp. leisure)
It is probably unrealistic of ESL/EFL teachers to expect their students to maintain
the traditional subject-verb agreement rule in their speech when many speakers of English
ignore it. ESL/EFL students should probably be taught to use the rule since the number-
agreement distinction is still expected in formal—especially written—usage; however, they
should also realize that, when speaking, speakers of English often use there’s with following
plural nouns.5 Another strategy might be to teach ESL/EFL students to say there’s instead of
there is because the contraction makes the lack of agreement more acceptable:
There's too many term papers for this course.
*There is too many term papers for this course.
A related issue, which was discussed in Chapter 4, is that the proximity principle tends
to apply when conjoined noun phrases follow there, with the result that the verb be agrees
with the number of the nearest noun phrase rather than the number of both noun phrases
combined, which was the older prescriptive agreement rule. This tendency occurs even in
writing, a finding confirmed by Martinez Insua and Palacios Martinez (2003):
468
The Grammar Book
There are two boys and a girl in the room. (The first conjunct IS plural.)
There is a girl and two boys in the room. (The first conjunct is singular.)
?There are ล girl and two boys in the room. (Traditional prescriptive agreement now
sounds strange to many speakers of English.)
Furthermore, Martinez Insua and Palacios Martinez (2003) also found that if there was
intervening material (usually adverbiais of some sort—below at least and only about) between
the verb and the notional subject, nonconcord was more likely (p. 279):
And there's at least eight discs available at the present time and more could be made
available. (F7U 234; sp. educational and informative)
And there's only about three marks for it anyway so... (FM4 ใ 023; sp. educational and informative)
Verbs Other Than Be with Existential There
Even though be is by far the most frequent verb following existential there, it is by no means
the only one. Other groups of intransitive verbs can occur with existential there’.
•	Verbs of existence or position (exist, live, dwell, stand., lie, remain, etc.)
There exist several alternatives.
At the edge of the forest, there dwelt a troll.
•	Event verbs that describe something happening, developing, or materializing (develop,
arise, appear, emerge, ensue, happen, occur, etc.)
There arose a conflict.
There ensued a dispute.
•	Verbs of motion or direction (come, go, walk, run, fly, approach, etc.)
There came three suspicious-looking men down the street.
Along the river there walked an old woman.
The Use of the Indefinite Determiner with the Logical Subject
You may have noticed, in the example sentences beginning this discussion of there, that
the only morphological feature that distinguished the sentence with deictic there from the
sentence with existential there was the choice of determiner before little·.
THERE'S the little boy who looks after the sheep, (deictic there)
There's a little boy who looks after the sheep, (existential there)
The indefinite article in the sentence with the existential there indicates that the noun phrase
following the verb—that is, the logical subject, boy—is not identifiable. Some reference
grammars state that only logical subjects with indefinite determiners occur with existential
there. As a matter of fact, all the example sentences presented thus far in this chapter agree with
this stipulation. As you will see a little later, however, it is possible to use the definite article
with the logical subject. Nevertheless, this “rule of thumb” requiring use of the indefinite
determiner with the logical subject provides a clue as to the meaning of the existential there.
THEΜΕΑΝΪΪΝΪ€~0ΐ^ΈχΪ5ΤΕΝΤΪΑί~7/ί£^£
Although we introduced the existential there by contrasting it with deictic there, we should also
acknowledge that it is not mere coincidence that the two share a form. Lakoff (1987) invokes
the notion of prototypicality to explain the isomorphism between deictic and existential there.
As we saw with spatial prepositions, cognitive linguists assume that the spatial or deictic
notion is the core meaning, while the meaning of the existential there is an extension of it.
Chapter 23: NonreferentialSubjects: Ambient It and ExistentiaIVnere
469
As opposed to physical space, the existential there designates a mental space in which some
entity is to be located. The common use of the indefinite determiner with the logical subject
supports the notion that there functions to introduce something into mental awareness
(Bolinger, 1977)—to assert its existence, hence its name: the existential there. Unlike the
deictic there, what is said to exist does not have to be in the current speech context. Bolinger
claims that asserting the location of something or asserting the existence of something are
opposite sides of the same coin—i.e., if you locate something, it exists; if something exists, it
is located somewhere.
It is clear, then, that although there is not a content word in the usual sense, to call there
a dummy subject ignores the fact that it does serve a function other than simply filling the
subject slot. Also, if there merely existed to fill the subject slot, this would leave US with no
explanation for why two well-formed sentences, such as the following, are both possible:
There is a pen on the table.
A pen is on the table.
To answer such a question, we must turn to use.
THE USE OF ΕΧΪΗΕΝΤΪαΓ^^
The Presence and Absence o/'There Contrasted
While Langacker (1991) prefers to say that there designates an abstract setting as opposed
to some mental space, he concurs that the basic function of an existential there clause is
presentational; that is, a there clause brings an element into awareness. There serves as a signal
to the addressee to direct his or her attention toward an item of new information (Breivik,
1981). The result of there being in clause-initial position, then, is that everything that follows
the verb can be accorded new information status, including the logical subject. In other words,
by using there as the subject, the usual distribution of given and new information in a clause
can be maintained, where what is new is located in the predicate.
While in some cases, the use of there may seem syntactially optional,6 presumably the
discourse context would favor one sentence over another in a given instance. For example, one
can imagine staging a play and being given stage directions describing a scene, one sentence
of which might be “A pen is on the table.” If I am on the telephone, on the other hand, and I
express the need for a writing implement to someone in the room, I would be put off by the
use of this marked sentence without there. I would interpret it as saying that I should know
that a pen is on the table. I would find “There is a pen on the table” much more appropriate,
as the entire predicate gives me the information I am seeking. In other words, the use of there
may be syntactically optional in certain cases, but it has a pragmatic function centering on
appropriate use in context or discourse.
In fact, in hiSi search of the Survey of English Usage, a corpus of 450,000 words of
spoken text and 300,000 words ofwritten texts of modern, educated British English usage,
Breivik (1981) was able to find very few instances of sentences where the logical subject with
an indefinite determiner occupied subject position. One example he did find occurs in a text
describing the interior of a department store selling electronic equipment:
The first floor houses the reâl heart of the store—the hi-fi departments—but there is
much else here also... A headphone bar is also on the first floor.
The last sentence in this text, one that illustrates what we have been calling the “stage-
direction use”, presumes the existence of the first floor and provides one visual detail about
it. The clause with there after but in this text asserts the existence of something—here much
470
The Grammar Book
else, which is then elaborated on with a concrete detail, the one provided in the last sentence.
Sentences like these without there, then, appear to be infrequent and very restricted in use,
limited to providing details for a scene whose existence has already been established or can
be presupposed.
Although we will have more to say about this in the chapter on adverbiais, for now
we should note that it is also possible to move a locative prepositional phrase to the initial
position in a sentence:
On the table is a pen.
This word order has the effect of treating the logical subject as new information much as
the use of there does. This word order is still marked, however, not unlike the stage-direction
use. Also, moving a phrase to the initial position without there can be done only with locative
phrases:
?This month are a lot of holidays.
This month, there are a lot of holidays.
There are a lot of holidays this month.
Finally, we should also note that there can still occur when the adverbial locative phrase
is preposed:
On the table is a pen.
On the table there is a pen.
But there is more likely to be used if the logical subject is more abstract:
?ln the house was no sign of life.
เท the house there was no sign of life.
As Bolinger (1977) notes, “The less vividly on stage an action is, the more necessary there
becomes” (p. 96).
Various Uses q/~There
Since the function of there is to focus the listener on what follows the verb, the information
status of this part of the clause must somehow be new in the moment; that is, the listener
must have been unaware of the referent or must have forgotten about it and needs to have
his or her memory “reactivated” (Chafe, 1970). The following uses of there fall out from this
deduction (based in part on Lakoff, 1987):
•	Presentational use (introduces a new referent to the discourse, which then
becomes the topic):
There are several alternatives. We could go shopping first and then take in a movie...
•	Locative use (introduces the logical subject and its location):
There are several books on the table.
There used to be a tree behind the garage.
•	Ontological use (strongly asserts the existence of something where the verb exist can
appear instead of be, and the main verb bears stress):
There exist five prime numbers below twelve.
There is a Santa Claus.7
•	List:
4: What is there to see in Tucson?
B: There's the Sonora Desert Museum, Saguaro cactus plants, the Biosphere, a dude
ranch...
Chapter 23: Nonreferential Subjects: Ambient It and ExistentialVnere
471
B’s reply seems to violate the constraint about logical subjects with there in subject
position needing to take indefinite articles. Rando and Napoli (1978) explain this phenomenon
by saying that what is being asserted in such a conversation is the existence of a list, leaving the
items on the list free to take definite or indefinite determiners depending on their uniqueness.
The way that Ward and Birner (1995) explain the use of definite articles here is to say that
the speaker is presumably giving the listener new information about things to see in Tucson,
so the NPs are still nonspecific to the listener, with the choice of definite or indefinite article
determined by the uniqueness of the noun referred to:
•	Suggestion (J. Hilder, personal communication):
A: Where is he going to sleep?
B: Well, there's the couch.
•	Reminder (The speaker is reminding the listener of the existence of someone or
something; a verb like remain can easily serve this function):
A'. Before we leave on vacation, there remains the problem of what to do with the dog.
B: Oops. I almost forgot.
A variation of a reminder is when something is acknowledged by the listener as new in
the moment:
A'. I feel depressed, and I am not sure why.
B: I am sorry, but remember, you often feel this way in mid-winter.
A: Yes. Well, there is that.
In this example, it is not that the link between the season and A’s feelings is unprecedented
in A’s life; it is just that in the moment, A accepts B’s explanation as a plausible account for
why A is feeling depressed, an explanation that apparently did not occur to A until B raised
it. In other words, B’s explanation was interpreted by A as new-in-the-moment information,
what we earlier noted as a status required of an NP in this position in a sentence with there
as a subject. The NP itself may be specific, as is that, but what it represents is a new or
reactivated awareness to the listener (Abbott, 1997; Ward & Birner, 1997).
•	Narrative use (In narratives, there is used to introduce a new element into the
narrative, while simultaneously sketching a scene or background to the story):
There once lived an old woodsman in a little cottage deep in the woods.
With narrative use, it is possible to have an entire VP, not just a verb, precede the logical subject:
Suddenly, there burst onto the scene an out-of-town volunteer fire department.
For discourse reasons involving the need to elaborate new information, which are now
familiar to you, it would be odd for the logical subject to be preceded by a lengthy VP unless
it itself is of sufficient length:
?Suddenly, there burst onto the scene a fire department.
Other Uses of the Definite Determiner with the Logical Subject
Contrary to what some reference1·grammars indicate, it is further possible to use a definite
determiner with the logical subject, even when it is not on a list. Bolinger (1977) and Rando
and Napoli (1978) have pointed to the existence of sentences such as the following:
There's the/a most unusuaUnan standing over there.
There will soon appear the definitive edition of Hamlet.
There never was that problem in Austin.
In each case, however, there is an explanation for the use of definiteness. In the first
sentence, the or a is used because of an odd fact about certain English superlative adjectives
that permit either a definite or indefinite article to be used in such a context to mean “very
472
The Grammar Book
unusual” (see Chapter 3 5 for more details). In the second sentence, the uniqueness explanation
applies (there can only be one “definitive” edition of any work); and, in the third explanation,
that problem, the that is being used anaphorically to refer to something previously mentioned.
In other words, it is too simplistic to say that the logical subjects in existential there
constructions always take indefinite determiners.
There in Oral Discourse
Much of what has been presented in this chapter is a sentence-level analysis. Our treatment
would not be complete if we did not also examine the use and distribution of there at a level
above the sentence as well. Sasaki (1991) has done so for spoken American English. Sasaki’s
data are taken from oral transcripts representing three different speech genres: informal
conversations, radio talk-show discourse, and oral narratives. Transcripts were analyzed for
topic continuity using a modified version of Given’ร method (1984) of measuring referential
distance. Although there were qualitative differences among the three different genres, the
general trends that Sasaki observed were obtained for all three genres:
•	Logical subjects in sentences with there tended to have low topic continuity. They
were not previously mentioned. This finding is consonant with our observation
that logical subjects represent new information and thus tend to be the topic of
subsequent clauses, not previous ones.
•	Although the logical subjects introduced specific new information, it was often a
subcategory of some previously mentioned topic.
•	The elements following the logical subject of existential there sentences were found
to have high topic continuity; that is, their central referents had been previously
mentioned in the discourse. In this way, the postlogical subject element was
functioning as what Fox (1987) calls an “anchor” or a “linker” between the new topic
introduced by the logical subject and the preceding part of the discourse.
Here is an example from Sasaki’s (1991) paper (interview recorded earlier by Jan Frodesen)
to illustrate the third trend as manifest in an interview with a Great Lakes shipping captain:
1.	Well, the thing is, that when you see the boat at the dock and you see all
2.	that steel and all that riveting, you think well, there's nothing gonna
3.	harm this boat, and when you're out on a big storm, you're wondering
4.	what's keeping it all together.
In this extract, we see that the central referent of the postlogical subject element, this
boat in line 3, connects the boat in line 1 to it in line 4. In other words, it is this postlogical
subject element that contributes to the cohesion of the discourse.
Sasaki’s (1991) is the only study we know of that examined the use of there in oral
discourse. There has been much more study of there in written discourse, and it is to this
research that we turn next.
There in Written Discourse
Huckin and Pesante (1988) examined a corpus of 100,000 words taken from 29 written English
texts representing a variety of genres, ranging from reference books to magazines. They
found four purposes for there clauses in written discourse. The basic function was to assert
existence, the other three being more specific extensions of this basic function: (1) presenting
new information, either as setting a new topic or (2) making isolated topic shifts, and (3) using
there sentences to summarize.
Ahlers (1991), building on the work of Huckin and Pesante (1988) and Sasaki (1991),
examined 100 tokens of there gathered from 18 sources—undergraduate college readings
from a variety of disciplines, as well as other academic writing. Ahlers found that there were
Chapter 23: Nonreferential Subjects: Ambient It and ExistentialTnere
473
two primary ways that there functions in academic expository writing: general-particular and
listing. The general-particular function is one where a new topic is introduced in a general
statement beginning with there, which is followed by clauses that offer supporting details or
elaboration. Here is an example from Clyde Kluckhohn’s Mirror for Man, taken from Ahlers’s
data. Prior to this excerpt, Kluckhohn has been discussing various differences among cultures:
All this does not mean that there is no such thing as raw human nature. The members
of all human groups have about the same biological equipment. All people undergo
the same poignant life experiences, such as birth,...
Kluckhohn makes a generalization with a there statement and then provides other details in
subsequent supporting statements.
Fully three-quarters of the tokens of there in Ahlers’s (1991) data fit into subcategories
of the general-to-particular function. The other one-quarter of the examples exemplified the
listing function, which we have already mentioned with regard to the sentence level. Here’s
an example from Ahlers’s data of the listing function as the author uses it in discourse to list
places in Portugal. This is an example from Eleanor Perenyi’s “Escape to the Past,” Atlantic
Monthly, February 1982, pages 39-42:
Portugal abounds เท old Ritzes. I use the term generically; there is a real Ritz in
Lisbon, a modern one with no atmosphere at all, and we didn't stay at it. Our choice
was the Avenida Palace, which fills the bill by being very grand (tapestries, red plush,
chandeliers) and rather shabby. Grander, less shabby, and twice the price is the
Infante de Sagres at Porto. Its high-Edwardian decor is appropriate to a city where the
wine trade has been so heavily involved with England that there is even an English
club, founded in 1785...
The final study of written discourse that we shall summarize here is one of research
reports published in journal articles (Thomas & Hawes, 1994). The authors of this study did
not focus exclusively on nonreferential subjects, being more generally interested in the syntactic
choices available to writers for making reporting statements. Of the 129 reports they analyzed,
approximately 10 percent had ambient it or existential there as subjects, followed by the be verb.
A reporting statement with there, in particular, was used to assert the existence of evidence. It
seemed to be used when the writer was submitting evidence of a certain kind in connection
with a point that he or she was making. These themes co-occurred with nouns like evidence and
support, such as There is increasing support for the hypothesis. Here is an example from their data:
Chronic bronchitic patients do seem to suffer from high levels of psychiatric
disorder, and a close liaison between chest physicians and psychiatrists or clinical
psychologists may contribute to the effectiveness of patient management. There is
some evidence that alleviation of psychiatric symptoms is associated with a
reduction of breathlessness.
The first sentence is making a tentative claim by the writer. The writer then brings
in evidence in the form of a reporนุ as the basis for making the claim. The structure allows
the foregrounding’of the word evidence and the clause qualifying it, so that the relationship
between the two sentences—the claim and the supporting evidence—is highlighted.
All of the examples of it used in these research reports are of fr-extraposition or
anticipatory it, a structure with which we deal in Chapter 32.
474
The Grammar Book
Conclusion
We have seen that the scope and complexity of sentences with nonreferential subjects is far
greater than what most reference grammars would lead US to believe. It has been claimed in
some traditional grammars that such forms as ambient it and existential there are mere fillers,
to be avoided in any formal writing. What our investigations in this chapter have suggested
instead is that it and there serve important, albeit unconventional, functions. While they may
not be semantically rich themselves, the semantic chameleon nature of ambient it and the
function that existential there has of introducing new information make these constructions
important grammatical devices in discourse management. It is not good advice, in our opinon,
to tell ESL/EFL students to avoid them in writing.
It is difficult to pinpoint the challenge for these structures in general. Perhaps the
greatest challenge lies in the one to which we have devoted the most space—the use of
there. Teachers have to help ESL/EFL students get beyond simply using the there + be +
NP + LOC construction. Often this is done by describing familiar scenes. For example, to
introduce the existential there, the teacher may say, “There is a whiteboard in the front of
the classroom. There is a door in the back of the classroom,” etc. This approach may be the
easiest for beginning-level students, but it gives them a misleading impression. If the function
of existential there is to introduce new information, the information after the verb must truly
be new, not something that everyone knows already or can perceive in the environment. The
other learning challenge lies in helping students to understand the distinction between these
two nonreferential forms, it and there.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form. Ask students to listen to a weather report before coming to class. Ask them to
report what they have heard. Alternatively, bring into class a weather report and guide
students in making statements with ambient it using the weather information.
It was hot yesterday.
It was 80 degrees Fahrenheit.
It was dry.
It was windy.
2.	Form. Use a calendar to get students to practice asking and answering questions
concerning the day, month, year, and date.
What day is it?	It's Friday.
What month is it?	It's March.
What year is it?	It's 2015.
What is the date?	It's March 20,2015.
3.	Form. Bring a map into class and ask students to make statements about distances and
travel times.
How far is it from Pittsburgh to Cleveland?	It is about 100 miles.
How long does it take to drive by car?	It takes about two hours.
4.	Use. Here is an adaptation of an activity that Stevick (1982) offers, which he calls
“Islamabad.” Have a student describe a place that has special significance to him or
her. As the student describes the scene, he or she places Cuisenaire rods on a table to
indicate the location of things in the scene. Each statement by the student is repeated
Chapter 23: Nonreferential Subjects: Ambient It and Existential There
475
by the teacher. If the student makes a grammatical error while describing the scene, the
teacher does not correct it but rather recasts the student’s statement using the correct
form. For example:
Student: I am thinking of a place in my hometown. It is the plaza in the middle of the
town. It has a big fountain. (The student places a rod down to mark the fountain.)
Teacher: I see. There's a big fountain in the center of the plaza.
Student: Yes, and it has bench around the fountain. (The student places rods around the
first rod to represent benches.)
Teacher:There are benches around the fountain.
When the student has finished describing the scene, the teacher can repeat the entire
description using the rods to recall the various aspects of the scene, or at this point,
another student can be called upon to describe the same scene. After this, the students
can form small groups, with each group having rods and the task of reconstructing and
describing the scene. Notice that what is significant in this activity is that students are
describing something unfamiliar to the others. It would not do to hold up a picture that
everyone could see and describe it.
5.	Use. Have students pair off. Each pair of students gets a different picture of a city scene.
Only one student in each pair gets to look at it. Identical pictures are placed on a desk
at the front of the room. Student A describes the picture to Student B, who has to guess
which city it is and then has to run up to the desk at the front of the room and find the
picture that Student A has described. Then the roles are reversed. For example:
A:There are skyscrapers. There is a bridge. There is a building next to the water.
It is white. It looks like a shell.
B: Is it Sydney?
6.	Form. Have your students conduct a survey. Shaw and Taylor (1978) suggest one
with the signs of the zodiac. After the students have learned each other’s astrological
signs, they should tally the numbers for each sign and make summary statements. For
example:
There are five Capricorns in the class.
There is one Libra.
7.	Use. Badalamenti and Henner-Stanchina (2007) feature an activity showing a picture of
someone’s apartment to a class and then asking students to figure out the characteristics
of the apartment dweller. They need to make a claim and support it with evidence. For
instance, a student might make the statement:
Student:The person is a tennis player.
Another student or teacher could ask:
Teacher: How^do you know?
Student: Because there is a tenpis racket in the closet.
8.	Use. Frodesen and Eyring (2007) suggest giving students categories such as:
a.	Types of books you like best
b.	Things that you think majce a good movie or TV program
c? Steps for performing a procedure that you know how to do
Students are asked to write a general statement to introduce the topic and then to
write two or three sentences to develop the particular statements. For example:
There are three secrets to making good sushi. First, you need the right kind of rice.
Second, it is important to use very fresh fish. Third, you need a sharp knife.
476
The Grammar Book
9.	Meaning. Kathi Bailey (personal communication) suggests that composing a letter or
creating a sound file to send home after moving to a new place provides a good context
for reinforcing the differences between ambient it and existential there. If the students
are at a low level, the letter could be given to them with just the words it and there
missing.
Dear,_________
It's raining again today, so I'll take the time to write some letters. My new dorm room is okay.
It is pretty noisy here. There are four people living in each room.
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1.	Provide an original sentence illustrating each of the following terms. Underline the
pertinent words.
a.	ambient it	d. existential there
b.	referential it	e. narrative use of there
c.	deictic there
2.	Why are the following sentences problematic?
a.	*It are four o'clock.	c. "There is sunny today.
b.	A: Who’s going?	d. ?In the month of February are 28 days.
B: ?There’s Harry and I.
3.	An earlier linguistic approach to the existential there was to insert there in subject
position after the logical subject had been moved to a position after the verb.
A book is on the table. -»There is a book on the table.
What are some problems with this analysis?
Test your ability to apply what you know.
4.	If your students produce the following, what is it they need to learn in order to
conform to the norms of Standard English?
a.	"Is windy.	d. ?My family has a lot of people.
b.	?A lot of noise is in the street. e. "There has been a long time since
c.	"There are many tourists visit there. I have seen you.
5.	What differences do the following sentences in each set exhibit?
a.	(i.) A ball was in the street.
(ii.) In the street was a ball.
(iii.) There was a ball in the street.
b.	(i.) The time is nine o’clock.
(ii.) It is nine o'clock.
6.	One of your ESL/EFL students comes to you and says, “I heard an English speaker say,
‘There’s usually a lot of empty rooms on the weekend.’” The student asks you why the
English speaker didn’t say “There are... ” How will you answer?
Chapter 23: Nonreferential Subjects: Ambient It and Existentiallhete
477
7.	Lakoff (1987) notes that there is a lack of symmetry with regard to the following two
sets of examples (p. 557):
a.	There’s a Japanese executive in the waiting room.
A Japanese executive is in the waiting room.
b.	There’s a Japanese executive in our company.
*A Japanese executive is in our company.
Can you figure out why the second sentence in (b) is ungrammatical?
8.	There are two other uses of there, which we have not specifically covered in this
chapter. Look at these two examples. Can you figure out what function they serve or
what meaning they convey?
a.	There! My brother is happy at last.
b.	There’s bread, and there's good bread.
Bibliography
Abbott, B. (1997). Definiteness and existentials. Language, 7-2(1), 103-108.
Ahlers, E. (1991). A discourse analysis of nonreferential there in academic writing (Unpublished master’s thesis).
University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Badalamenti, V., & Henner-Stanchina, c. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning., and use 1 (4th ed.).
Boston, ALA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Bergen, B., & Plauche, M. (2005). The convergent evolution of radial constructions: French and English
deictics and existentials. Cognitive Linguistics, 16(f), 1-42.
Bolinger, D. (1977). Meaning and form. London, England/New York, NY: Longman.
Breivik, L. (1981). On the interpretation of existential there. Language, 57(1), 1-25.
Celce-Murcia, M., & Hudson, J. K. (1981). What “there” is to subject-verb agreement. Paper presented at the
annual TESOL Convention, Detroit, ML
Chafe, พ. (1970). Meaning and the structure of language. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Crawford, พ. (2005). Verb agreement and disagreement. Journal of English Linguistics, 55(1), 3 5-61.
Fox, B. (1987). The noun phrase accessibility hierarchy reinterpreted. Language, 65(4), 856-870.
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston,
MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Givón, T. (1994). Universals of discourse structure and second language acquisition. In พ. Rutherford
(Ed.), Language universals and second language acquisition (pp. 109-133). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John
Benjamins.
Huckin, T, & Pesante, L. (1988). Existential there. Written Communication, 5(3), 368-391.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire, and dangerous things. Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press.
Langacker, R. (1991). Descriptive applications: Foundations of cognitive grammar (Vol. 2). Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Martinez Insua, A. E., & Palacios Martinez, I. M. (2003). A corpus-based approach to non-concord in
present-day English existential ráere-constructions. English Studies, 84(3), 262-283.
Meechan, M., & Foley, M. (1994). On resolving disagreement: Linguistic theory and variation. There’s
bridges. Language Variation and Change, 6, 63-85.
478
The Grammar Book
Rando, E., & Napoli, D. (1978). Definites in there sentences. Language, 54(2), 303-313.
Rutherford, พ. (1983). Language typology and language transfer. In ร. M. Gass & L. Seiinker (Eds.),
Language transfer in language learning (pp. 358-370). Rowley, MA: Newbury House Publishers.
Sasaki, M. (1990). Topic prominence in Japanese EFL students’ existential constructions. Language
Learning, 40(3), 333-368.
Sasaki, M. (1991). An analysis of sentences with nonreferential there in spoken American English. Word,
42(2), 157-178.
Schachter, J., & Rutherford, พ. (1979). Discourse function and language transfer. Working Papers in
Bilingualism, 19, 1-12.
Schmitt, T. L. (2011). Grammatically speaking. TESOL Connections, May.
Shaw, p., & Taylor, J. B. (1978). Nonpictorial visual aids. In ร. Holden (Ed.), Visual aids for classroom
interaction (pp. 15-18). London, England: Modern English Publications.
Stevick, E. (1982). Teaching and learning languages. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Thomas, ร., & Hawes, T (1994). Thematic options in reporting previous research. IDEAL, Ί, 13-28.
Ward, G., & Birner, B. (1995). Definiteness and the English existential. Language, 71(4), 722-742.
Ward, G., & Birner, B. (1997). Response to Abbott. Language, 73(1), 109-112.
Yip, V (1995). Interlanguage and learnability: From- Chinese to English. Amsterdam, Netherlands/Philadelphia,
PA: John Benjamins.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
For other linguistic treatments of existential there, see:
Abbott, B. (1993). A pragmatic account of the definiteness effect in existential sentences. Journal of
Pragmatics, 19, 39-55.
Aniya, ร. (1992). The semantics and syntax of the existential àre-construction. Linguistic Analysis, 22(3^4·),
154-184.
Hannay, M. (1985). English existentials in functional grammar. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Foris Publications.
Jenkins, L. (1975). The English existential. Tübingen, Germany: Niemeyer.
Lumsden, M. (1988). Existential sentences: Their structure and meaning. London, England/New York, NY:
Routledge.
McNally, L. (1992).An interpretation for the English existential construction (Unpublished doctoral
dissertation). University of California, Santa Cruz, GA.
Milsark, G. (1974). Existential sentences in English (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Prince, E. (1978). On the function of existential presuppositions in discourse. CLS, 14, 362-376.
For other corpus-based research on existential there, consult:
Erdmann, p. (1976). “There": There sentences in English: A relational study based on a corpus of written text.
Munich, Germany: Tudeuv-Verlagsgesellschaft.
Lloyd-Jones, M. (1987). A contextual analysis of nonreferential there in American English usage (Unpublished
master’s thesis). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
For good pedagogical treatment of nonreferential subjects, see:
Badalamenti, V., & Henner stanchina, c. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 1 (4th ed.).
Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Benson, B., & Byrd, p. (1989). Improving the grammar of written English: The handbook. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Houck, N., & Hilles, ร. (2009). Grammar connection: Structure through content 4. Boston, MA: Heinle,
Cengage Learning.
Chapter 23: Nonreferential Subjects: Ambient It and Existential There
479
Endnotes
1.	Such a sentence is possible in Arabic, but not in English.
2.	Langacker points out that this is true to a somewhat lesser extent for other pronouns. For example, the
first person plural personal pronoun we can have a specific meaning of my partner and 11 but it can also
refer to a larger set that is not so readily delineated, such as We have a lot of coyotes around here. This is
also true of the third person plural personal pronoun, they, as in They say you can never have too much life
insurance.
3.	Notice, for instance, that object, not subject, pronouns are used after the verb in existential there
constructions:
A; Who's going tonight?
B: Well, there's Aziz, you, and me, at least.
4.	เท this regard, note that the deictic there, here, and the wh-question word where sometimes exhibit the
same subject-verb behavior in informal speech (i.e., there're, here're, and where're tend not to occur):
There's the two people I was talking about.
Here's the two books I promised you.
Where's the earrings you wore last time?
5.	This is an obvious case of language change in progress. The written language, which maintains the old
forms, is more conservative than the spoken language, which shows where the language is heading. See
Schmitt (201 ใ) for further evidence of this change.
6.	เท many cases, of course, there is not syntactically optional:
There was a collective sigh.	*A collective sigh was.
7.	Note the use of the indefinite determiner with the logical subject, even though it is a proper noun.
The indefinite article is appropriate, of course, because it is indicating that the information is new in the
moment for the listener/reader.
480
The Grammar Book
Conjunction
Introduction
Conjunction, or coordination, is the process of combining two or more like constituents to
produce another larger constituent of the same type. In traditional grammar, this has been
called compounding. Two clauses or sentences that are combined in writing by means of a
comma after the first clause plus a connecting word make a “compound sentence”:
One of us cooks, and the other cleans up.
There are several options for conjunction available in English. One is simply to combine
like constituents with a coordinating conjunction, such as and. For example, two object NPs are
conjoined in the following sentence:
We served wine and cheese that night.
This is referred to as simple coordination. Another option exists when redundancies are
eliminated. This option is called ellipsis. In the following example, the verb and object in
the first VP, see Orion, has been omitted (elided) in the second VP, and too has been added,
preceded by a comma in a written sentence:
We could see Orion in the clear night sky, and they could, too.
A third option exists, which involves use of a pro-form, in this example a pronoun:
Annie plays softball, and she plays soccer, too.
Again, in this sentence, constituents in both clauses are identical. The substitution of the
pronoun she for the repeated subject, Annie, eliminates the redundancy. As before, the adverb
too has been added to mean “also.”
We know of no language that does not have a means for simple coordination, but of
course, languages use different grammatical devices for doing so. For instance, Korean has at
least two ways of expressing conjunction. The first one is the use of coordinating conjunctions,
and the other is the use of conjunctive suffixes (Fee, 2002).
In addition to simple conjunction, there is complex conjunction, consisting of two-part
correlative structures, here exemplified with both ... and.
Cecilia is both energetic and ambitious.
First, we will treat the form of each of these major syntactic options for conjunction,
drawing attention to the similarities and differences within each option. Next, we will treat
together the meaning and use of the various coordinating conjunctions. Finally, we will
consider other matters of use as they pertain to conjunction.
481
Form: Syntactic Options for Simple
and Complex Conjunction
SIMPLE COORDINATION: COMBINING LIKE CONSTITUENTS WITH
COORDINATING CONJUNCTIONS
Perhaps the easiest way to begin a discussion of simple conjunction is by mentioning the
most common signal used to conjoin: the coordinating conjunction and, which seems to mean
much the same as the “plus” sign in arithmetic. Consider some of the constituents that and
may conjoin:
noun + noun: [bread] and [butter]
NP + NP: [the bread] and [the butter]
adjective + adjective: [big] and [strong]
AP + AP: [very big] and [extremely strong]
verb + verb: [run] and [hide]
PrepP + PrepP: [over the field] and [into the trees]
adverb + adverb: [rapidly] and [effectively]
ร + ร·. [She got in the pool,] and [she began to swim.]
English users should have no difficulty constructing sentences in which such sequences
naturally occur. For example:
The children ran and hid.
The problem was solved rapidly and effectively.
Because coordination consists of combining like constituents,1 we need a simple way of
showing how to connect such constituents. This we will do simply with the abbreviation
“conj” between them. For example:
NP	AP
à	à
NP conj NP	ADJ conj ADJ
à
ร conj ร
Such an analysis assumes that conjoined constituents form a super-constituent of the
same category. For example, two conjoined NPs are assumed to be a “super-NP,” with the
properties of any other NP. This is a reasonable assumption to make since a conjunction of
two NPs seems to behave syntactically exactly as a single, simple NP does: it can figure as
subject, direct object, indirect objççt, object of preposition, and so on:
Subject:	[Martin] bought a stereo. [Martin and Fred] bought a stereo.
Direct object:	Let's get [some coffee].	Let's get [some coffee and a cake].
Indirect object:	1 sent [Russ] a gift.	1 sent [Russ and Amy] a gift.
Obj of prep:	They worked with	They worked with [a hammer and r [a hammer].	saw].
Cases of multiple conjunction with more than two elements can also occur; e.g., with
adjectives (a big, high) fearsome wave), prepositional phrases (they ran out of the house, across the
482
The Grammar Book
yard, and into the street), or other constituent type. Multiple coordination often involves an
overt conjunction only between the last two conjuncts (although no conjunction is required
in the case of prenominal adjectives, as in the first example in this paragraph):
Rising intonation, reflected in writing with commas, appears on all items on a list except
the final one, which is marked by falling intonation. An orthographic convention allows
an optional comma, called an Oxford comma, before the conjunction that precedes the last
conjunct.
They had veget^tííes, rif^ and beàtis.
Finally, we should point out that coordination can occur at different levels of the tree. It
is not the case that any sequence of the form “NP and NP and NP” is a case of coordination
of three constituents at syntactically equal levels. In fact, certain cases may be ambiguous:
We had red beans and rice and fish.
Here, one may interpret red beans and rice either as separate food items on a plate or
as the famous New Orleans dish by that name. The two relevant segments of the tree would
be those shown here:
separate items
New Orleans dish
NP
...— " —
NP cqnj
AP^^nX^ and .
ADJ bean -pi
NP
rice
red
con)
and
NP
fish
fish
N
N
N
This type of ambiguity is relatively common in everyday speech.
So far, we have implied that conjunction involves the coordination of constituents of
the same grammatical category. This is not necessarily what we mean by “like” constituents.
Langacker (2012) asserts that what is necessary is the “mental juxtaposition of multiple
entities conceived as being analogous” (p. 555). In other words, the conjuncts do not have to
be of the same part of speech (although they often are), so long as there is some perceived
commonality. Here are some examples from Langacker (2008, p. 408):
He was sad and feeling sorry for himself, (adjective and participial phrase)
She signed the papers reluctantly and with much hesitation, (adverb and prepositional phrase)
According to Langacker (2008), their commonality is due to the adjective and participial
phrase in the first sentence ascribing a mental state to he. In the second sentence, both adverb
and prepositional phrase specify the subject’s attitude in performing the action. Langacker
(2008) adds: “Such analogies at the level of conceptual content seem more important than
specific grammatical form” (p. 408). For instance, the second sentence in the previous
examples would be ungrammatical if constituents with the same grammatical categories were
conjoined, but the semantic roles were not parallel:
*She signed the papers with reluctance and a ballpoint pen.
At the sentence level, too, what is important is that the two clauses that are being
conjoined relate to the same topic and form a coherent discourse. In the first sentence here,
this coherence is easy to see: two people preparing a meal together, but in the second sentence,
Chapter 24: Conjunction
483
the events do not seem connected. However, they can be related if we think in terms of the
life history of a married couple (Langacker, 2012, p. 574):
Ann cooked the salmon, and Bob prepared the vegetables.
Ann was born in Milwaukee, and Bob went to school in Minnesota.
An additional qualification to our discussion so far rests in the distinction Huddleston
and Pullum (2002) make between distributive and joint coordination at the subclausal level.
What we have illustrated so far is distributive coordination, which is the default type of
coordination where the claim is that two “likes” are being combined, e.g.:
Ann and Bob know Greek.
In this case, we understand that Ann knows Greek, and Bob knows Greek, individually.
Such is not the case with joint coordination, where the two conjuncts do not apply separately
to the individuals:
Ann and Bob are a happy couple.
Notice that or works with distributive coordination, but not joint coordination:
Ann or Bob speaks Greek.
*Ann or Bob are a happy couple.
Also, joint coordination can occur with more than two conjuncts:
Ann, Bob, and Sarah met in college.
Sometimes ambiguity arises when it is unclear whether distributive or joint coordination
applies:
Diane and Donald are married, (to each other or each to someone else?)
Simple Coordinating Conjunctions
Other than and, traditionally, the simple coordinating conjunctions are or and but. Others that
are sometimes included are for, yet, so, and nor. As we saw with and, each of these conjoins like
constituents:
We will have coffee or tea.
He keeps trying, but not succeeding.
They closed the theater, for there was no other choice.
He is friendly, yet vain.
She arrived early at the market, so she got the freshest food.
I don't smoke, nor do I drink.
Not all of these coordinating conjunctions are as amenable to conjoining the full range of
constituents as is and. For instance, for is used in writing, and somewhat archaically in speech,
to coordinate only full clauses, as in:
The flight was diverted to Philadelphia, for the weather was bad in Newark.
Yet and so are also considered “marginal members of the coordinator category” (Huddleston &
Pullum, 2002, p. 1319) This is because they function more often as adverb subordinators to
subordinate than they do as coordinating conjunctions to coordinate. We discuss subordination
further in Chapter 25. Nevertheless, yet and so sometimes combine with a coordinator
(Huddleston & Pullum, 2002, p. 1319):
Vou can look as fit as a fiddle and yet feel quite listless.
This may make the task easier and so increase self-confidence.
In addition, they can both join non-clause conjuncts, although this is not common:
The hiking trail is difficult, yet passable.
The ring is [expensive so unaffordable].2
484
The Grammar Book
The conjunction nor is also a special case. First of all, nor connects two negative clauses
and, as we will see shortly, often occurs with neither. Second, nor cannot connect two negative
clauses without subject-operator inversion applying to the second clause:
*John will not stay at his job, nor he will leave town permanently.
John will not stay at his job, nor will he leave town permanently.
If there is no modal verb, have, or copula be in the second clause, the auxiliary do will
have to be added as the operator:
John did not stay at his job, nor did he leave town permanently.
But why does inversion occur at all? Notice that it does not occur where or is used:
*John will stay at his job, or will he leave town permanently.
*John stayed at his job, or did he leave town permanently.
One explanation is historical. The inversion here is a special case, a remnant of a process in
older stages of English: whenever something other than the subject occurred in first position
in the sentence, a verbal element had to be in second position. In Present-Day English,
inversion is required when a negative/restrictive element precedes the subject. More is said
about this phenomenon in Chapter 25.
SIMPLECOOR	_____
We noted in the introduction to this chapter that a second syntactic option exists to
accomplish simple coordination. Ellipsis, or deletion, occurs frequently in English and will
be encountered elsewhere. Here, we view it in the context of coordination.
บทinverted Affirmative Form
Consider the following set of sentences:
a.	?Birds can fly, and I can fly.
b.	Birds can fly, and I can fly, too.
c.	Birds can fly, and I can, too.
d.	*Birds can fly, and I, too.
Sentence (a) is the result of the simple addition of a coordinating conjunction, the
process that we have just discussed. Simple addition of a coordinating conjunction in clausal
conjunction, when there is redundant material in the second clause as in sentence (a), results in
a rather strange sentence. It is improved considerably with the addition of the adverb too, placed
in the normal adverbial position at the end of the clause, as in (b). The improvement that results
from the presence of too presumably stems from the consistency between the redundancy of
the information in the second clause and the meaning of too·, “also” or “in addition.” Perhaps an
even better solution is to elide or eliminate the redundancy, or part of it, as in (c).
Sentence (d) tells US that if there is a redundant auxiliary verb, it must remain in the
clause. But what if the VP is redundant but there is no auxiliary verb? Such is the case with the
next set of sentences, where the be copula is the main verb, and there is no auxiliary verb:
a.	?She is a citizen, and he is a citizen.
b.	She is a citizen, and he is a citizen, too.
c.	She is a citizen, and he is, too.
d.	*She is a citizen, and he, too.
As we have come to expect with the be copula, in the absence of auxiliary verbs,
it can function as the operator. Its presence makes (c) grammatical; its absence makes
Chapter 24: Conjunction
485
(d) ungrammatical. Finally, as we have also come to expect, when there is no other operator,
the do verb serves this function:
a.	?She believes the reports, and I believe the reports.
b.	She believes the reports, and I believe the reports, too.
c.	She believes the reports, and I do, too.
d.	*She believes the reports, and I, too.
You can see that it does not seem to matter how much material is elided in the VP:
She believes [the reports that the politician was lying about his involvement with
space aliens during his first term of office], and I do, too.
So long as the material deleted is identical to that which already appears in the first clause, no
meaning is lost in the second, elliptical clause.
Inverted Affirmative Form
Now let us look at the following examples:
Birds can fly, and so can I.	*Birds can fly, and I can so.
She has left the country, and so have I.	"She has left the country, and I have so.
She is a citizen, and so is he.	*She is a citizen, and he is so.
She believes the reports, and so do I.	*She believes the reports, and I do so.
Here, the syntax looks similar to the example given earlier with nor—that is, sentences
such as John did not stay at his job, nor did he leave tffwn permanently, where subject-operator
inversion occurs—with the difference that in these four cases, the sentences are affirmative
rather than negative. We will simply assume that so is an adverb like too. So has a special
requirement, however. It must be in clause-initial position, thus triggering subject-operator
inversion.3
Uninverted and Inverted Negative Forms
The negative counterparts of these sentences are:
a.	Turkeys can't fly, and I can't fly either.
b.	Turkeys can't fly, and I can't either.
c.	Turkeys can't fly, and neither can I.
a.	She hasn't left, and I haven't left either.
b.	She hasn't left, and I haven't either.
c.	She hasn't left, and neither have I.
a.	She doesn't believe the reports, and I don't believe them either.
b.	She doesn't believe the reports, and I don't either.
c.	She doesn't believe the reports, and neither do I.
In the (a) sentences, either functions in a conjoined negative sentence as an adverb,
just as so does in an affirmative compound sentence. The (b) sentences result from eliding
the redundancy in the repeated VP. In all the (c) sentences, it can be seen that neither is a
combination of not + either. Then, because neither is in a position before the subject in the
second clause, subject-operator inversion takes place.
One last brief alternative with too/so/either/neither ellipsis concerns the clipped forms,
used as rejoinders. For example:
A: I play tennis.	B: Me, too!
A: I don't play squash. B: Me (n)either.
486
The Grammar Book
As is well known, these forms are often frowned on by prescriptive grammarians.
However, they are commonly used. Moreover, what is interesting about them is the fact that
the pronouns, which in the other elliptical forms appear in subject form, are here in object
form. We do not hear
*1 too.
*1 (n)either.
In addition, only the uninverted forms may appear in this way. We do not hear
*So me.
*(N)either me.
Gapping
An additional type of ellipsis, called gapping, occurs medially in conjoined structures. Gapping
may occur provided that the conjoined sentences have (a) nonidentical subjects and (b) at
least one nonidentical predicate constituent apart from the verb. Here are some examples:
John trimmed the tree, and Mary the hedge.
My uncle works in Ann Arbor, and my aunt in Detroit.
The wind was brisk, the รนท bright, and the ocean calm.
The major difference between simple ellipsis and gapping is that with gapping the
deleted part of the sentence lies in the middle rather than at the end of the second clause.
Another type of reduction from conjoined clauses, where the segments cannot be
analyzed as complete; would seem to be necessary in cases like
Ann came with, and Bob without, a date.
By juxtaposing the contrasting elements, their parallelism is highlighted. “And while
processing of the baseline clause is interrupted, it is not ârupted. Our mental agility is
such that we can usually resume and complete it while preserving its structural integrity”
(Langacker, 2012, p. 595).
SIMPLE COORDINATiÕNrPRÕ^FÕRÃis
In addition to simple coordination and ellipsis, another syntactic option exists for conjoining
constituents in a sentence. Like ellipsis, it also helps in avoiding redundancy. This is the
possibility of substituting a pro-form for a redundant constituent. In fact, pro-forms often occur
in tandem with ellipsis. We could, for instance, say that an operator, be it an auxiliary verb, the
copula be, or do, is really a pro-verb or, rather, a substitute for the entire VP. For example:
Glenn likes to play tennis, and Elaine does, too. (i.e., does - likes to play tennis)
There are some times, however, that pro-forms are used in compound sentences without
ellipsis. This is the case with pronouns and substitute words:
She has left the country, and I have left it, too.
She believes the reports, and I believe them, too.
She is a citizen, and he is one, too.
and also pro-adverbs:
Carl first voted in the 2008 presidential election, and Bev first voted then, too.
He graduated from the University of Wisconsin, and she graduated from there, too.
Chapter 24: Conjunction
487
Sentences with Respectively
We conclude this section on simple conjunction with mention of the adverb respectively.
It seems again that few other languages have an equivalent word; it is used only where
it is needed for the purpose of resolving interpretation problems. For example, in the
sentence
Gunther bought a Honda, and Takako bought a Volkswagen.
there is no doubt as to who bought which car. However, in the sentence
Gunther and Takako bought a Honda and a Volkswagen.
it is less clear whether each person bought one or more cars individually or whether the
two cars were purchased jointly by Gunther and Takako. Although the sentence seems fully
grammatical, an interpretation problem may arise—a problem that the addition of the adverb
respectively can solve because it clarifies that Gunther bought the Honda and Takako bought
the Volkswagen:
Gunther and Takako bought a Honda and a Volkswagen, respectively.
Respectively is a word that is capable of appearing in different structural positions. The
sentence below is synonymous with the one above:
Gunther and Takako, respectively, bought a Honda and a Volkswagen.
While respectively serves mainly to disambiguate, correlatives serve both to disambiguate
and to emphasize as well. We turn to correlative conjunction next.
COMPLEX COO
Though the syntax of simple coordination is not an area of English grammar that causes many
ESL/EFL learning problems, students often have difficulties with complex coordination—
two-part correlative constructions where one part precedes the first conjunct and the other
correlates with and precedes the second. The correlative conjunctions include both . . . and,
either... or, and neither... nor. An additional correlative conjunction pair, not only ... but also,
will be taken up in the exercises. ESL/EFL students, unfamiliar with two-part conjunctions
in their own language, may experience cross-linguistic influence and leave out one member
of the pair.
Both ... And
The correlative conjunction pair both . . . and shows a wide range of possibilities available
for constituent coordination.4 The correlative elements appear just prior to the coordinated
constituents:
Both [Mary] and [John] arrived early.
Mary is both [energetic] and [ahibitious].
John wants both [to stay at his job] and [to leave town permanently].
Almost any pair of constituents can be joined by both . . . and, with the exception of
full-sentence coordination—that is, with clausal conjunction where some kind of ellipsis is
necessary:
"Both [John wants to stay at his job] and [he wants to leave town permanently].
However, both does not always occur directly before the first conjunct. Note the
following sentences with their respective stylistic variants:
Both [John] and [Mary] arrived early. - [John] and [Mary] both arrived early.
Mary is both [energetic] and [ambitious]. - Mary is [energetic] and [ambitious] both.
488
The Grammar Book
John wants both to [stay at his job] and to [leave town permanently]. — John both
wants [to stay at his job] and [to leave town permanently].
In the second versions of these sentences, the first correlative does not occur immediately
before a constituent type identical to the one before which the second occurs.
Either ... Or and Neither ... Nor
Correlatives with either ... or and neither . . . nor are parallel to both . . . and in that they
generally place the conjunctive elements directly before the options mentioned:
Either [Mary] or [John] arrived early.
Neither [Mary] nor [John] arrived early.
Mary is either [energetic] or [ambitious].
Mary is neither [energetic] nor [ambitious].
However, there are variants in which the first correlative element appears in a different
position:
John wants either to [stay at his job] or [leave town permanently].
John wants neither to [stay at his job] nor [leave town permanently].
John either wants [to stay at his job] or [to leave town permanently].
John neither wants [to stay at his job] nor [to leave town permanently].
It is worth noting that either ... or is different from neither . . . nor and both . . . and in
that correlative conjunction is not only possible at the subclausal level, but also at the clausal
level:
Either he does what is expected of him, or he'll lose his job.
We have already discussed form issues having to do with the correlatives and subject-
verb agreement (see Chapter 4), so for now, we turn to fully exploring the areas of meaning
and use.
The Meaning and Use of Conjunctions
Conjunctions allow speakers to combine two or more like elements. Their use helps to
make writing, especially, less choppy and redundant. Not using them leads to run-on
sentences:
*The moon is full that explains their crazy behavior.
The moon is fully so that explains their crazy behavior.
Sometimes a comma is used with a run-on sentence. When such is the case, it is called
a comma splice by prescriptive grammarians:
*The moon is full, that explains their crazy behavior.
Of course, coordinating conjunctions can also be overused:
?The moon is full, so that explains their crazy behavior and many other things, such
as the fall in the stock market and the rising price of butter, and others.
Avoiding run-on sentences and comma splices is something all writers need to learn.
Chapter 24: Conjunction
489
Turning now to their meaning, a straightforward account for coordinating conjunctions
might look like this:
Conjunction	Meaning	Example
and	plus	Lloyd and Mark are going into business together.
but	shows contrast	Lloyd is hard-working, but Mark is lazy.
yet	but at the same time	Mark is lazy, yet well intentioned.
SO	therefore	Neither man had much money, so they decided to collaborate.5
for	because	1 hope they succeed, forthis has been a dream come true for both men.
or	one or the other of two or more alternatives is true	They are determined to make it or to go bankrupt in the process.
nor	conjoins two negative sentences, both of which are true	Lloyd doesn't give up easily, nor does Mark.
While this account may well be satisfactory for beginning ESL/EFL students, its
straightforwardness is deceptive. The question of what conjunctions “mean” is a difficult
area for linguists. It has been explored on the one hand by logicians and on the other by
researchers in pragmatics; the two groups have in the past come to different conclusions, with
the former generally favoring what Posner (1980) calls a “meaning-minimal” account and
the latter a “meaning-maximal” account. Let US take a brief look at the two views and, in the
process, attempt to characterize the nature of the conjunction and. We then look at but, yet, or,
and so. We do not discuss for here because as we mentioned, the use of for as a coordinating
conjunction is somewhat archaic. We also do not deal with nor further here, as it occurs
much more frequently with its correlative counterpart neither, which we address later in this
chapter. It is important to understand that linguists by no means agree over what constitutes
“semantic meaning” and what constitutes “pragmatic meaning” in this area of language.
AND _
The meaning of the word and has inspired lively debate. Here, we sketch some of the ways
the question has been approached.
And as a Logical Operator
Most linguists agree that conjunctions have certain logical properties. Branches of linguistics
that are oriented toward mathematically formal description, such as logical semantics, speak
of the truth-conditional properties of connective elements. The general idea is that the truth
of the statement
Stu is a cook, and Fred is a server.
is a function of the truth of each individual conjunct. So long as each conjunct is true, then
the entire conjoined statement is true; if one conjunct is false, the statement is false. Since this
truth-conditional meaning seems to be constant across all uses of and, that is often thought to
be its central, prototypical, or essential meaning.
490
The Grammar Book
As it turns out, and seems to convey many additional meanings in English, not all of
which are conveyed by its roughly equivalent word in other languages. If and is really only a
logical operator, it ought to be possible to reverse all clauses that are conjoined by and without
any loss of meaning—after all, in logic and mathematics (X + Y) is equivalent to ( Y+ X). And,
indeed, it does not seem to matter how we order the two major parts of the sentence here:
Tokyo is the capital of Japan, and Paris is the capital of France.
Paris is the capital of France, and Tokyo is the capital of Japan.
However, once we get beyond such symmetric sentences to asymmetric ones, which are
likely to be uttered more frequently, problems arise:
Fred fell down, and he hurt his foot badly.
?Fred hurt his foot badly, and he fell down.
The problem in the second sentence does not lie in the question of whether and is truth-
conditional or not: after all, it is true that if Fred fell down and hurt his foot, then Fred did
hurt his foot, and he did fall down. The problem is that the hearer concludes in the first case
that Fred’s hurting his foot was a result of his having fallen. If the order of clauses is reversed,
as in the second example, we do not come to that conclusion; if anything, we might conclude
the opposite: that his falling was the result of his foot injury, which is also possible, but which
indicates a different sequence. What is responsible for these different interpretations?
And as a Marker of Many Meanings
One solution is to take the “meaning-maximal” route and say that and has two meanings—one
simply the truth-conditional meaning of logic, and the other a richer meaning that includes
the idea of “as a result.” There would therefore be ambiguity in the word and; as in other
cases of lexical ambiguity, the listener or reader simply has to figure out from the context
of the utterance whether one meaning or the other is intended (as happens when one says,
“I went to the bank”—have we been talking about money, or are we now in the middle of a
fishing trip?). Yet this solution has its own problems. As Posner (1980) shows, the same sort of
juxtaposition of sentences with and can yield many additional readings (p. 186):
a.	Annie is in the kitchen, and she is making doughnuts, (and there...)
b.	Annie fell into a deep sleep, and her facial color returned. (and during this time...)
c.	The window was open, and there was a draft, (and coming from it...)
d.	Peter married Annie, and she had a baby, (and after that...)
e.	Paul pounded on the stone, and he shattered it. (and thereby...)
f.	Give me your picture, and I'll give you mine. (If you give me your picture, I'll give
you mine.)
The number of possible senses of and grows with such a list, which may still be
incomplete. For example, in a sentence like I gave them everything they wanted, and they still
didn't thank me, and could be replaced by but. In principle, the meanings of and shade into
one another in such a way that they could become too numerous to list; this is not a problem
that we encounter with ordinary lexical ambiguity. When we say “bank,” we might mean a
place to deposit our money or a place from which to fish, but we are certainly not tempted to
interpret the word as some combination of these two meanings—say, as a safety deposit box
alongside a river.
And as an Inferential Connective
This sort of problem has led those who work in the field of pragmatics and who look for
general principles of language use to the conclusion that these so-called meanings of and
Chapter 24: Conjunction
491
are actually not meanings at all, but aspects of use—where use means that the context of the
utterance determines exactly how the word will be interpreted. Blakemore (1992) argues that
when we use the conjunction and, we may intend to draw the listener’s/reader’s attention
to something over and above what is expressed by the individual conjuncts; the use of and
is motivated, in other words, by the desire to have the listener/reader draw an inferential
connection, one that is not stated but implied. If we are simply making a grocery list, there is
no mystery to the use of and to connect items in a parallel way. However, if someone utters,
John fell down and hurt his knee, the listener/reader is implicitly being invited to seek some
other relevant connection between the conjuncts. Given what we know about the possible
effects of a fall upon the human body, we are led to the most likely connection—a causal one.
Since we assume that the speaker/writer is equally aware of the possible connection, we will
feel almost betrayed in the event that no such connection was actually intended—in the case
that, for instance, John did fall down but had actually hurt his knee from some other cause
prior to or later than that.
And as a Marker of speaker Continuation
Another much different presentation of and by Schiffrin (1987) examines its use in
conversational discourse beyond the ideational, or content, level. She calls it a mark of
“speaker-continuation,” with which a speaker signals that the discourse to follow is in some
way connected with what has come before. The connection may be a way to take back a
conversational turn that has been interrupted by someone else, thereby indicating that the
original speaker has not finished. A speaker who wishes to continue a monologue, but needs
to catch his or her breath, does well, then, to signal this wish by ending with an uttered and
just prior to the pause. This use of and goes beyond the usual ideational conjunctive uses and
places it into the category of what have come to be known as discourse markers—a category
that contains words like oh and well, expressions that cannot well be defined without reference
to a speaker’s role in conversation at a given moment. Discourse markers certainly should
have a role in the teaching of oral communication skills.
Regarding oral communication, Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad, and Finegan (1999)
note that “turn-initial coordinators are considerably more common in conversation than
sentence-initial coordinators in the written registers” (p. 8 3).This maybe due to the prescription
to avoid beginning written sentences with a conjunction. However, Dorgeloh (2004)
argues that this dispreference for sentence-initial connectors is not a modern phenomenon
and can be traced to earlier stages in the evolution of English. Nevertheless, the use of
sentence-initial conjunctions, even and, is undeniably increasing these days.
As was the case with the syntax of simple conjunction, the meaning and use of and are
not especially problematical aspects of English for ESL/EFL students. This is so despite the
fact that although most languages may have a word that is translatable as and, this word may
not be as free in it§. syntactic occurrence or potential interpretations as is the English word.
Mandarin Chinese, for example, jnay coordinate NPs with the word han, but sentences are
coordinated by other words such as er or che.6 At least one of these would fit into most of the
slots filled by and in Posner’ร (1980) example sentences, but would make no sense at all in the
warning, Do that, and ru hit you! A comparative study of distribution will show that in general,
English is quite broad with respect to the contexts in which and may be used; most ESL/EFL
students may not make full use of the options available to them.
492
The Grammar Book
BUT AN D YET _________________________________________________________________________________
But is often described as logically equivalent to and. That is, if the sentence “It is raining, but I
am happy” is true, it is also true that it is raining and I am happy. However, but clearly means
more than this, and this “more” is generally said to be a contrast of some sort.7 But signals two
types of contrast, while the conjunction yet is generally limited to a single type of contrast.
But/Yet in Denials of Expectations
One type of contrast is usually called denial-of-expectation. This use, often called adversative,
has to do with the violation of reasonable expectations: what is expected after a reading of the
first conjunct turns out not to be true from a reading of the second. Some examples are the
following:
He is assertive but/yet introverted.
They tried for three hours to steer the boat from the storm, but/yet the boat sank.
They've had a terrible time up to now, but/yet they'll probably succeed in the end.
She told us that Athens was in this direction, but/yet she's mistaken.
As such examples show, but/yet may be used where the violation of expectations is not
especially strong; in the last example, it is not necessary that we expect the directions that
people give to be correct all the time. However, we do tend to trust others’ directions, and we
find our trust misplaced if the directions are faulty; so the issue of expectation probably plays
a part in the choice of conjunction.
But as a Marker of Semantic Contrast
The other major use of but involves a real semantic contrast, one in which exactly two entities
or qualities are set adjacent to each other in order to focus on one or more semantic differences
in them. Most often they may involve polar opposition, but the following examples show that
they need not do so:
Winter is warm in Miami but cold in Moscow.
Heide likes skiing, but her sister prefers tennis.
Nimbus clouds threaten rain, but cirrus clouds do not.
She enjoys an occasional visit to the desert, but he wants to relocate there.
Although it is possible to imagine circumstances in which some of these sequences might
involve denials of expectation (which then also would permit yet), in general, no real denials
of expectations need be present here; for instance, we cannot expect or predict anything at
all about Moscow weather from information about Miami weather. Sometimes, the semantic
contrast is not exhibited in a specific pair of words like warm/cold or a clear negation word, but
rather in an implied ideational contrast, such as that in the final example between occasional
visit (“stay briefly from time to time”) and relocate (“stay a long time”).
But as a Marker of Speaker-Return
There seems to be a clearly distinct third way in which but is used in discourse, especially
conversational discourse, one that has been described by Schiffrin (1987). When seen as a
discourse marker, but can be, among other things, a sign of speaker-return: when one party
to a conversation has strayed for some reason from the main point of a monologue, but (or
anyway, or but anyway, or but, as I was saying,) can be used to mark the attempt to recover the
lost point. This use of but differs greatly from the two ideational uses.
As was true with and, languages other than English tend to have some sort of expression
like but to mark contrast; ESL/EFL students do not seem to experience great difficulties
Chapter 24: Conjunction
493
with the use of but. Again, these other languages may have two or more noninterchangeable
words that cover the uses of the English word. Modern Hebrew distributes these uses across
two words, aval and ela. One Mandarin Chinese equivalent of but) the expression tan-she, is
actually a correlative with which one can express denial of expectations, but not semantic
contrast, which can be marked by another word, er.8 German has one word, abeT) which covers
both denial and contrast except in the case of explicit contradictions, as in This is not a rose
but a geranium, in which case the word sondem is used. As with and) the task of the student
learning English in such cases, where many native-language words coalesce into one, seems
much simpler than that of the English-speaking student learning one of these languages, in
which he or she might tend to generalize just one of the forms to inappropriate cases.
OR
Arguments over the true meaning of or are parallel to those we summarized previously
concerning and. In presenting them, we will cover the major uses of this conjunction.
Inclusive Or
The meaning of the conjunction or has been characterized by logically oriented linguists in
a truth-conditional way: any sentence “X or Y” is true so long as one of its conjuncts is true.
If both of the conjuncts are false, then the statement is false; if both are true, the statement is
true. Thus if someone says,
We'll serve carrots or (we'll serve) peas.
without a specific commitment to doing only one of these things, one might normally say that
the conditions of the statement are fulfilled so long as we do one or both of these things; it
is unlikely that if we serve both carrots and peas, someone would accuse US of having spoken
falsely. Logic and reality seem to work in parallel ways here.
Exclusive Or
However, it is clear that when we use or, we do not always intend it in this way. In some cases,
we clearly intend to convey the exclusive rather than the inclusive meaning. Suppose that
during the sale of an automobile, the salesperson says,
You can pay US ten thousand dollars in cash, or you can give US a money order for that
amount.
In this case, the buyer clearly expects that the seller intends the exclusive reading to hold;
neither buyer nor seller would consider the inclusive reading as even a remote possibility. In
other cases, it seems that real-world conditions dictate an exclusive reading regardless of our
intentions, as in the case of the sentence
Right now our relatives are in London, or (they are) in Paris.
In others, logic dictates such a reading, as in
It is snowing outside, or it is not snowing outside.
Logicians might then insist, as those in Gamut (1991) do, that such problems are matters
of context, not of word meaning: whatever the world is like, it still holds that the semantic
meaning of simple or is the logical one. The conjoined sentence Right now we are in London, or
we are in Paris is true so long as at least one of its conjuncts is true. The fact that in this case,
both of its conjuncts cannot be true at the same time is a problem for the world, not for logic,
and so long as we are in one of the two cities at the time of the utterance, the sentence is true
and the meaning of or remains constant.
494
The Grammar Book
We thus seem to have a problem similar to that for and) where semantic meaning
and pragmatic meaning are confounded. Since ambiguities can arise through mismatched
intentions, English does have a correlative form either... or, which seems, for most speakers,
to have the exclusive reading. The sequences
a.	either Xor / but not both ... exclusive)
b.	either XorY or both... (= inclusive)
c.	Xand/or /...(— inclusive or exclusive)
serve the same purpose in an even more emphatic way.
Or as a Warning
Or may have additional senses that go beyond the inclusive-exclusive distinction. One involves
an imperative, or quasi-warning, sentence followed by a statement of consequence:
Stop that loud music, or I will call the police.
Give me your overdue assignment right now, or I will lower your grade.
You have to fix the car, or we can't go on our trip.
In such cases, or may be paraphrased lexically as otherwise. These sentences may also be
naturally paraphrased syntactically with such conditional structures as
If you do not stop that loud music, (then) I will call the police.
If you do not give me the assignment, (then) I will lower your grade.
If you do not fix the car, (then) we can't go on our trip.
Once again, given a more fully explicated form of the imperatives (as in, Either you
'will stop that loud music, or I will call the police.), a logician would likely hold or to the constant
semantic meaning while leaving the pragmatics to others.
Or in Paraphrases
A further use of or is somewhat more puzzling:
This is a matsutake, or pine mushroom.
The boards have to be mitered, or cut at an angle.
Or is frequently used in this way at the phrasal level in definitions, appositives, or
paraphrases. At first glance, the situation seems complementary to that of It is snowing, or it is
not snowing as far as logic is concerned. While the reading of or in that sentence is necessarily
exclusive, in these two sentences, the reading seems necessarily inclusive: we cannot have a
matsutake without also having an exotic mushroom called by the common English name “pine
mushroom.” (This kind of all-inclusion is, after all, part of what makes a good definition.) Yet
the logician could still tell US that the usual definition of or holds true. Pragmatically, there
seems to be something metalinguistic happening in such sequences. In the first part of each
sentence, in uttering the words matsutake or mitered, we may seem to be referring to things
(objects or events) in the world. In the second part, however, we retroactively call attention to
those words as words, rather than as representations of objects or events. This metalinguistic
intention shows up in spoken discourse by means of a special emphatic stress on the word to
be defined or paraphrased; it shows up in written discourse by means of italics or quotation
marks. Thus, the speaker seems to be saying,
You can refer to this object as a "matsutake" or as a "pine mushroom."
The action that must be performed on the boards can be called either "mitering" or
"cutting at an angle."
Since there is a possibility here of choosing one option, the other option, or both, the
logician’s definition still seems to hold true.
Chapter 24: Conjunction
495
Or as a Self-Correction Device
At the clausal level, this metalinguistic version of or shows up in what often appear as self-
corrections when a speaker has not expressed himself or herself satisfactorily. For example:
We have to help the children. Or, more precisely, we have to help them to help themselves.
You are a joy to be around. Or, to put it another way, I love you.
Here, the or may be interpreted in reference to the prior statement itself in such a way
as to suggest, “What I intended by the first sentence was ..
These uses of or do not necessarily match the full range of uses of any single word
in other languages. Although the correspondence between English or and German Oder is
rather neat, Mandarin Chinese is quite different: Mandarin speakers use the expression
huozhe for yes/no questions, while the expression hai she is used for alternative questions (see
Chapter 14); the two are not interchangeable. In the case of the imperative-warning use of
or, only the expression foze (i.e., “otherwise”) is available. None of these three may be used
to express metalinguistic-paraphrase or, which is typically marked with an expression that we
can translate as “that is to say”; thus, in this kind of metalinguistic paraphrase, the English use
may seem quite bizarre to Chinese learners.
_____________________________________________________
SO	_______ ____________________________________	..
The conjunction so9 might be seen essentially as a marker that relates causes to results, as in
The rope broke, so the box fell down.
She has a cold, so she won't be coming with US today.
However, Blakemore (1988) calls so more generally an inferential marker—that is, a
conjunction that relates an inference in the second clause to a proposition in the first. (Since
propositions are typically rendered in sentence form, we may have an explanation for why so
finds practically no use as a phrasal conjunction.) For Blakemore (1988), the causal reading
is what she calls an “enriched” interpretation. It is possible to use so where no expression of
cause is desired, but where logical inferences are strong, as in examples like the following:
There's five dollars in my wallet, so I didn't spend all my money, then.
The car's in the garage, so Zahra must be here.
This use of JO can be used across interlocutors, where one supplies the initial proposition
and the other supplies the inference:
A: The Acme Corporation has just gone out of business.
B: So we've lost our investment.
So may even be used, as Blakemore (1988) points out, where no prior utterance at all has
occurred: Suppose that someone is wondering who has taken a freshly made cake and then
sees the family dog with frosting on its face. A likely reaction would be to say, So YOU ate it! If
the baker of the calce had not already noticed that the cake was missing (and hence not had at
least the proposition, The cake is missing, already in mind), the baker could not, on seeing the
dog’s face, attach so to the exclamation. What unifies all of these uses of so is that while logical
inferences may or may not always be present, the listener/reader will always be cued to the
construction of some kind of inference as his or her main task.
Mõving beyond its role as a simple coordinator to its use as a discourse marker, Schiffrin
(1987) illustrates situations in which a speaker marks a transition in the conversation by the
496
The Grammar Book
use of so, thereby offering the listener the chance to become a speaker and either carry the
topic further or change topics. One of the speakers whom she recorded is quoted as saying,
"We're considered the... more or less... the oppressors. So ah... take it from there."
Often, when a conversation seems played out, an interlocutor will utter so . . ., often
with fading intonation, apparently as a signal that the discussion agenda is being opened
or, perhaps, that the conversation is nearing an end. It is worth investigating to what extent
this conversational device can be seen as an extension of the ideational one described by
Blakemore (1988).
Buysse (2012) sums up investigations on the use of so by learners [e.g., Miiller’s (2005)
and Hellermann and Vergun’s (2007)] in this way:
เท sum, the discourse marker so appears in the existing literature as a"resultative"or
"inferential" marker that has the ability to fulfil a multitude of (predominantly) discourse-
structuring functions. As such it is frequent in native and learner language, but it is still
more common in the former than in the latter, (p. 1766)
From 40 interviews with advanced English learners in Belgium, Buysse (2012) himself
identifies ten functions of so, which he classifies according to Halliday’s three functional
relationships (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2014) and which he then compares to a comparable
corpus of interviews with English speakers.
DISCOURSE MARKER FUNCTIONS OF so	
Type of relation	Discourse marker function
Ideational	Indicate a result
Interpersonal	Draw a conclusion Prompt Hold the floor
Textual	Introduce a summary Introduce a section of the discourse Indicate a shift back to a higher unit of the discourse Introduce elaboration Mark self-correction
Buysse (2012) found that advanced learners of English used so for all these functions;
however, in contrast to previous research, he reports that the learners used them twice as
often as the English speakers. Further, even this list of ten functions is not comprehensive.
As Buysse observes, it leaves outro as an adverb of degree or manner (e.g., She was so happy.'),
so marking “purpose” (e.g., He left early so as to avoid the rush-hour traffic.'), as a part of fixed
phrases (e.g., and so on) and as a pro-form (e.g., I think so.).
AND/OR
One final comment on the meanings of conjunctions has to do with the alternation between
and and or in conjoined constructions in affirmative and negative statements, respectively.
Consider the following sets:
a.	They have a house and a car.
b.	They don't have a house and a car.
c.	They don't have a house or a car.
Chapter 24: Conjunction
497
Most speakers of English will tend to find the proper negation of the proposition expressed
in (a) to be (c), not (b), although negation seems to have operated on (b) in the normal way.
What sentence (c) expresses is:
It is not true that they have a house. It is also not true that they have a car.
In contrast to that, the typical logical interpretation of the (b) sentence is:
It is not true that they have both a house and a car.
It is true that they have either a house or a car.
We find a parallel in a structure already presented in Chapter 10: the alternation between
some and any. Recall that the standard negation of
She has some books.
is the sentence:
She doesn't have any books.
Recall, too, that the sentence
She doesn't have some books.
admits the following interpretation:
There are some books that she doesn't have.
implying that there are some books that she does have. As is true with the some/any distinction,
the and/or alternation is likely to be the source of learner difficulty; the two structures may
even merit treatment together in class.
OTHER ISSUE...............................................................~~zโ Í ..
Similarities and Differences between Structures with
Too/Either and So/Neither
In many English grammar textbooks, the affirmative expressions I do too and so do I and the
negative expressions I don’t either and neither do I are presented as synonymous forms that can
be freely substituted one for the other.
บทinverted	Inverted
Affirmative	I do too	so do I
Negative	I	don't either	neither do I
They are similar in that the words too and so serve to provide new information in
affirmative statements, while cueing the listener/reader that identical components of the first
clause may need to be inferred to fill in syntactic gaps and flesh out the full meaning. The
words either and neither serve the same purpose for negative statements. All four phrases
can also be seen as devices to shortcut the repetition of sentence elements primarily in the
expression of agreement between interlocutors.
We earlier presented too as similar to so, and not...either as similar to neither, differing
only in their relative syntactic positions and in the fact that subject-operator inversion occurs
when so or neither precedes the subject. In fact, they often seem interchangeable, but they
are not equivalent in all contexts^since the too-form permits the addition of new information
within the predicate, while the re-form does not. For example:
Matt plays second base, and he pitches, too.
"Matt plays second base, and so does he pitch.
498
The Grammar Book
You can fish from the bridge, and you can dive from it, too.
*You can fish from the bridge, and so can you dive from it.
In contrast, the corresponding forms with not.. .either/neither are both possible, although
the second of these tends to sound somewhat awkward:
I don't like broccoli, and I don't like squash either.
?l don't like broccoli, and neither do I like squash.
You can't fish from this bridge, and you can't dive from it either.
?You can't fish from this bridge, and neither can you dive from it.
When one wants to add new information in subject position, however, all these forms
are suitable:
Matt plays second base, and so does Lou.
Matt plays second base, and Lou does, too.
I don't like broccoli, and neither do you.
I don't like broccoli, and you don't either.
When new information is added both to the subject and the predicate position,
however, or when multiple pieces of information are added to the predicate, speakers express
reservations about the appropriateness of any of these forms:
71 play first base, and my sister pitches, too.
71 don't play first base, and my sister doesn't pitch either.
?You can fish from this bridge, and you can dive from that one, too.
?You can't fish from this bridge, and you can't dive from that one either.
However, Celce-Murcia (1980) provides evidence from discourse analysis that such
sentences occasionally occur in informal conversations.
A second difference worth pointing out is that when these forms are used as rejoinders,
only the uninverted forms may be shortened and used without an auxiliary verb. Also, when
these forms are shortened, any subject pronoun involved must be changed to an object form:
A: I'm sorry that Detroit lost the World Series in 2012.
ร.· So am I. /1 am, too. / Me, too!
A: I wasn't paying attention.
ร.· Neither was I. /1 wasn't either. / Me neither.
These rejoinder forms, in addition to being of a highly informal register, seem almost
completely restricted in use to the expression of personal agreement between interlocutors.
Evidence for this observation lies in the fact that only the first person pronoun me regularly
appears in this structure:
4: She wants to wear a sweatshirt today.
ร.' So does he. / He does, too. / ?Him too.
A: I don't want to stand in line all day.
ร.' Neither do they. / They don't either. / ’Them neither.
In other words, one cannot talk about other people’s agreement with these forms. Nor
are they regularly used with the first person pronoun in a monologue:
?She wants to go, and me, too.
?She doesn't want to go, and me neither.
Therefore, me too and me (ท)either seem tied to a very specific and restricted discourse
function.
By using a questionnaire, Shayne (1975) was successful in isolating a third context where
the uninverted forms were strongly preferred over the inverted forms. In this case, it was
Chapter 24: Conjunction
499
with subordination rather than coordination (see Chapter 26). Shayne found that uninverted
forms were favored where the “tag” is preceded by an adverb subordinate such as because,
since, although, or in spite of the fact. For example:
Macy's offers a lot of good buys, although
a.	so does Gimbel's.
b.	Gimbel's does, too. (strongly preferred)
c.	no preference
You have seen several contexts so far where the uninverted forms were necessary or were
preferred over the inverted forms. The opposite also occurs. In a usage study, Celce-Murcia
(1980) showed that native speakers preferred the inverted forms over the uninverted forms in
those cases where an insult was intended. (The numbers in parentheses refer to the number
of respondents completing a questionnaire who preferred a given form.) For example:
You're a rotten egg and
(74) a. so is your father.
(31) b. your father is, too.
(8) c. no preference
The uninverted forms are more frequent and versatile overall than the inverted forms;
however, there are important discourse differences. While this area of grammar could stand
more investigation, it is an oversimplification to treat the two affirmative (and two negative)
forms as mere paraphrases of each other.
Coordinate Clauses without Conjunctions
Coordination, or conjunction, presumably exists as a syntactic operation to ease language
processing. In many cases, redundancy is eliminated and more efficient communication is
achieved. In addition, conjunction serves to clarify the relationship between sentences. When
conjunctions are not used, the clause sequence may be ambiguous:
It was bitter cold. It was snowing.
The most likely interpretation of the relationship between these two sentences might
be an additive one:
It was bitter cold and snowing.
Without conjunctions, however, we have no way of telling the relationship from the
syntactic evidence. People who live in snowy climates, for example, know that bitter cold
days and nights are often the clearest—that is, it doesn’t often snow when it is bitter cold.
Therefore, we could give another interpretation to this pair of sentences:
It was bitter cold, yet snowing.
Many other interpretations are possible. The point is that conjunctions serve to
disambiguate the relationship between sentences and thus clarify intended meaning. In
Chapter 26, we wilbcQnsider logical connectors, where this is even more the case.
Conclusion
Conjunction presumably exists to help speakers and writers avoid the repetition of identical
constituents and ambiguity. We have seen that this can be done by adding coordinating
conjunctions and using ellipses and pro-forms. Correlative conjunctions can serve this same
purpose while emphasizing the coordination of grammatically similar constituents.
500
The Grammar Book
One of the fascinating aspects of conjunctions is the chameleonlike way in which they
may behave as simple logical operators at one extreme, and as discourse markers, serving a
connective function in discourse, at the other. Many of the uses of conjunctions, particularly
conversational ones, fall into this latter type. For ESL/EFL teachers, much that has to do
with conjunctions is fairly straightforward for advanced-level students. Nevertheless, the
processes of coordination will have to be taught so that beginning-level ESL/EFL students
can learn to produce and understand conjoined constructions.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form. A focus on coordination in English is a good context in which to begin to deal with
grammatical parallelism—that is, the coordination of like constituents while avoiding the
coordination of unlike constituents. (Lack of parallelism is often seen as a problem in
native English student writing as well.) Students can be presented with sentences from a
text like the following or shown samples of their own or other students’ work; they can
be asked to determine whether the sentences are properly formed and to fix those that
are not:
Weather is the effect of four forces: temperature, humid, wind, and the fourth
force is pressure.
Warm air rises, it cools, and forms clouds.
The climate of northern Africa is hot and dry, in southeast Asia is hot and wet,
and cold in northern Europe.
Creating parallel structures is strikingly like the addition of fractions: one cannot add
fractions unless a common denominator exists. The idea that the process of forming
parallel structures is exactly like that of finding common denominators may in fact be
helpful to students who enjoy doing math.
2.	Form/Meaning. The following exercise can be used to create the contexts for
practicing so/too/either/neither forms. Students in pairs can draw up individual lists in
which they describe their most and least favorite activities, their most and least favorite
subjects in school, the things that they have never done that they would like to do, or the
jobs that they would most and least like to have. (You might think up other possibilities,
but the idea is to elicit points of agreement of both positive and negative types.)
Students then compare lists and make note of the areas in which they agree. They then
report to the class on the content of their lists; students take turns reading items where
there is agreement:
Maria: Tomomi wants to visit Las Vegas, and so do I.
Tomomi: Maria would not like to major in engineering, and neither would I.
3.	Form/Meaning. In the context of a discussion of world geography or cultures, students
may be presented with a map of the world. One student can go up to the map and point to
two countries, then ask another student to make a statement that is true of both countries.
For example, if the student points to Russia and Canada, possible answers might be:
Russia is in the far northern part of the world, and Canada is, too.
Both Russia and Canada reach from one end of a continent to the other end.
Russia does not have banana trees, and Canada does not have them, either.
Chapter 24: Conjunction
501
The student who answers with a true statement may then go up to the map and point to
two countries of his/her own choosing. Students take turns in this way until every student
has asked and answered a question.
4.	Form/Meaning. Shaw and Taylor (1978) have suggested that nonpictorial visual aids can
be very useful stimuli for encouraging the use of conjoined sentences in communicative
exchanges among class members. For example, a baseball box score clipped from the
previous day’s newspaper could provide an opportunity for relevant practice. The statistics
could allow for conjoined sentences, such as:
The Atlanta Braves scored eight runs, but they didn't win the game.
One player hit a single, a double, and a home run.
The Oakland Athletics didn't make an error, nor did the Royals.
5.	Form/Meaning. The use of coordination with too/either/neither takes practice for ESL/
EFL students to master. This is so partially because of structural difficulties; for either/
neither, it is so also for another reason. Many languages—east Asian languages, for example—
show agreement with a negative statement by asserting affirmation rather than negation.
As we saw when discussing negative yes/no questions, when the question tag “You aren’t
from Japan, are you?” is used, the speaker will agree by saying “Yes” (meaning, “No, I am
not from Japan”). This potentially confusing difference carries over to neither structures,
where one student will say, “I am not finished with my studies,” and a second student will
comment, “So am I” (or “Me, too” meaning “Neither am I”).
One possibility is to have one student make a statement about a like or dislike, about
his or her studies, or about another topic and have a second student comment on the
statement with respect to himself or herself in the following manner:
Student ไ: I don't like liver.
Student2:1 don't like liver, either.
A third student can then comment on the information given by students 1 and 2, saying:
students: Neither Mariko nor All likes liver.
Mariko doesn't like liver, and All doesn't like liver, either.
Mariko doesn't like liver, and neither does All.
Should a sequence like the one here occur:
Student ไ: I don't like liver.
students:*So do I.
and if Student z cannot recognize and acknowledge it as an unacceptable response, the
teacher can step in and model a more appropriate response.
6.	Form/Meaning. A variation of the previous exercise, useful for writing, has the students
making lists of their likes and dislikes with regard to the city they are staying in, and then
comparing listsjike those here. 'This works well as a pair activity:
Ali	Mariko
1 1 don't like the weather.	1 don't like the food.
2 1 don't like the dirty air.	1 don't like the weather.
3 1 don't like the subways.	1 don't like the noise.
4'1 like the food.	1 like the people.
5 Hike the people.	1 like the school.
6 1 like the museums.	1 like the subways.
502
The Grammar Book
From this list, Ali, for example, may derive the following comparisons:
I don't like the weather, and neither does Mariko.
I don't like the subways, but Mariko does.
I like the food, but Mariko doesn't.
I like the people, and so does Mariko.
7.	Form/Meaning. Ur (1988) describes an activity that gives students practice with
correlative conjunctions. Students first are given a list of activities, such as painting a
picture, playing basketball, helping to move heavy furniture, singing a high part in a song,
and so on. Next, students receive brief descriptions of a few people. Students then are
asked to say which people are likely to be able to do the activity; for example:
Either Teresa or Joanna could paint a picture.
Neither Umberto nor Ramón could sing a high part in a song.
8.	Form. Thewlis (2007) suggests working with students on avoiding run-on or run-together
sentences in which coordinating conjunctions are omitted or sentences containing them
are incorrectly punctuated. Give students a paragraph in which you have intentionally
run together certain sentences, and ask them to correct it.
Alternatively, gather run-on sentences from students’ compositions, and ask the
students to correct the errors. (Note that if you choose this alternative, there should be
at least one error from almost every person in the class so as to avoid stigmatizing any of
the students.)
9.	Use. Record a conversation and bring it to class. Ask students to listen to it and to make
note of the coordinating conjunctions that they hear. Which of them are conjunctions and
which are used as discourse markers? Can the students figure out their function?
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1.	Provide example sentences that illustrate the following terms. Underline the pertinent
words in your examples.
a.	coordination	d.	respectively
b.	coordinating conjunction	e.	ellipsis
c.	correlative conjunction	f.	gapping
2.	Draw tree diagrams for the following sentences:
a.	They were invited for dinner with Paul and Paulette.
b.	Wendy played the piano, and Erik sang.
3.	Explain by means of trees the ambiguity in the following sentence:
Pam drinks coffee and milk.
4.	Do could really be called a pro-VP, not a pro-verb. Explain.
Chapter 24: Conjunction
503
Test your ability to apply what you know.
5.	Suppose that your students produce the following sentences. What guidance would
you give them?
a.	*Either Helen or Judy are going to be the president next year.
b.	*1 couldn’t go to a university in my country, and my sister couldn’t go, too.
c.	*The doctor couldn’t be found anywhere, and the nurse neither.
d.	*You didn’t ask me, neither I asked you.
e.	*Bill can play tennis, and John can.
f.	*Fred paid Bill and Bill paid Fred, respectively.
6.	While this chapter gives examples of many types of coordinated constituents,
no examples of coordinated prepositions were listed. Can two prepositions be
coordinated? If so, provide some examples.
7.	An additional item freguently cited as a correlative conjunction is the seguence
not only . . . but also.
a.	Can not only. . . but also coordinate successfully for all word and phrase
categories? Will additional changes be necessary in some cases?
b.	Can you find an acceptable example of the use of this sequence at the clause-to-
clause level?
8.	A student tells you that he read the following sentence in a news report:
The police found him penniless and without visible means of support.
She tells you that she thought that and had to connect phrases with the same part of
speech. What would you tell her?
9.	Suppose that a student tells you that he or she has heard the following sentence
spoken by a native speaker of English:
I'm neither going to make a salad or anything else today.
Having learned that neither should be followed by nor, the student is confused and
asks for an explanation. What would you tell the student?
10.	A writing student produces an essay, an excerpt from which appears here:
It was a warm day, and we were feeling like nothing could happen to US because we
were young and everything looked so beautiful in the mountains, and we went to
pick up my brother because he was coming with US. We began our bicycle trip from
my brother's house, and he lived not so far from the mountains, and so we rode
directly in the direction of the fountains, and we felt the warm breeze on our faces
and bodies, and after about one half-hour we reached the mountains, and it was
cooler there....
There are many possible ways for a teacher to respond to descriptive writing. Would
you respond to the student's freguent use of and in this excerpt? If so, what might
your response be? If you would rather not respond directly, what general comment can
you make on the use of and in this piece?
504
The Grammar Book
Bibliography
REFERENCES_
Bayer, ร. (1996). The coordination of unlike categories. Language, 72(3), 579-616.
Biber, D., Johansson ร., Leech, G., Conrad, ร., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and 'written
English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ltd.
Blakemore, D. (1988). So as a constraint on relevance. In R. Kempson (Ed.), Mental representations: The
interface between language and reality (pp. 183-195). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Blakemore, D. (1992). Understanding utterances. Oxford, England: Blackwell.
Buysse, L. (2012). So as a multifunctional discourse marker in native and learner speech. Journal of
Pragmatics, 44, 1764-1782.
Celce-Murcia, M. (1980). A discourse analysis of I do too, So do I. In J. Povey (Ed.), Language policy and
language teaching: Essays in honor of Clifford Prator (pp. 115-129). Los Angeles, CA: English Language
Services.
Dorgeloh, H. (2004). Conjunction in sentence and discourse: Sentence initial and and discourse structure.
Journal of Pragmatics, 36, 1761-1779.
Gamut, L. T. F. (1991). Logic, language, and meaning (Vol. 1). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Halliday, M. A. K., & Matthiessen, c. Μ. I. M. (2014). Halliday's introduction to functional grammar (4th ed.).
London, England/New York, NY: Routledge.
Hellermann, J., & Vergun, A. (2007). Language which is not taught: The discourse marker use of beginning
adult learners of English. Journal of Pragmatics, 39(1), 157-179.
Huddleston, R., & Pullum, G. K. (2002). The Cambridge grammar of the English language. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Langacker, R. พ. (2008). Cognitive grammar. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Langacker, R. พ. (2012). Elliptic coordination. Cognitive Linguistics, 23(3), 555-599.
Lee, Η. K. (2002). Towards a new typology of connectives with special reference to conjunction in English
and Korean. Journal of Pragmatics, 35, 851-866.
Müller, ร. (2005). Discourse markers in native and non-native English discourse. Amsterdam, Netherlands/
Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Posner, M. (1980). Semantics and pragmatics of sentence connectives in natural language. In J. Searle,
E Kiefer, & M. Bierwisch (Eds.), speech act theory and pragmatics (pp. 169-203). Dordrecht, Netherlands:
Reidel.
Schiffrin, D. (1987). Discourse markers. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Shaw, p, & Taylor, J. B. (1978). Nonpictorial visual aids. In ร. Holden (Ed.), Visual aids for classroom
interaction (pp. 15-18). London, England: Modern English Publications.
Shayne, J. (1975). “I do too " versus “So do I” (Unpublished English 215 paper). University of California,
Los Angeles, CA.
Stockwell, R., Schachter p., & Partee, B. H. (1973). The major syntactic structures of English. New York, NY:
Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Thewlis, ร. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 3 (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle,
Cengage Learning.
Ur, p. (1988). Grammar practice activities. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Chapter 24: Conjunction
505
SUGtSESTiaNFfoiTRiRTHE^Ri^	.......
For linguistic treatments of conjunction, see:
Baker, c. L. (1995). English syntax (2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hudson, R. (1988). Coordination and grammatical relations. Journal of Linguistics, 24(2), 303-342.
Lakoff, R. (1971). Ifs, ands, and huts about conjunction. In c. J. Fillmore & D. T. Langendoen (Eds.), Studies
in linguistic semantics (pp. 114—149). New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Lenker, บ., & Meurman-Solin, A. (Eds.). (2007). Connectives in the history of English: Current Issues in
Linguistic Theory 283. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins.
For gapping, consult:
Hudson, R. A. (1989). Gapping and grammatical relations. Journal of Linguistics, 24(2), 303-342.
For one of the first articles that addresses the interface between logic and pragmatics, see:
Grice, Η. p. (1975). Logic and conversation. In p. Cole & J. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics 3: speech
acts (pp. 41-58). New York, NY: Academic Press.
For an overview of conjunction from the viewpoint of systemic functional grammar, see:
Martin, J. R. (1992). English text. Amsterdam, Netherlands/Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
For treatments of individual conjunctions, consult:
Blakemore, D. (1988). Denial and contrast: A relevance-theoretic analysis of but. Linguistics and Philosophy,
12, 15-37.
Blakemore, D. (1988). So as a constraint on relevance. In R. Kempson (Ed.), Mental representations: The
interface between language and reality (pp. 183-195). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Bolden, G. B. (2009). Implementing incipient actions: the discourse marker “so” in English conversation.
Journal of Pragmatics, 41(5), 974-998.
Dascal, M., & Katriel, T. (1977). Between semantics and pragmatics: The two types of but—Hebrew aval
and ela. Theoretical Linguistics, 4, 143-172.
For a study that looks at the effect of discourse markers on ESL/EFL audiences, see:
Flowerdew, J., & Tauroza, ร. (1995). The effect of discourse markers on second-language lecture
comprehension. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 17(4), 435-458.
For some practical suggestions on the teaching of conjunctions, especially correlatives, see:
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions·. Form, meaning, and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Rutherford, พ. (1975). Modem English. New York, NY: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
For teaching the punctuation of compound sentences, see:
Bryd, p., & Benson, B. (1989). Improving the grammar of written English: The handbook. Belmont, GA:
Wadsworth.
Raimes, A. (1990). How English works. New York, NY: St. Martin’s Press.
The Online Writing Lab at Purdue (OWE). Retrieved from https.y/owl.english.purdue.edu
For a lesson that provides text-based practice with coordinate conjunctions, see:
Houck, N., & Hilles, ร. (2009). Grammar connection: Structure through content 4. Boston, MA: Heinle,
Cengage Learning.
Many good usage manuals offer exercises on grammatical parallelism; for one that is accessible to both ESL/
EFL ánd English native speakers, see:
Glazier, T. F. (1990). The least you should know about English. New York, NY: Harcourt Brace College
Publishers.
506
The Grammar Book
Endnotes
1.	A discussion is found in Bayer (1996) of various instances where unlike categories may be coordinated,
such as
Jermaine is boring and a fool.
2.	As we will see later in this chapter and in the next, so performs a number of functions เท English in
addition to its roles as a coordinator and subordinator.
3.	เท another environment not discussed in this chapter, so need not move. This is typically called the do so
construction, as in
They asked me to move the car, and I did so.
4.	Stockwell, Schachter, and Partee (1973), in a classic treatment, assumed a rule of "correlative addition,"
whereby the word both is inserted optionally; this rule captured the essential synonymy of identical
sentences, one of which contained both while the other did not: John and his brother are mechanics
versus Both John and his brother are mechanics. Both may be used to put special focus on the fact that
"not just one but two brothers are mechanics."
5.	The neither in this sentence is a quantifier, not a correlative conjunction. Although both forms are
identical and obviously related semantically, remember from Chapter 17 that quantifiers can function as
determiners (as neither does here) or pronouns.
6.	For judgments on Mandarin, thanks goto Regina พน and to the Taiwanese students in the Summer 1997
Academic English Program at the University of California, Los Angeles.
7.	Suf also has the meaning of "except," as in
We had everything but what we needed.
This is an historically old use of the word; in this context, it seems to function more as a preposition than
as a conjunction and is usually treated as such in descriptive grammars. But may also be used in a second
seemingly noncontrastive context, where it often combines with instead:
The rain did not go away but (instead) came down harder than ever.
เท this use, but most often coordinates VPs rather than full clauses.
8.	This fact seems, incidentally, to be the source of frequent production errors among Chinese ESL/
EFL students who attempt to combine although at the beginning of an initial clause with but at the
beginning of the second.
9.	Note that the conjunction so is generically distinct from the so discussed earlier in this chapter as a
marker of VP-deleted material:
I can swim, and so can you.
Chapter 24: Conjunction
507
Adverbiais
Introduction
Of all the grammatical structures in English, adverbiais, including single-word adverbs
(carefully, often), phrases (before lunch, at last), and clauses (when she had finished, if we still have
time) stand out as the most diverse in their forms and syntactic positions. In introducing
adverbial characteristics, Quirk, Greenbaum, Leech, and Svartvik (1985) call them “the most
nebulous and puzzling of the word classes,” adding that “it is tempting to say simply that the
adverb is an item that does not fit the definitions for other word classes” (p. 438). Similarly,
Hasselgard (2010) has remarked that adverbiais may be considered “a rag-bag category in
the linguistic system” (p. 3). We might choose a different metaphor to characterize the many
useful roles that adverbiais play in expressing meanings; however, it does seem to be the case
that when a word, phrase, or clause doesn’t clearly fit into some other category, we often opt
for that “collection of items” known as adverbiais.
The frequency and diversity of adverbiais can be seen in the following text examples of
spoken and written English from the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA).
The adverbiais are underlined; adverbiais inside larger adverbial structures are indicated in
brackets.
When we woke up [the next morning], after we had gone fthrouqh the wind and
the rain and the waiting room], the windows blew in and they had kept the baby safe
in the middle of the hospital... (CBS The Early Show, August 28,2010)
Previously unearthed fossils... indicate that modern humans moved from Africa to
the Middle East approximately 100,000 years ago but, either because they died out
or returned [to Africa], gave way to Neanderthals by 70,000 years ago. (Science News,
February 26 2011, p. 5)
One of the largest categories of English adverbiais, and most frequently used across
all registers, are adverbiais used to provide information about events and actions, including
direction, position, manner, time, frequency, purpose, reason, among others (see Chapter 6).
Most of the adverbiais in the examples above fall into this category. They correspond to
the traditional definitions of adverbs, often explained as answering questions such as Where,
When, How, and Why. This large group of adverbiais has traditionally been termed adjunct
adverbiais (Quirk et al., 1985). However, other classifying terms reflect their functions: Biber,
Johansson, Leech, Conrad, and Finegan (1999) call them circumstance adverbiais (p. 763);
similarly, Halliday and Matthiessen (2014) term them circumstantial adverbiais (p. 123). Since
509
much current corpus-based research on adverbiais refers to Biber et. al.’s categories in the
Longman Grammar of spoken and Written English, we will use the term circumstance adverbiais
in this chapter.
Because there are so many types of circumstance adverbiais, it should not come
as a surprise that they have been subclassified in English grammars in different ways;
the varying terminology and labels can be confusing for teachers and students alike. As
Hasselgard (2010) has stated, “A striking feature of adverbiais is that there are hardly any
two grammars that use the same classification scheme and/or terminology” (p. 21). For
example, she notes that Quirk et al. (1985) classify some adverbiais that express temporal
relationships, such as frequency adverbs seldom and never, in a separate category called
subjuncts, whereas Biber et al. (1999) include them with circumstance time adverbiais. For
teaching purposes, you will most likely choose only a subset of circumstance adverbiais
and their subcategories (e.g., direction and position as subcategories of place). We have
done much the same thing in this chapter, selecting those categories that are the most
frequent and, we think, most useful.
Aside from circumstance adverbiais, the other major category of adverbiais we will be
looking at in this chapter is one which deals with the attitudes of speakers and writers toward
their content. These have commonly been referred to as stance adverbiais. Here are some spoken
and written examples (some from COCA) with the stance adverbiais underlined:
No doubt we could have done better with more time.
Neighboring villages had evidently joined the fight; there were 200 people in the
makeshift camp now. (Mother Jones, March/April 2010, p.36)
Another storm this week in the Northeast and folks are already starting to dig out....
Unfortunately, there is another system on the way in the Great Lakes. (CBS, The Early
Show, January 27,2011)
I mean, I read the blogs, and it gets kind of depressing, frankly, to read those blogs.
(This Week, 2011 [110123])
Technically speaking, he didn't forget. He just didn't think it relevant. (Analog Science,
Fiction and Fact, September 2010)
As these examples show, stance adverbiais have to do with expressing degrees of probability (no
doubt, evidently), evaluations (unfortunately), and the manner in which messages are conveyed
(frankly, technically speaking). Like the circumstance adverbiais, stance adverbiais have been
subclassified in many ways. In this chapter, we will present classifications that seem most
useful for teaching purposes.
In addition to circumstance and stance adverbiais, a third category of adverbiais are
words and phrases used to create logical connections such as contrast, addition, reason/result
and concession between sentences and larger parts of discourse, e.g., however, in addition, as a
result, and nevertheless. We will treat-these adverbiais as a subcategory of “logical connectors,”
which is the focus^bf Chapter 26.
As you might expect, sinc?"adverbials are so frequent in English and express many
common meanings, such as time and place, they are introduced and practiced at every
level of ESL/EFL instruction. Even at beginning levels, students study not only single-
word adverbs and adverb phrases, but also adverbial prepositional phrases and clauses.
For example, consider the adverbiais in the sentences that follow, which are used to
express time:
510
The Grammar Book
I'll call you tomorrow.
I usually get up before 8 A.M.
After I eat breakfast, I check my e-mail.
I have been learning English for two months.
Because of the great variety in the forms, meanings, and uses of adverbiais, they pose
diverse learning challenges for ESL/EFL students. Here, we list some of the challenges along
with examples of learner productions related to each.
Adverbial Feature	Example of Learner Productions
Placement of adverbiais in relation to other sentence constituents	*Judy washes often her car. *We are going probably to Hawaii for our spring break.
Ordering of adverbiais in sequences	*He very carefully usually listens to the directions for assignments.
Word forms of single-word adverbs	*My father works very hardly: he has two jobs. *Emmy Lou Harris sings beautiful.
Structures of prepositional phrases (in contrast to adverb clauses)	ฯท spite of 1 don't like sushi, 1 tried some at my friend's house.
Using stance adverbiais appropriately in speech and;writing	Teacher: Raul, how about you? Do you like sushi? Raul: ?Of course 1 do. (While this is correct in form, it could be a pragmatic error; i.e., an error of appropriateness in use.)
We have already discussed adverbiais briefly in Chapter 2 (grammatical terminology),
and Chapter 6 (phrase structure rules), and again in Chapter 21 (prepositions). In this chapter,
we provide an overview of adverbiais in terms of their major phrasal and clausal types,
including participles functioning as adverbiais, complementing the section in Chapter 20
(adjectives) that examined participles functioning as adjectivals. We also examine what
types of adverbiais occur in sentence-final and in sentence-initial position, and we give
special attention to preverbal adverbs of frequency1 (e.g., sometimes, often, never) since they
occur primarily—though not exclusively—before main verbs in sentence medial position.
As mentioned previously, this chapter is a general overview. Other specific topics involving
adverbiais are covered in later chapters: Logical connectors are focused on in Chapter 26 and
adverbial conditional clauses in Chapter 27. Relative adverbiais are discussed in Chapter 29,
and adverbiais of degree are treated in Chapters 34 and 35.
We begin this chapter with a review and expansion of the rules stated in Chapter 6 for
sentence-final adverbiais; then we treat sentence-initial adverbiais before considering some
issues of form and use that pertain to both sentence-final and sentence-initial adverbiais. Our
discussion of adverb clauses in conversation and writing considers differences in uses across
registers, including adverb clauses in conversation that stand alone, apart from independent
clauses. We then turn to participles functioning as adverbiais, before finally treating preverbal
adverbs of frequency.
Chapter 25: Adverbiais
511
Sentence-Final Adverbiais:
Forms, Meanings, and Uses
According to Biber et al. (1999), sentence-final adverbiais are by far the most frequent type of
adverbiais in English across all registers and text types (p. 765). Hasselgard’s (2010) analysis
of circumstance adverbiais in a 60,000-word corpus supports this claim. Her investigation of
spoken and written texts from the British sub-corpus of the International Corpus of English
(ICE-GB) revealed that 77 percent of the adverbiais occurred in sentence-final position.
In our discussion to come, we will look further into the frequencies of the various
forms and meaning subcategories of sentence-final adverbiais. As you will see, sentence-final
adverbiais can be characterized not only by their forms, but also by their typical meanings and
the particular roles that they play in spoken and written discourse.
FORM OF SENTENCE-FINAL ADVERBIALS
ADVL
As shown in our phrase structure rules in Chapter 6, sentence-final adverbiais occur in the
form of adverb clauses, adverb phrases, or prepositional phrases:
PRED —» AUX VP (ADVL")
AdvCI
AdvP
PrepP
Adverb clause: Mary danced while John played the piano.
Adverb phrase: Mary danced very gracefully.
Prepositional phrase: Mary danced in the living room.
Here is an example tree diagram of a sentence with two final adverbiais
Jason ate dinner at four o'clock because he was hungry.
SUBJ
NP
N
Jason
PRED
T	V
-past	eat
NP
PrepP
AdvCI
N prep NP
dinner at det N
four o’clock
because
NP
pro
he
AUX VP
T cop AP
-past be hungry
MEANING OF SENTENCE FINAL ADVERBIALS
Some of the most common meanings of adverbiais in all registers are presented in the
following table. As this table shows, not every form combines with every subtype of adverbial.
512
The Grammar Book
FORM AND MEANING OF SENTENCE-FINAL ADVERBIALS
	Form of Sentence-Final Adverbiais		
Meaning of Adverbial	Adverb Clause	Adverb Phrase	Prepositional Phrase
Place Direction Position Distance	where the road ends as far as we could see	(far) north (quite) locally (very)far	to the store 0 there in the middle 0 here for a long way 0 several miles
Time Duration Frequency Temporal relationship	after he saw the report as long as you are able as often as I can3 after they saw the report while we were sleeping	(fairly) recently (quite) briefly (almost) always (much) later	at six o'clock 0 next week for two months 0 every Monday after the storm
Manner	just as 1 do as though it didn't matter	(very) quickly	with care like a hawk
Instrument					with a hammer
Reason/Cause	because we were tired since it was important	—	because of the weather4 due to the accident of a broken heart
Purpose	in order to finish the job5 to explain what happened	—	for the glory
Concession	though he disagreed although it was early		despite her fears in spite of our doubts
Addition	—	too as well	in addition to his salary
Extent/Degree		completely somewhat	by about twice the normal rate
A study focused only on sentence-final adverbiais was done by Miller (1991). His analysis of
almost 3,000 clause-final adverbiais in a 50,000-word corpus (roughly half speech and half
writing) revealed that approximately 7 5 percent of the adverbiais were prepositional phrases.
These findings indicate that prepositional phrases are an important adverbial structure for
grammar focus in ESL/EFL classrooms.
Chapter 25: Adverbiais
513
USE OF SENTENCE-FINAL ADVERBIALS_____
Although circumstance adverbiais can also occur in sentence-initial and sentence-medial
positions, in their sentence-final roles, they tend to be related more closely to the verb
phrases that they modify. And in some cases, they are required to complete the meaning of
verb phrases, as in the following sentences:
She put her coat on the chair.
The ladder lay on the ground.
As we pointed out in Chapter 6, when more than one sentence-final adverbial is used to describe
an event, there are patterns that tend to be followed. The next table summarizes these patterns.
ORDER PATTERNS OF SENTENCE-FINAL ADVERBIALS
Order Patterns	Examples
Direction before position	1 last saw Phil walking down the street in Atlanta.
Manner before time or frequency	Mrs. Lee worked very quickly yesterday.
Direction or position before time or frequency	Tourists travel to the Caribbean every December.
Reason or purpose follow other adverbiais	Kuniko studies hard to get good grades.
This information allows US to propose the following rule of thumb regarding the unmarked
ordering of sentence-final adverbiais:
direction + position <-----> manner + time <-------> frequency + purpose + reason
These sequencing patterns were explored in the previously mentioned Study by Miller (1991).
His analysis strongly confirmed the patterns shown in the table above, with the following
findings:
•	Direction comes before position (92 percent)
•	Manner comes before time or frequency (75 percent)
•	Direction or position come before time or frequency (80 percent)
•	Reason or purpose come after other adverbiais (7 5 percent)
The motivations for some of these preferred patterns stem from the verbs they modify. For
example, direction and position adverbiais typically occur before time adverbiais because they
are more closely related to the verbs as in this example: I will drive to the airport tomorrow. Note
that tomorrow could be repositioned quite far from the verb; e.g., Tomorrow, all the members of
my family will drive to the airport. It would sound odd to move to the airport away from the verb:
? To the airport all the-members of my family will drive tomorrow. When speakers or writers do not
follow these preferred orderings,-their motivation may relate to the principle of end-focus,
which we saw operating in sentences with indirect objects and separable phrasal verbs. This
information structure principle, holds that it is rare for the first of two items in a sequence
to be longer than the second one (Biber et al., 1999, p. 813). Miller’s (1991) study found that
the principle of shorter constituents preceding longer ones also applied to the sequencing
of adverbial strings that included adverb phrases and adverb clauses; adverb phrases tended
to occur first in a string (61 percent of the time) and adverb clauses tended to occur last
(78 percent of the time) as in this example, which also has a single manner adverb (comfortably)
514
The Grammar Book
as the first modifier. Here we see that contrary to the preferred pattern, a time clause follows
a purpose clause, presumably due to the length of the former:
Manner adverb Position prepositional phrase
Mary Morris is resting comfortably at her Buttonwillow home
Purpose clause	Time clause
to finish her recuperation after her doctors released her this morning.
How often do strings of sentence-final adverbiais occur in spoken and written English?
Miller’ร (1991) analysis revealed that strings with more than three sentence-final adverbs—
while possible—were extremely rare. In fact, in his data, only 27 percent of sentence-final
adverbiais occurred with another adverbial, and of those, the majority occurred with only one
other (e.g., They raced up the slope to the steppes. Only 4 percent were found in strings of three
final adverbiais (e.g., They raced up the slope to the steppes beyond.) As you might expect, Miller
found that multiple adverbiais tended to be more frequent in writing than in speech.
A final observation regarding sentence-final adverbiais concerns their scope; that is, the
extent to which they modify other parts of a sentence. In general, adverbiais used in sentence-
final positions are more limited in scope than the adverbiais that occur in other positions. For
example, compare the scope of two sentence-final circumstance adverbiais with the scope of
the adverbiais in other positions:
Sentence-final adverbiais:
The taxi driver helped US put our luggage in the trunk.
I'll call you Monday morning.
Sentence-initial and sentence-medial adverbiais:
Certainly, after we finish this project, we will deserve a vacation!
She is evidently not planning to join US for dinner.
As these examples show, the different sentence positions tend to be occupied by different
meaning categories. The sentence-final adverbiais above express place and time, whereas
the sentence-initial and sentence-medial adverbiais express meanings related to speaker
stance.6
As we will discuss in the next section, not all sentence-initial and sentence-medial
adverbiais modify an entire clause or sentence. However, many of them, unlike the sentence-
final adverbiais, do.
Form, Meaning, and Use of
Sentence-Initial Adverbiais
FORM oTsÊNTÍNCHN^	......
Like sentence-final adverbiais, sentence-initial adverbiais can be adverb phrases (which
includes single words), prepositional phrases, or adverb clauses:
Adverb phrase: Fortunately, Helen won the election.
Prepositional phrase: With our help, Helen won the election.
Adverb clause: After we held a recount, Helen won the election.
In order to account structurally for the possibility of having one or more adverbiais in initial
position, we allow the sentence modifier (sm) to include sentential adverbiais as one of many
possibilities (i.e., along with not, Q, etc.). As Quirk et al. (1985) point out, initial adverbiais “are
Chapter 25: Adverbiais
515
syntactically more detached and in some respects ‘superordinate’ in that they have a scope that
extends over the sentence as a whole” (p. 613).
We have encountered such sentences in Chapter 6. Here is another example tree
diagram for a sentence with this type of adverbial:
Fortunately, Helen won the election.
SUBJ
AUX
ADVL
PRED
AdvP
NP
win det
ADV
NP
fortunately
Helen -past
the
election
We could change the sentence modifier so that instead of being a single adverb phrase like
“fortunately,” it is a prepositional phrase (e.g., of course, with our help) or an adverb clause (e.g.,
when we all voted; after we held a recounf). With the exception offortunately and of course, the other
sentence-initial adverbiais do not express speaker stance and attitude.7 However, like the single-
word adverbs, their scope also includes the entire following sentence. We say more about the use
of sentence-initial adverbiais in a later section.
MEANING OF SENTENCE-INITIAL ADVERBIALS
As the phrasal and clausal examples given here illustrate, circumstance adverbiais can occur
in initial as well as final positions, especially adverb clauses (e.g., after we held a recount). In
this position, such clauses have different uses than sentence-final clauses do. Some of these
differences will be discussed later in our section devoted to adverb clauses. As for other
circumstance adverbiais, we have already noted that the great majority of them occur in final
position. Only time adverbiais occur sentence-initially with any frequency: approximately
20 percent across spoken and written registers (Biber et al., 1999, p. 802). In an interesting
corpus study, Diessel (2008) shows that although temporal clauses generally follow main
clauses as do other adverb clauses, there is a correlation between clause order and iconicity.
What this means is that temporal clauses denoting prior events precede the main clause
more often than temporal clauses that denote events that occur after or simultaneous to the
one expressed in the main clause. Diessel attributes this finding to the fact that the iconic
sequence makes complex sentences-easier to process.
Other than circumstance adverb clauses (and logical connectors, the topic of the next
chapter), sentence-initial adverbiais are typically those related to speaker attitude or stance, the
second semantic category we introduced at the beginning of this chapter. Like circumstance
adverbiais, stance adverbiais have been subclassified in different ways, as being “epistemic”
(Lyons, 1979), “evaluative” (Ernst, 1984), “evidential” (Chafe & Nichols, 1986; Palmer, 1988),
“factive” (Koktova, 1986a; 1986b), and “attitudinal” (Greenbaum, 1969).
We find it useful to refer to the four functional categories given by Halliday and Matthiessen
(2014) for sentence-initial adverbiais, all of which refer to a different facet of speaker attitude:
SIS
The Grammar Book
Probability: maybe, perhaps, certainly, surely
Usuality: usually, generally, typically, occasionally
Presumption: of course, obviously, clearly, evidently
Desirability: (นท)fortunately, luckily, hopefully, regrettably
The most comprehensive data-based study of sentence-initial adverbiais was done by Lee
(1991). In her analysis of 736 sentence-initial adverbiais in a 675,000-word corpus, she found
the following distribution (Lee, 1991, p. 29):
probability	280/736	38 percent	(e.g., (un) fortunately)
usuality	200/736	27 percent	(e.g., sometimes, often)
presumption	199/736	27 percent	(e.g., of course, obviously)
desirability	57/736	8 percent	(e.g., maybe, perhaps)
If we consider the kinds of meanings expressed in the four categories, it is not surprising
that the first three categories are well represented in Lee’s corpus, while the fourth was not
particularly frequent. The first three categories contain adverbiais such as maybe, sometimes,
and of course, which are very common in speech and writing. We might expect attitude markers
such as (unfortunately to be much less frequent, especially in speech.
Maybe versus Perhaps. Lee’s (1991) findings about the highly frequent sentence-initial
adverbiais maybe and perhaps parallel the findings of Biber et al. (1999) across all sentence
positions. Lee found that maybe occurred twice as often in speech as in writing, while perhaps
had the reverse pattern. Similarly, in Biber et al.’s conversational corpus, maybe was much
more common (500 occurrences per million words) across all sentence positions than perhaps
(200 per million words). An interesting difference identified in Biber et al.’s conversational
corpus of American and British English is that maybe is much more common in American
English (800 occurrences per million words versus only 200 per million in British English).
Obviously versus Clearly. A number of studies have looked at the contrasts between
adverbiais that have similar meanings. Simon-Vandenbergen and Aijmer (2007) summarize
several studies that have distinguished uses of these adverbiais. They note that while in the
system of Halliday and Matthiessen (2014), surely is listed with of course, obviously, and clearly,
indicating “obviousness,” a study by Downing (2001) showed that surely signals not only
certainty but also surprise. Downing also found, comparing usage in speech acts such as
questioning or seeking agreement, that the functions of surely varied depending on the speech
act and, in some cases, was even challenging or confrontational.
Certainly versus Obviously. Another study by Barbaresi (1987) found that certainly and
obviously were used differently in one genre of academic writing. In Barbaresi’ร data of 60
scientific articles in economics, certainly was used epidemically (that is, to convey the degree
of certainty a writer had about information)8, whereas obviously served as a rhetorical strategy
device to express something that the writer assumed could be easily perceived by someone; in
other words, the writer feels that readers can easily infer the truth of the information.
Certainly versus Definitely. Simon-Vandenbergen (2008) found that in the BNC certainly
was used more often in formal and public speech and writing whereas definitely occurs more
frequently in informal and private dialogue. She also reported that certainly typically is used
in contrasts, while definitely generally signals emphasis. In addition, the two prefer different
modifiers: almost certainly but most definitely.
Chapter 25: Adverbiais
517
Of Course versus Obviously. Simon-Vandenbergen and Aijmer (2007) add that obviously is
often less authoritative than of course and primarily expresses the meaning “as evidence shows”
rather than “as we all know” (p. 312). They suggest that of course expresses more authority,
emphasizing the speaker’s belief that the hearer should know the information. In their data from
the ICE-GB corpus, they found a striking difference between the frequencies of obviously and
of course in broadcast discussions compared to casual conversations. While obviously and of course
occurred with about the same frequency in conversation (482 versus 422 per million, respectively),
in the broadcast discussion data, there were only 25 occurrences of obviously per 1 million words,
compared to 975 occurrences of of course.
Focusing on differences between speech and writing in the use of of course, Simon-
Vandenbergen (1992) found distinct usage differences between two genres—casual
conversation and political interviews. Whereas of course was used in conversation to express
solidarity and politeness, its use in political speech involved primarily expressions of power
and authority.
Sometimes. A stance adverbial may differ in use not only across registers or genres, but also
depending on its role in the development of a text, either spoken or written. Lee (1991) found
that the discourse functions of sometimes varied depending on where it occurred sentence-
initially in a paragraph or episode. She summarized her finding as follows:
When it was used paragraph- or episode-initially (22/77 occurrences), sometimes
functions to present the topic and create a transition with what preceded it:
Sometimes the truth itself is better than fiction. An almost illiterate man served three
years in jail for a warehouse robbery he insisted he didn't commit. His defense was
that he was a mile away in a shopping plaza, but he had no witnesses. (Lee, 1991, p. 58)
In paragraph- or episode-medial positions (42/77 occurrences), sometimes elaborates
upon or restates the preceding argument:
Well, there are some aspects that overlap. Sometimes, say, for instance, the matter of
point of view will come up in a poem.... It's crucial in fiction, and it's not something
you think a lot about in poetry.... (Lee, 1991, p. 60)
As a paragraph- or episode-final marker (13/77 tokens), sometimes is used to sum up
the preceding arguments, to show the result of a process or some change, or to offer a final
alternative, as in the last sentence of the following speaker turn:
"It used to be," said my friend, Beth, grieving the death of her middle son, "that
whenever I'd catch myself in repose, I'd be aware that I wasn't happy.... Somewhere
along the way, there has been a change. I'm no longer feeling that ever-present
sorrow. I feel comfortable again in moments of repose. Sometimes I feel very happy."
(Lee, 1991, pp. 60-61)
Fortunately versus Unfortunately. Students can also benefit from developing awareness of
other structures that co-occur with stance adverbiais, structures that help to reveal discourse
functions of these «adverbiais. For example, Lee (1991) looked at the different uses of the
stance pair fortunately and unfortunately in writing. She found that unfortunately (which was
used twice as frequently as fortunately), tends to co-occur with other grammatical and lexical
items expressing a negative or problematic situation:
[in a review of p. Skira's Still Life: A History]
[The genre of still life] has suffered from relative scholarly neglect in spite of the
almost hypnotic appeal exerted by many of the images... produced by... our
greatest artists... .Unfortunately, this volume fails to fill the void. It does not supersede
518
The Grammar Book
Charles Sterling's "Still Life Painting.. ."(1959), which, regrettably, was reprinted in
1981 with only black-and-white illustrations. (Lee, 1991, p. 83)
In contrast to the use of unfortunately to foreground problems, fortunately follows the statement
of a problem, indicating the speaker’s conviction that the reality of a situation is more positive
than prior information might lead one to expect:
[from a review of a restaurant]
The Cactus Café is the front end of a comedy nightclub. The New Improvisation, in Santa
Monica. But these ungainly air ducts hanging down from the ceiling aren't funny...
Fortunately, though, the Cactus Café is a pretty comfortable room, with its surprisingly
high ceiling and mirrors. It's a pleasant place to sit and eat... (Lee, 1991, p. 87)
These kinds of generalizations about stance markers can be especially useful in helping
students in their reading of difficult texts to predict more quickly how two sections joined by
these stance markers are related to each other.
All of these studies we have discussed indicate that while groups of stance adverbiais with
similar meanings sometimes have similar uses, in many contexts, they are used for different
purposes, reflecting to varying degrees speaker authority and speaker assumptions of what the
hearer should know. And the same stance adverbial often has different functions in different
genres or even in different parts of a text’s development. Thus, in teaching students about
stance adverbiais, especially at more advanced levels, it is important to help them become
aware of usage differences across registers and genres.
Other adverbiais that are very common in initial position are actuality markers (e.g.,
really, actually) (see Liu and Espino, 2012), conversational imprecision markers (e.g., kind of
sort of like), and style adverbiais (e.g., honestly, confidentially) (Biber et al. 1999).
USE OF SENTENCEUNHJALADVERBIALS
There tend to be two primary motivations for placing circumstance adverbiais in sentence-initial
position. One is to place special focus or emphasis on this information (examples from COCA):
During the last quarter mile, I felt like I was going to collapse. (Backpacker.; August 2010)
The discourse functions of focus and emphasis for adverbiais and other structures will be
discussed in detail in Chapter 30.
A second discourse motivation for sentence-initial circumstance adverbiais is to create
a link to preceding text, as in this example, which follows a description of a woman getting
assessed for a physical ailment.
เท the previous month, her bizarre constellation of symptoms, the most prominent of
which was shortness of breath, had grown much worse ... (Health, 2011 [110329])
Sentence-initial adverb clauses play an important role in creating cohesive connections in
written discourse; their use for this purpose will be discussed further in the next section.
With Respect Το/As For. One category of circumstance adverbial not discussed earlier
is that which is used to define or limit the scope of a topic to be discussed. Unlike other
circumstance adverbiais, adverbiais in this category occur sentence initially; it includes phrases
such as with respect to and as for. Termed adverbiais of respect by Biber et al. (1999), these adverbiais
are especially common in written registers and formal speech. Biber et al. comment that these
adverbiais have functions similar to both logical connectors (e.g., however, therefore) and stance
adverbiais (e.g., certainly, fortunately). Like logical connectors, they can introduce a new topic
connected to a previous one. And like stance adverbiais, they can express the speaker’ร perspective
on the truth of what follows, though not as strongly as the stance adverbiais do (p. 805). The
Chapter 25: Adverbiais
519
following examples from COCA illustrate the functions of linking to previous topics in defining
a new topic:
... a stress response that interrupts the body's ability to fight cancer cell
development might be at work. With respect to heart disease/ a more complex
set of potential pathways... has been proposed. (.American Journal of Public Health,
January 2011)
The extra-wide (toothbrush) head contains 65% more bristle tufts than standard
models... and/ in a world that apparently has gone eco-wild/ they are a favorite
among the greenies since they last up to three times longer than normal brands.
As for the casesf they are designed without drain holes. (USA Today, March, 2011)
Stance Marker Collocations
Also deserving of attention in teaching the uses of initial stance adverbiais are the
lexicogrammatical patterns in which they are found, especially in academic writing. As one
example, the stance marker perhaps often collocates with a variety of superlatives + classifier
nouns (e.g., perhaps the best approach, perhaps the worst example) in written texts as in these
examples from COCA:
perhaps + positive superlative:
the best strategy; the best illustration; the strongest evidence;
the most convincing case
perhaps + negative superlative:
the biggest problem/hurdle/obstacle/sticking point;
the greatest limitation; the worst failure; the most troubling case
perhaps + neutral superlative:
the most common type; the most striking difference;
the most widely used method
By checking collocation patterns of stance adverbiais through concordancers
such as COCA and the Compleat Lexical Tutor,9 teachers can help students use these
lexicogrammatical resources appropriately.
The study of adverb clauses in languages of the world by Thompson, Longacre, and
Hwang (2007) offers valuable information for ESL/EFL teachers about the ways these clauses
are structured, positioned and used across languages. They point out that although “apparently all
languages, regardless of their basic word order, have preposed adverbial clauses,” the distributional
patterns of preposed clauses differs across languages (p. 295). For example, they note that verb-final
languages such as Korean and Japanese use clauses infrequently and then only in conversation.
They also point out that English tends to use structures that subordinate one proposition to
another more frequently than other languages, such as Chinese, do (p. 241). In addition, they
discuss grammatical^markers required with adverb clauses in some languages; for example, they
note that in Turkish arid other languages, before-clauses must include a negative marker (p. 248).
Thus, English learners may have a variety of challenges structuring and using adverb
clauses in English depending on their native languages. Additional challenges are posed by
the multiple semantic meanings of some adverb subordinators, such as as, which can express
manner, reason, or time.
Uses of Adverb Clauses in Writing and Conversation
Studies in various areas of linguistics—Corpus Linguistics, Conversational Analysis, and
Systemic Functional Linguistics—have identified uses of adverb clauses that are distinct from
their uses in written registers.
520
The Grammar Book
One discourse function of adverb clauses unique to conversation is its use by speakers
to add a comment to another’ร speaker’ร utterance. Biber et al. (1999) note that conditional
adverbiais (see Chapter 27) are the most common type that function in this way, representing
about 10 percent of all conditional adverb clauses in conversation, as in this example (p. 833):
A: I know we're running late, but the traffic's not too bad, so I think we can still make
it to the meeting.
B: If we're lucky.
Other special uses of adverb clauses in conversation were identified by Ford (1993) in
her study of 194 clauses. According to Ford, sentence-final adverb clauses with continuing
intonation serve to provide new information that qualifies, locates, or completes the meaning
of preceding utterances, similar to their use in written discourse. However, sentence-final
adverb clauses, produced with their own separate intonation contour, have altogether different
functions. Such adverb clauses are used either by the same speaker (to self-edit in response to a
perceived problem) or by another speaker (to negotiate understanding). Segments exemplifying
both of these cases follow:
[A is telling R about his work situation at a TV studio]
A: But the thing is, they might get their project canceled, (pause)
-> Because ABC got bought out. Did you hear about that? (adapted from Ford 1993, p. 111)
[J shows his understanding and agreement with p, whose roommates are out for the night]
P: I've got the apartment to myself, and I'm gonna take advantage of it by going to
bed early.
J: Oh.
P: An'they come home, they gonna talk about it. And I'm gonna goto bed.
J: —> Before they get there, yeah, (adapted from Ford, 1993, p. 126)
In summary, Ford (1993) shows US how sentence-final adverb clauses that are separated from
the main clause with their own intonation contours play a role in the conversational turn-
taking system in English.
Other uses of adverb clauses in conversation that are distinct from their uses in formal
written English registers have been discussed by Schleppegrell (2004). She notes that because
clauses in interactional registers create both internal links (usually with reference to something
previously stated) and external links (evidence for a claim existing outside the text) as written
registers do. An example from her data of both types of links is the following from a discussion
between children (p. 57):
internal link
Well like I have a partner that hardly anybody likes because they make fun of her name
external link
because it's Halley, like Halley's comet.
Schleppegrell states that the first because in this example “makes an internal link that
introduces the reason [the speaker] can make the judgment he has made. His second because,
on the other hand, makes an external link by explaining why the children make fun of
Halley’s name.” (p. 57). She provides this example in the context of a discussion on the need
for teachers to be aware of how differently clause-combining operates in conversational
registers than in academic genres. As she points out, because clauses in conversation often
“carry less semantic weight,” and their conversational uses often do not transfer well to
academic registers, in which writers use other kinds of grammatical constructions to convey
logical relationships. Schleppegrell’s findings on the range of meanings that because clauses
Chapter 25: Adverbiais
521
have in informal registers help to explain some uses of these clauses by ESL/EFL writers and
native English-speaking developing writers that are inappropriate for more formal registers.
Punctuation with Adverb Clauses
In written English, a sentence-initial adverb clause is normally followed by a comma, whereas
a sentence-final adverb clause normally is not preceded by a comma, although there is some
variation here (when there is a contrast implied, as we have just demonstrated twice in this
sentence):
After Professor James finished the lecture, he asked for questions from the audience.
Professor James asked for questions from the audience after he finished the lecture.
These punctuation conventions reinforce the more salient role in discourse that sentence-
initial adverbiais have.
Sometimes, if a sentence-final adverb clause is viewed as an afterthought, it too is set off
with a comma:
Professor James was willing to answer questions, provided the audience wanted to ask any.
Form, Meaning, and Use of
Participles Functioning as Adverbiais
In addition to adverb clauses, adverb phrases, and prepositional phrases, we also need to
discuss another structure: -ing and -en adverbial participles.
FORM AND ΜE015
The -ing participle has three possible forms:
1.	Basic form: working (signals a time overlapping with the time expressed in the main
clause), such as:
Working diligently on his paper, John began to type up the bibliography.
2.	Perfective form: having worked (signals a time preceding the time expressed in the
main clause), such as:
Having worked on his paper since 4 P.M., John stopped at 8 to watch the DePaul
basketball game.
3.	Perfective-progressive form (rare): having been working (signals an action in progress
at a time preceding the time expressed in the main clause), such as:
Having been working on hts paper for more than a week, John decided he would
turn it irfwithout further revision.
The -en participle also has three possible forms:
1.	Basic form: worn out (signals a reason for the result expressed in the main clause), such as:
Worn out from all the work, John decided to relax.
2.	Progressive form: being worn out (much like the basic form but with stronger
emphasis on the fact that the participle gives a reason or cause for the result expressed
in the main clause), such as:
Being worn out from all the work, John decided to relax for the evening.
522
The Grammar Book
3.	Perfective form: having been worn out (signals that the action in the participle is completed
before—and is also the reason for—the result expressed in the main clause), such as:
Having been worn out from three days' work on his paper, John decided to relax
over the weekend.
The basic form is by far the most frequent one for both the -ing and the -en participle.
The other forms do occur, however, and grammar texts sometimes erroneously refer to the
progressive and perfective forms of the -en participle as instances of the -ing participle because
of the initial -ing forms.
SENTENCEINITIALA^
The adverbial use of -ing and -en participles in clause-initial position is a potential problem for
native as well as nonnative speakers of English. Errors such as the following are traditionally
referred to as “dangling modifiers” or “dangling participles,” and they are the bane of many a
high school English teacher’s existence:
"Laughing hysterically and unable to answer Miss Fiddich, she sent poor Tom to the
principal's office.
"Torn and bent beyond recognition, I received my mother's letter.
In such cases, the subject of the participle should also be the subject of the main clause.
Whenever this is not the case—as in the two examples above—a dangling participle results.
Danielson and Porter (1990) have pointed out that such participles can usefully be viewed
as reduced forms of adverb clauses; however, they caution that the reduction is grammatically
acceptable only if both clauses have the same underlying subject. With this condition in mind,
we can now correct the above sentences:
Because Tom was laughing hysterically and unable to answer Miss Fiddich, Tom was
sent to the principal's office (by Miss Fiddich). -> Laughing hysterically and unable to
answer Miss Fiddich, Tom was sent to the principal's office.
After my mother's letter had been torn and bent beyond recognition, my mother's
letter was delivered to me yesterday. -» Torn and bent beyond recognition, my
mother's letter was delivered to me yesterday.
Both native and nonnative users of English should be given ample opportunity to reduce
sentence-initial adverb clauses to participle clauses when the same subject condition is met.
Students should also be able to identify clauses that cannot be reduced to participles. Some
teachers find it useful to point out to their students the unintended humor that occurs when
a dangling participle is interpreted literally; for example:
"Following the recipe carefully, my cake was a great success. (= My cake followed the
recipe carefully!)
"Flattened out of shape by Dmitri's serve, we could no longer play with the old
volleyball. (= We were flattened out of shape by Dmitri's serve!)
The same subject participles discussed here are the most common type of sentence-
initial adverbial participle; however, it is also possible to have a sentence-initial adverbial
participle with a subject that is different from the subject of the main clause. In such a case,
the subject of the participle must be overtly stated:
The bus drivers being on strike, many people had to get to work using other means of
transportation. (Since the bus drivers were on strike,...)
When -en participles are used in this type of construction, only the progressive or perfect
form of the participle occurs:
Chapter 25: Adverbiais
523
The house having been constructed poorly, the new owners had to cope with many
unexpected repairs. (Since the house had been constructed poorly,...)
Many grammarians refer to the two preceding sentences as absolute constructions, which they
carefully distinguish from participle clauses. We see no need to do this since the semantic
function of the two clause types is parallel. The only difference is whether the subjects of the
two clauses are the same or not.
ร E N TENCÍ^NÃrÃDVERBÍÃl~PÃRTlÍcÍPÍFÜÃÍÍsíS
A sentence-final participle clause is normally detached from the main clause by a comma
in writing or by special features in speech, such as a pause before the lowered pitch on the
participle clause; for example:
Laura looked at him, consumed with contempt for what he represented.
An old woman shouts out a long apocalyptic interpretation of the Bible, prophesying
the immediate arrival of the Messianic Kingdom.
While the use of a sentence-final participle clause seldom leads to ungrammatical
sentences in the way that the use of the “dangling modifier” does, a potential for ambiguity
exists in those cases where there is more than one noun in the main clause that could be the
antecedent of the underlying subject in the participle clause:
?Meg met Tom in the corridor, laughing heartily about what had happened in class.
In the absence of additional context, either Meg or Tom could be the underlying subject of the
participle clause in this sentence. Such ambiguity, however, rarely occurs since first of all, the
main clause may have only one noun phrase:
Betty danced joyfully, never suspecting what was about to happen.
Second, for many main clauses with two or more noun phrases, there is usually only one noun
phrase that qualifies semantically as the subject of the participle clause:
Sheila ignored the dog and the TV set, deeply engrossed in the new book.
Even though the main clause in this example contains three noun phrases (i.e., Sheila, the dog,
the TV set), only Sheila can serve as the underlying subject of the participle clause—that is,
someone who is deeply engrossed in reading a book.
Note that all the examples we have given here of sentence-final adverbial participles are
of the same noun phrase variety—the subject of the participle clause is identical in reference
to one of the noun phrases in the main clause. As shown before with sentence-initial clauses,
not all sentence-final participle clauses conform to this pattern; some have an overt subject
that is not identical in reference to any noun phrase in the main clause:
They decided to wait for dawn, each hiker taking his two-hour turn at watch.
She walked along hurriedly, herpurse clutched tightly in her arms.
Again, we feel that- there is no significant difference in structure or function between the
examples involving identical nourrphrases and nonidentical noun phrases. The identical noun
phrases have simply been deleted with the remainder of the clause being reduced to a participle.
USE OF ADVERBIAL ING PARTICIPLE CLAUSES
In carrying out an extensive study of -ing participle clauses, Thompson (1983) found that they
occurred most frequently in descriptive prose and very rarely in factual, scientific writing. For
example, she compared 10,000 words of text from two different sources—a historical narrative
and a pharmacology text—and found that the former contained 74 -ing participle clauses while the
524
The Grammar Book
latter contained only 5. (We feel that a similar ratio would be obtained for -en participle clauses if
such a count were carried out.) Thompson feels that the differences in frequency can be explained
by the discourse function of these participle clauses; namely, they evoke a visual image in the mind
of the listener or reader. Thompson’s term for this function is “depictive.” She adds that the more
formal the language and the more descriptive the discourse, the higher the frequency of participle
clauses. A corollary of this functional principle is that participle clauses do not occur frequently
in speech, since conversation leaves little opportunity for the planning required to make one’s
language evoke images in the listener’s or reader’s mind, which is the function of this construction.
Form, Meaning, and Use of
Preverbal Adverbs of Frequency
In Chapter 6, we mentioned the adverbiais of frequency that usually occur at the end of a
sentence. Some of these adverbiais express a specific and others a general sense of frequency:
^ld2.^“eweek· specific frequency
I brush my teeth everyday.
Helen does the dishes once in a while.	1 I f
You should write your grandparents every now and then. J 9enera requency
If we want to be more precise, we can refer to such adverbiais as “adverbiais of specific or
general frequency.”10 Although these adverbiais tend to occur at the end of the sentence (i.e.,
the activity is in focus), they may also occur initially if the adverbial of frequency is in focus:
Once a week Bob does his laundry.
Every now and then you should write your grandparents.
FORM OF PREVERBAL ADVERBS OF FREQUENCY ____
In contrast to these adverbiais of specific or general frequency, English also has a class of preverbal
adverbs of frequency (PAFs) that tend to occur most naturally in the middle of a sentence:11
Josh never writes his parents.	Bill has often forgotten to make his bed.
Mary is always late for class.	I can usually do my shopping on Saturday.
As you will see next, the preferred position for such adverbs of frequency is somewhat
complicated but predictable. Because of the complexity and crosslinguistic influence, however,
misplacement of these forms is a common problem for ESL/EFL learners, who produce
ill-formed sentences such as the following:
"Always Mary is coming late to class.
"Bill has forgotten often to make his bed.
The Scope of Preverbal Adverbs
Perhaps the most important generalization to make about preverbal adverbs is that in
any given sentence, they modify the entire sentence in which they occur. The following
paraphrases make this clear:
Barry frequently drives faster than the speed limit. (It is frequently the case that Barry
drives faster than the speed limit.)
Cynthia never smiles at strangers. (It is never the case that Cynthia smiles at strangers.)
Chapter 2 5: Adverbiais
525
We can expand our basic phrase structure rule to accommodate preverbal adverbs of frequency
in this way:
ร -» SUBJ (ADVL) PRED
This rule accounts for all indicative and imperative sentences with preverbal adverbs that do
not have auxiliary verbs:
Gerald seldom goes to church.
I always do my shopping on Saturday.
Never talk with your mouth full.
The tree diagram here illustrates this rule.
I usually do the shopping on Saturday.
ร
SUBJ	ADVL	PREP
NP	AdvP	AUX	VP	ADVL
				
pro	ADV	T	V	NP	PrepP
			1	X/	ร/''^\
I	usually	-pres	do det	N	prep	NP
			the shopping	on	N
				Saturday
The rule also accounts for all cases where there is an operator (i.e., an auxiliary verb or copula be)
that carries emphatic or contrastive stress; that is, the preverbal adverb always precedes a
stressed auxiliary or copula:
You never are ready on time! Jim never did talk to Raymond!12
I never have met the president!
This rule also applies to reduced sentences where the operator occurs in final position, and
thus cannot take reduced stress the way it might if it occurred in a complete sentence, e.g.,
4: Is Mr. Franks strict?	A·. I want to be class president.
S: Yes, he often is.	S: You never will (be).
(cf. Yes, he is often strict.)	(cf. You will never be class president.)
Adverbs of frequency can also occupy other positions in the sentence for several principled
reasons. First of all, there are many cases in which a sentence contains an unstressed operator
(an auxiliary verb or be copula). In such cases, the PAF will directly follow this operator as in
these examples:
Mary is always late for class.
I can usually do my shopping mi Saturday.
Bill has often forgotten to make his bed.
Let us look at the tree diagram for one of these sentences:
526
The Grammar Book
รบBJ
NP
pro
I
I can usually do my shopping on Saturday.
Saturday
Second, in addition to their position after unstressed operators, some PAFS occur
sentence-initially, those that fall into Halliday’s “usuality” category for sentential adverbs
(i.e., sometimes, occasionally, frequently, usually, generally, regularly).13 Finally, some PAFs can
occur easily in sentence-final position, including sometimes, occasionally, often, and frequently.
The other PAFs are awkward (usually, rarely, seldom) or ungrammatical {never, always) in final
position.
However, all preverbal adverbs of frequency can be placed between the subject and the
predicate and then adjusted for surface position with respect to the operator, as necessary. In
fact, a good piece of evidence for claiming that PAFs initially occur sentence-internally and
preverbally are the negative PAFs, which express zero or low frequency: never, seldom, rarely,
scarcely ever, and hardly ever. When they are used in initial position for purposes of emphasis,
we need to invert the subject and the operator in response to the fronting (adding do if no
operator is present) to ensure grammaticality.14
We have
never
seldom
rarely
scarcely ever
hardly ever
Never
Seldom
Rarely
Scarcely ever
Hardly ever
seen such a sight!
have we seen such a sight!15
If the negative PAFs could be directly placed in initial position, there would be no subject-
operator inversion, i.e., the inversion is a reaction to the fronting of the negative adverbial,
which has been placed medially.
Statements and Questions with Ever
The particle ever16 interacts with preverbal adverbs of frequency in a number of ways. As
shown previously, it is generally used phrasally with scarcely and hardly when they function as
preverbal adverbs of frequency:
Joan has \	freely ! ever gone to bed after midnight, lardly J
*Joanhas	h^dT'y 1 9one to bed after midnight.
Chapter 25: Adverbiais
527
Tn such cases, scarcely ever or hardly ever would be placed as phrasal preverbal adverbs in
medial position as discussed previously.
Ever can also be used in yes/no questions as the most general (i.e., least presupposing)
of the PAFs:
Does Mark
ever
sometimes
often
usually
always
sing in the shower?
The '๗-question for all expressions of frequency (including PAFs) is “how often”:
How often does Mark sing in the shower?
MEANING.OfPRÍVERBÃUÃDVERBSOFFREQ~IJ E N
Resemblance to Quantification
Similar to the quantifiers described in Chapter 17, preverbal adverbs of frequency fall
along either the positive or the negative continuum of a scale on which always constitutes
the positive extreme and never the negative one. Again, there are several pairs of positive
and negative terms that logically contradict each other. (See the diagonal lines in the
diagram.)
POSITIVE
NEGATIVE
(all)
always
(most)
usually
generally
regularly
low
frequency
(some)	(much/many)
sometimes 1 (often 1
occasionally J (frequently!
never
not ever
(no)
high
frequency
not usually 1 not always
not generally] (not all)
(most... not)
rarely
seldom
hardly ever
scarcely ever
not often
(few/little)
The dotted line between never and always signals an opposition. The dotted line and arrow going
from not always to smnetimes/occasionally signals an inverse implication (e.g., saying that Jack is not
always on time is the same as saying that Jack is sometimes not on time or that Jack is sometimes
late).17 Because of the semantic similarities between quantifiers and preverbal adverbs of frequency,
a semantically related quantifier is indicated in parentheses at each point in the diagram.
Many sentences with preverbal adverbs can in fact be paraphrased with sentence-final
adverbiais containing semantically·related quantifiers:
John always gets up at 7 A.M.	John gets up at 7 A.M. all the time.
Bob sometimes reads the paper.	Bob reads the paper some of the time.
Students often drink beer."	Students drink beer on many occasions.
Likewise, the ๗-question of frequency “How often?” has its quantifier-based counterpart in
“How many times?”
How often have you gone to Boston? How many times have you gone to Boston?
528
The Grammar Book
Negation and Preverbal Adverbs
As Klima (1964) has pointed out, we can verify the negative or affirmative nature of preverbal
adverbs by observing their behavior in unmarked tags, since an affirmative preverbal adverb
co-occurs with a negative tag and vice versa:
always
often
sometimes
(i.e., these are affirmative preverbal adverbs)
Jason i:
late, isn't he?
Mavis
never
seldom
scarcely ever
goes out, does she?
(i.e., these are negative preverbal adverbs)
Interaction with Not
The semantically strongest negative preverbal adverb of frequency (e.g., never) may not
co-occur with the negative particle, not, if the not derives from the sentence modifier:18
*Jim is not never on time.
It does occasionally occur with the not expressing phrasal negation (see Chapter 10):
Sandra is never able to not eat chocolates.
and it occurs freely with lexical negation (see Chapter 10):
Mrs. Beck has never been unkind.
(Recall that both phrasal and lexical negation are different from syntactic negation.)
The semantically positive preverbal adverbs of frequency, on the other hand, occur
not only in affirmative statements but also in negative statements in combination with not
(or -n’t), as the following examples illustrate:
1.
a. Florida often
!snt. \ cold in winter,
is not
b. Florida is often not cold in winter.
c. Florida
isn't
is not
often cold in winter.
2.
a.	Professor Potter usually I hasn't
has not
attended faculty meetings.
b.	Professor Potter has usually not attended faculty meetings.
c.	Professor Potter \ hasn't I usually attended faculty meetings.
I has not I
Our current syntactic rules for negation and for PAR placement and movement account
for sentences like (la and b) and (2a and b). In these sentences, the not and the PAF are
independently placed and moved, if needed. In the case of (1c) and (2c), the not appears to be
part of a phrasal negative PAF (i.e., not often, not usually) that has been placed medially and
moved to post-operator position. Other phrasal PAFs that are a result of combining with not
in this way are: not always, not ever, and not generally.
USE OF PREVERBAL ADVERBS OF FREQUENCY
As the analysis of conversational and written corpora in the Longman Grammar of spoken
and Written English shows, preverbal adverbs of frequency are differently distributed across
registers (Biber et al., 1999, p. 796). Those on the extreme ends of the continuum, always and
Chapter 25: Adverbiais
529
never, are much more frequent in conversational English and fiction than in news or academic
prose. For example, never occurs 800 times per million words in conversational English and
1,2 00 times per million words in fiction, whereas in academic prose, its frequency is only about
200 times per million words. In contrast, usually and often are much more frequent in academic
prose than in conversation; in fact, often is rarely used in conversation. This last finding
parallels our own investigation of preverbal adverbs in 23,000 words of English conversation,
in which often did not occur even once. One preverbal adverb, sometimes, occurs with about
equal frequency across registers.
These striking differences across registers (especially between conversation and formal
written registers) in the use of some preverbal adverbs of frequency reflects in part the need
for writers to “hedge” or qualify statements so as not to overgeneralize. While speakers can
overgeneralize or even exaggerate claims in conversation (“Z would never do that\” "Z always try
to get some exercisewriters may be more careful not to do so. English has numerous adverbs
that serve to qualify statements, including generally, occasionally, and typically as well as the
more common ones previously noted. These uses, then, are related to the epistemic stance
adverbiais (e.g., perhaps, probably, maybe), which also function to qualify assertions.
Interaction with Tense and Aspect
Praninskas (1975) points out that since preverbal adverbs of frequency are used to express
approximately how many times a habitual action or condition is repeated, they are typically
not used with the progressive aspect. Instead, simple present tense, present perfect, and simple
past (in its habitual sense) tend to co-occur with these adverbs:
Professor Johnson is always busy.	Joe often studied until midnight.
I have never visited Japan.
In fact, we would add that all adverbiais of frequency—not just the preverbal adverbs—tend
to co-occur with tenses that are used to express habitual action:
Horace goes to the movies once a week.
Alberta drank champagne every now and then.
While we agree in principle with Praninskas’s (1975) generalization, we would, however,
point out that the progressive aspect may co-occur with preverbal adverbs of frequency when
the speaker’s message carries emotional overtones (see Chapter 7):
Orville is always hearing noises, (i.e., he hallucinates)
Compare this with the less emotional, more objective sentence:
Orville always hears noises, (i.e., he has a keen sense of hearing)
The preverbal adverb of highest frequency (i.e., always), also closely resembles certain
adverbs that express duration or iteration, although always is less emphatic than continually or
constantly.
always
Sydney is continually grouchy,
constantly "ϊς·
always
Martha continually loses things,
constantly
(durative: a continuing state of affairs)
(iterative: a series of events)
Sentence-Initial Use of PAFs
Several—though not all—preverbal adverbs of frequency sometimes occur in initial position.
What does such initial position signal? Close (1981) suggests that logical contradiction is a
likely environment for a sentence-initial preverbal adverb:
A: Peter is always on time.
S: No, Peter isn't always on time. Sometimes he's late.
530
The Grammar Book
While this seems to be a reasonable suggestion, Lee’s (1991) research on sometimes certainly
argues that sentence-initial use of PAFs can signal other important discourse organizing
functions, especially if they occur at the beginning of a paragraph or episode.
Some Other Discourse Considerations
Many reference grammars and ESL/EFL textbooks state that how often begins a question
that asks about frequency. What they usually do not point out is that such questions tend to
elicit responses containing specific (or general) adverbiais of frequency rather than preverbal
adverbs of frequency. In fact, a response with a preverbal adverb could be considered vague,
evasive, or even rude:
A: How often do you go to the movies?
B:
I go about once a week.
?l go (fairly) often.
A: How often do you study in the library? B:	nJght·
[ ?l always study there.
The above questions begin with “How often do you ...” and they are asking about
the frequency of current habitual activities. There are other questions beginning with “How
often ...” that involve the perfect of experience; a specific or general frequency is expected
in the response. Again, most preverbal adverbs are inappropriate, and always is impossible:
A: How often have you been to Acapulco?
Three times.
Many times.
?Seldom.
frequently.
"Always.
Yes/no questions with ever—like the “How often ... ?” questions—may ask about either
specific experiences or the frequency of habitual actions:
Specific experience: Have you ever been to Acapulco?
Frequency: Do you ever study in the library?
Yes/no questions with ever that ask about specific experiences tend to elicit specific
responses—again, responses with a preverbal adverb of frequency are too vague:
A: Have you ever been to Acapulco?
Yes, for one week back in 1991.
?Yes, I
sometimes 1
usually 1 go there.
On the other hand, yes/no questions with ever that ask about the frequency of habitual
actions readily elicit responses with a preverbal adverb of frequency, and they are the only
questions with ever that can do this:
A: Do you ever study in the library?
always
usually
often
sometimes
rarely
never
do.
Therefore preverbal adverbs are not normally elicited by ๗-questions and can be naturally
elicited by only one type of yes/no question (i.e., questions about the frequency of habitual
actions). This observation has ramifications for teaching since we want our students to
Chapter 25: Adverbiais
531
practice using preverbal adverbs in contexts that are as natural as possible. Clearly we need
a comprehensive discourse analysis of the use of preverbal adverbs in English speech and
writing that will give US some of the information we have about other adverbiais.
Conclusion
This chapter has expanded on our brief earlier discussions about adverb phrases, prepositional
phrases used adverbially, and adverb clauses. We have shown that these three adverbial
structures can occur both sentence-finally and sentence-initially, with different implications
for the organization of discourse. We have also included a discussion of participles functioning
as adverbiais to complement our earlier discussion of participles functioning as adjectives
in Chapter 20. In the final section of this chapter, we have introduced preverbal adverbs of
frequency (PAFs), an important sub-class of adverbiais, which are sentential in scope and which
overlap semantically with the quantifiers presented in Chapter 17. All PAFs are placed medially
between the subject and the predicate; many of them can also appear sentence-initially where
they function to reflect speaker stance, and a few of them can occur sentence-finally.
Adverbiais will be the topic of the following two chapters on logical connectors, Chapter 26,
and conditionals, Chapter 27. We will encounter adverbiais again as a special type of relative
clause in Chapter 29 and in the two chapters that deal with degree constructions (Chapters 34
and 3 5). As we said at the outset of this chapter, adverbiais are a large and diffuse category.
More is on the way!
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form. Miller (1991) suggests having learners unscramble sentences, putting the
adverbiais after the verb; each scrambled sentence contains two adverbiais for which
possible orderings can be discussed (pp. 75-77); for example:
sometimes/John/to the beach/goes
jumped/the cat/into the car/through the window
in the spring/salmon/upstream/swim
Mr. Chaves/from Peru/immigrated/ten years ago
2.	Form. Ίο help learners see the relationship between adjectives and adverbs of manner,
have them convert sentences with adverbs to sentences with adjectives, and vice versa:
John is a careful worker —> John works carefully.
Sheila dances gracefully —> Sheila is a graceful dancer.
3.	Form. Danielson and Porter (1990) suggest providing students with a text where the
adverbiais come at the end of each sentence in parentheses in a scrambled order. The students
have to rewrite the paragraph inserting the adverbiais in appropriate places (p. 195):
San Francisco is cool (in the summer, usually). The skies are overcast, and the fog
rolls off the bay to cover the city (in the morning, almost always, completely, often).
Hpwever, the weather turns warm and sunny (sometimes).
4.	Meaning. Thewlis (2007) suggests that students interview a classmate to find out things that
he or she does based on adverbial prompts of time, place and manner, such as every day, before
bedtime, outdoors, very we//, or with considerable difficulty. The interviewer should write complete
sentences about the activities and report them to the class (p. 35).
532
The Grammar Book
ร. Meaning. Sharon Voss (personal communication) suggests that the teacher prepare large
flashcards—each with a preverbal adverb of frequency. When each student has a flashcard,
the class members must first arrange themselves into a positive group and a negative group.
Then, within each of the two groups, they should order themselves from high to low frequency
according to the meanings of the preverbal adverbs of frequency on their flashcards. Each
student then says an original sentence using his or her preverbal adverb of frequency and,
if necessary, receives comments and corrections from peers. The teacher should also get the
students to discuss the appropriateness of the sentences containing the preverbal adverbs
(e.g., “Would an alternative sound better?”).
6.	Form/Meaning. Have students work in groups to describe events that surround some
notable event such as an earthquake, an election, the Olympics, or the World Cup. Ask them
to use preverbal adverbs of frequency to describe the related events. For example:
An earthquake
Some animals always know when an earthquake is going to occur.
People sometimes panic during an earthquake.
Homes and buildings are often damaged by an earthquake.
7.	Use. Have students consult a collocations dictionary or online concordance such as the
Compleat Lexical Tutor (www.lextutor.ca) or COCA (www.corpus.byu.edu/coca) to learn
what circumstance adverbiais co-occur frequently with common verbs. The choice of verbs
can depend on student levels and learning contexts. Ask them to write down four or five
adverbiais for each verb. If time permits, they can write sentences or choose several to use
in a paragraph. Or to conduct the activity in a shorter time, assign just one word to pairs or
groups and ask them to share their findings. Students can also be asked to volunteer verbs to
check. For example:
complain: bitterly, loudly, constantly, repeatedly
laugh: out loud, heartily, hysterically, nervously, uncontrollably
speak: briefly, quietly, softly, loudly, eloquently
study las เท examine): carefully, closely, in depth, extensively
travel: fast, slowly, regularly, widely, independently
work: steadily, effectively, efficiently, satisfactorily
worry: a lot, slightly, terribly, needlessly, unnecessarily (All examples are from Oxford Col-
locations Dictionary for Students of English, Oxford University Press, 2002)
8.	Use. As a noticing task for helping writers develop an awareness of the importance of
hedging in academic writing, Frodesen and Wald (2015) suggest giving students pairs of
sentences in which the first sentence does not use a hedging adverb expressing possibility or
frequency, but the second one does. Ask students to discuss why the hedges are important,
given the information expressed in the sentences. For example:
1.	a. Reducing intake of animal fat will lead to better health.
b.	Reducing intake of animal fat will potentially lead to better health.
2.	a. An African lion in the wild lives for 16-18 years.
b. An African in the wild typically lives for 16-18 years.
Chapter 25: Adverbiais
533
9.	Use. To practice the stance marker perhaps in its patterned usage with superlatives (perhaps
[one of] the best/biggest/most + classifier NP is...), give students a list of phrases with a variety
of superlatives and classifier nouns (e.g., example, experience, problem). Ask them to choose and
complete one or more phrases by writing sentences; then ask them to share their responses
with the class for comments and questions. Create phrases that reflect your students’
proficiency levels, backgrounds, interests and goals for learning English. This activity could
be expanded as an in-class writing or out-of-class assignment by asking students to write a
paragraph describing or explaining the sentence they wrote. For example:
•	Perhaps one of the most striking differences between my life in my home country and
[the country I now live ini is...
•	Perhaps the greatest difficulty I have experienced in learning English is...
•	Perhaps one of the best examples of traditional Mexican food is ...
•	Perhaps the most common stereotype people have of Americans in my home
country is...
•	Perhaps the biggest problem I had in adjusting to a new country/a new home/
college/living in a dormitory...
10.	Use. Ίο practice using sentential adverbiais for exposing attitude and stance, give students
a fist of three or four statements that would elicit such responses. Ask them to work in pairs
or small groups and choose one or more statements to list as many responses as they can.
Provide several examples of responses to a statement as models. For example:
Context
The American Cancer Society estimates
that at least 20 percent of all cancers
as could be prevented by proper diet.
Response(s)
•	Perhaps that's an understatement.
•	Of course, if you include tobacco
part of diet, the percentage goes
way up.
•	Sometimes I wonder what these
numbers are based on.
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1.	Provide anginal sentences that illustrate the following terms or rules. Underline the
pertinent word(s) in your examples.
a.	sentence-initial
(i.) adverb phrase
(ท.) prepositional phrase
(iii.) adveriaclause
b.	sentence-final
(i.) adverb phrase
(ท.) prepositional phrase
(iii.) adverb clause
c.	specific or general adverbial of frequency
534
The Grammar Book
d.	preverbal adverb of frequency
(i.) positive
(ii.) negative
e.	phrasal preverbal adverb of frequency
(i.) positive
(ii.) negative
f.	adverbial participle
2.	Why are the following sentences or dialogues ungrammatical?
a.	*Is not he ever going to finish his degree?
b.	*Marvin does often not dance.
c.	A: Are you ever late to class?
B: *1 am never.
Test your ability to apply what you know.
3.	If your students produce the following sentences, what norms of Standard English
have they not followed, and how would you help them to become aware of them?
a.	*José can play sometimes handball after work.
b.	*Rarely we can eat outside in the garden.
c.	*1 speak fluently French.
d.	*We enjoy going in Boston to seafood restaurants.
e.	*Crying hysterically, the mother tried to calm the little girl down.
4.	What is the difference in meaning, if any, between the sentences in each of the
following pairs?
a.	Alice uses dental floss. Alice always uses dental floss.
b.	Sometimes we need to think before we act. We sometimes need to think before we act.
c.	When I think about Sybil, I get very angry. I get very angry when I think about Sybil.
5.	What, if anything, is inappropriate with the responses to these two questions? What is
the explanation for any problem you detect?
a.	A: How often do you go to the beach?
B: Usually.
b.	A: Have you ever been to Europe?
B: Sometimes.
6.	A student asks you if there is any difference between these two sentences, and if so,
when he should use one form rather than the other. What will you say?
a.	I have always told the truth.
b.	I always have told the truth.
7.	A student asks you which of these two sentences is correct. What will you say?
a.	I watch the news at 10 P.M. every day.
b.	I watch the news every day at 10 P.M.
Chapter 25: Adverbiais
535
Bibliography
REFERENCES
Barbaresi, L. (1987). “Obviously” and “certainly”: Two different functions in argumentative discourse. Folia
Linguística, 2/(1), 3-24.
Biber, D., Johansson, ร., Leech, G., Conrad, c., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and
written English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ltd.
Chafe, พ., & Nichols, J. (Eds.). (1986). Evidentiality: The linguistic coding of epistemology. Norwood, NJ:
ABLEX.
Close, R. A. (1981). English as a foreign language (3rd ed.). London, England: Allen and Unwin.
Danielson, D., & Porter, p. (1990). Using English (2nd ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall Regents.
Davies, M. (2008). The corpus of contemporary American English (COCA): 425 million words, 1990-present.
Retrieved from http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/
Diessel, H. (2008). Iconicity of sequence: A corpus-based analysis of the positioning of temporal adverbial
clauses in English. Cognitive Linguistics, 19(3), 465-490.
Downing, A. (2001). “Surely you knew!”: Surely as a marker of evidentiality and stance. Functions of
Language, 8(2), 253-285.
Ernst, T. B. (1984). Towards an integrated theory of adverb position in English. Bloomington, IN: University of
Indiana Linguistics Club.
Ford, c. E. (1993). Grammar in interaction: Adverbial clauses in American English conversation. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Greenbaum, ร. (1969). Studies in English adverbial usage. London, England: Longman.
Halliday, M. A. K. & Matthiessen, c. Μ. I. M. (2014). Halliday's introduction to functional grammar (4th ed.).
London, England: Edward Arnold.
Hasselgard, H. (2010). Adjunct adverbiais in English. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Jacobs, R. (199 ร').English syntax: A grammar for English language professionals. Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press.
Klima, E. (1964). Negation in English. In J. Fodor & J. Katz (Eds.), The structure of language (pp. 243-323).
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Koktova, E. (1986a). Sentence adverbiais in afunctional description. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins.
Koktova, E. (1986b). Remarks on the semantics of sentence adverbiais. Journal of Pragmatics, 10(1), 127-40.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Lee, D. K. (1991). A discourse analysis of seven English sentential adverbs (Unpublished master's thesis).
University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Liu, D. & Espino, M. (2012). Actually, genuinely, really, and truly. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics,
17(2), 198-228.
Lyons, J. (1979). Semantics (Vol. 2). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Miller, D. o. (1991). Afiiscourse analysis of clause-final multiple adverbiais (Unpublished master's thesis).
University of California, Los Angeles^ CA.
Palmer, F. R. (1988). Mood and modality. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Praninskas, J. (1975). Rapid review of English grammar. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, ร. Leech, G., & Svartvik, J. (1985). A comprehensive grammar of the English
language. London, England: Longinan.
Schleppegrell, M. (2004). The language of schooling: A functional linguistics perspective. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Simon-Vandenbergen, A. (1992). The interactional utility of of course in spoken discourse. Occasional Papers
in Systemic Linguistics, 6, 213-226.
Simon-Vandenbergen, A. (2008). Almost certainly and most definitely: Degree modifiers and epistemic stance.
Journal of Pragmatics, 40, 1521-1542.
536
The Grammar Book
Simon-Vandenbergen, A., & Aijmer, K. (2007). The semantic field of modal certainty: A corpus-based study of
English adverbs. Berlin, Germany: Mouton de Gruyter.
Thewlis, ร. (2007). Grammar dimensions’. Form) meaning) and use 3 (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Gengage
Learning.
Thompson, ร. A. (1985). Grammar in written discourse: Initial vs. final purpose clauses in English. Text)
5(1), 55-84.
Thompson, ร. A., Longacre, R., & Hwang, ร. (2007). Adverbial clauses. In T Shopen (Ed.), Complex
constructions: Language typology and syntactic description (2nd ed., Vol. 2, pp. 237-300). Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING ____________________
For useful overviews of linguistic and grammatical analysis of adverbiais, see:
Buysschaert, J. (1982). Criteria for the classification of English adverbiais. Brussels, Belgium: Paleis der
Academien.
Ernst, T. B. (1984). Towards an integrated theory of adverb position in English. Bloomington, IN: University of
Indiana Linguistics Club.
Nilsen, D. L. E (1972). English adverbiais. The Hague, Netherlands: Mouton.
For useful information on usage, see:
Ford, c. E. (1993). Grammar in interaction: Adverbial clauses in American English conversation. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Greenbaum, ร. (1969). Studies in English adverbial usage. London, England: Longman.
Koktova, E. (1986). Sentence adverbiais in a junctional description. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins.
For research that investigates stance adverbiais across academic genres and disciplines, see:
Hyland, K. (2004). Disciplinary discourses: Social interaction in academic writing. Ann Arbor, MI: University of
Michigan Press.
Hyland, K. & c. ร. Guinda (Eds.). (2012). Stance and voice in written academic genres. New York, NY:
Palgrave Macmillan.
For information on negative preverbal adverbs of frequency, see:
Klima, E. (1964). Negation in English. In J. Eodor & J. Katz (Eds.). The structure of language (pp. 246-323).
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
For explanations and exercises for learners on adverbial phrases and clauses and also on using adverbs and
aspect to indicate time relationships, see:
Thewlis, ร. (2007). Grammar dimensions·. Form,) meaning) and use 3 (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage
Learning.
For a content-based lesson on adverbs of frequency, see:
Firsten, R. (2008). Grammar connection·. Structure through content 2. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
For explanations and activities focused on adverb clauses in advanced grammar and writing, see:
Bland, ร. K. (with Savage, A., & Meyers, p.). (2008). Grammar sense: Advanced grammar and writing 4. New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.
For explanations and activities using stance adverbiais in academic writing, see:
Frodesen, J., & Wald, M. (2015). Exploring options: Vocabulary and grammar for academic writing. Ann Arbor,
MI: University of Michigan Press.
For a discussion of adverbs frequently used in academic writing, see:
Hinkel, E. (2004). Teaching academic ESL writing: Practical techniques in vocabulary and grammar. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Chapter 25: Adverbiais
537
Endnotes
1.	The term preverbal adverb of frequency comes from the work of Klima (ใ 964).
2.	All the 0 symbols represent obligatorily or optionally deleted prepositions of the types described in
Chapter 2Ί.
3.	This is an equative degree clause functioning adverbially (see Chapter 35), not the usual subordinate
adverb clause consisting of an adverb subordinator followed by a full sentence.
4.	Recall that because of Is a complex preposition of the type described and diagrammed in Chapter 21.
5.	Note that this is a nonfinite adverb clause, different from the usual adverb clause (an adverb
subordinator followed by a full finite sentence). Jacobs (1995) points out that nonfinite subordinate
clauses often lack an overt subordinator (p. 67): She locked the door (so as) to prevent any more intrusions.
6.	The other major syntactic means of introducing speaker stance and attitude toward propositions in
English are via modals/phrasal modals, You may be right and via the short introductory clauses that can
precede noun clause complements: It's possible he was injured; I think you're right. (See Chapter 31.)
7.	This includes "frequency,"which we treat in our discussion of preverbal adverbs of frequency.
8.	Biber et al. present a number of subcategories for epistemic, such as doubt/certainty, actuality, and
imprecision.
9.	The Compieat Lexical Tutor (www.lextutor.ca), developed by Tom Cobb, is a website with, among other
vocabulary learning resources, a concordancer for investigating patterns of words and phrases in a
number of written and spoken corpora, both American and British English.
10.	We have not provided phrase structure descriptions for many general and specific adverbiais of
frequency, such as once a week, once in a while, and, every now and then, because their analysis is simply
too complicated to be worth doing.
11.	Note that whereas adverbiais of specific or general frequency tend to be phrases (with exceptions such
as weekly, yearly, daily, hourly), preverbal adverbs of frequency tend to be single words, although they
may take adverbs and thereby form adverbial phrases (e.g., very often or almost always). Sometimes both
types of adverbs of frequency occur in statements of habitual action, e.g., I usually do my laundry once
a week. When this happens, the preverbal adverb is modifying the specific adverbial of frequency; in
other words, preverbal adverbs of frequency modify the entire sentence—they do for the sentence what
quantifiers do for the noun phrase—whereas general or specific adverbiais of frequency modify the
activity expressed in the verb phrase.
There are also some prepositional phrases semantically similar to the preverbal adverbs generally and
usually that typically occur in initial position:
As a rule, 1 -______1..____1_______1.____
__	Ϊ Sara walks her dog after dinner.
เท general,]
12.	Note that in this example, the auxiliary verb do has been added via do support to carry the emphatic
stress as well as the tense. For further discussion of this function of do, see Chapter 30. Also, with
emphatic do as operator, there is one other possible ordering in strong agreement rejoinders that the
rules do not predict: Yes, she does always do that!
13.	For some reason, often is more awkwarcl than these other adverbs when used sentence-initially (?Often
Mary jogs in the morning) even though it is in the same semantic category. The somewhat archaic
equivalent form oftentimes seems to work better in initial position than often.
14.	Negative preverbal adverbs are not the only negative forms that cause subject/operator inversion when
fronted. Most, if not all, negative constituents have this effect in English:
Not since the tsunami has such destruction been seen.
15.	Note that not all sentences containing never, rarely, etc., may undergo this change of word order. The
speaker or writer typically must be expressing an exclamation of sorts; if not, the fronting of the negative
RAF and the inversion are strange:
John has never traveled abroad. ?Never has John traveled abroad.
538
The Grammar Book
16.	Evercan function on its own as a PAF in questions and after not/'rit.
17.	Ever is not listed on the semantic continua for preverbal adverbs of frequency because it is midway
between the positive and negative lexical items. It occurs mainly in questions or negatives or as a part of
phrasal combinations with not, hardly, or scarcely.
18.	This impossible combination may be due to the fact that historically never is a lexicalized form
of not + ever.
Chapter 25: Adverbiais
539
Introduction
In Chapter 24 we described coordinating conjunctions (e.g., and, hut, so), which conjoin two
or more like constituents and lead the listener/reader to interpret how these constituents
are related to each other. Chapter 25, gave an overview of adverbiais. In this chapter, we
focus more specifically on two types of adverbiais, which we call logical connectors. Logical
connectors signal how segments of discourse are logically related to each other. For instance,
they may signal causal, sequential, or contrastive relationships. There are two types of logical
connectors:
1.	Adverb subordinators
Adverb subordinators, such as although, because and whereas, identify relationships between
the subordinate clauses they mark and main clauses in sentences:
Although the black clouds looked threatening, no rain was predicted.
2.	Linking adverbs
Linking adverbs comprise a larger group of expressions than that for adverb subordinators.
They include words and phrases such as however, therefore, for example, and in addition,
and are used to signal relationships between independent clauses that in written English
are punctuated as separate sentences or joined by a semi-colon:
The black clouds looked threatening; however, no rain was predicted.
From these two examples, we can see that adverb subordinators and linking adverbs
are similar in the meanings that they signal between clauses and sentences. And from these
examples, it is also apparent that some adverb subordinators and linking adverbs specify the
same kinds of relationships that coordinating conjunctions do;1 in this case, the conjunction
would be but:
The black clouds looked threatening, but no rain was predicted.
With so few members, the logical meanings that coordinating conjunctions express are
quite limited. Subordinating conjunctions and linking adverbs, in contrast, signal a wider
range of meanings.
Logical connectors in ESL/EFL teaching contexts get significant attention, especially
at more advanced levels, and in the teaching of writing. But even at beginning levels,
speakers and writers need to learn and practice logical connectors commonly used in
everyday English.
541
Among the most important issues that arise in the teaching and learning of logical
connectors, and which will be covered in this chapter, are the following:
1.	How do the connector types differ in the kinds of constructions they connect?
2.	What types of punctuation are used in written English with the connector types?
3.	How do the connector types differ in the meanings they signal between parts of text?
4.	How do the uses of connectors differ across speech and writing and within different
registers of these modes (e.g., journalism versus academic writing)?
5.	Which logical connectors deserve the most focus in language teaching based on their
frequency in speech and/or writing?
Common problems that ESL/EFL learners have with the forms, meanings, and uses of
connectors are as follows:
•	Using a connector that does not have the appropriate meaning for the context:
The golden eagle is a large bird, with a wingspan of over 8 feet.
*On the contrary, some hummingbirds are not much bigger than large insects.
•	Using a connector with an inappropriate level of formality (either more formal or less):
I had a bad cold on Sunday. *Hence, I couldn't go swimming.
•	Using incorrect punctuation for a connector:
*The road was closed, as a result, we had to take a detour.
In addition to these common problems is that of unclear reference of connectors in
extended pieces of writing. For example, when a writer uses a connector such as therefore
to signal a result or however to signal a contrast, a reader may have difficulty determining
how much of the previous text should be considered as part of the logical relationship.
(This, of course, is a problem that native English writers may have as well.) As ESL/EFL
learners develop their proficiency in academic writing, they may also tend to overuse
connectors.
This chapter, then, will describe the shared and different meanings of adverb
subordinators and linking adverbs, the ways in which these two connector groups differ
in form and use, and aspects of their teaching that deserve special attention in ESL/EFL
contexts.
The Form of Logical Connectors
CLAUSE?v111________
We have already encountered in this book what traditional grammarians have called
subordinating conjunctions. We have, referred to them as adverb subordinators because they
subordinate one clause to another, and they have the force of an adverbial. We first introduced
them in Chapter 6, where we saw that one of the grammatical forms that adverbiais take in
English is clausal (rule 13), and that adverb clauses are in turn composed of sentences that are
introduced by adverb subordinators (rule 14).
AdvCI
13.	ADVL —> \ AdvP ►
PrepP
14.	AdvCI -> adv sub ร
542
The Grammar Book
โ'
Simple Adverb Subordinators
A list of simple adverb subordinators includes the following:
after	before	since	when (ever)
although	if	though	where(ver)
as	lest	until	whereas
because	once	unless	while
We should point out immediately that many of the words listed here also fit other part-
of-speech categories, in which they would not be called adverb subordinators. You have seen how
where and when, for instance, function as ๗-question words (Chapter 13). In addition, some
words that serve as adverb subordinators before clauses function as prepositions when they
are followed by a noun phrase. This is especially true for those expressing time relationships,
such as after, before, since, and until:
adv sub: Before/After the play ended, many patrons were crying.
prep: Before/After the play, we had coffee.
adv sub: Since you talked to me about it, I've become convinced.
prep: Since Monday, it has been terribly hot.
adv sub: Until it cools off, I am not doing any yardwork.
prep: We will not have our next class until the end of the week.
Notice that what distinguishes these uses is what comes after the adv sub or prep. If it is an
adv sub, it will be followed by a clause; as a prep, it is followed by an NP.2
An additional possible point of confusion concerns the word as. This word falls into the
class of subordinators provided that it is used in the causal sense of since, as below:
She left soon as she saw no reason to remain.
As is also a preposition, and is used extensively in equatives (Chapter 34).
Complex Adverb Subordinators
To the list of simple adverb subordinators, we add certain other expressions, sometimes called
lexicalized units, that can precede a subordinate clause:
as long as	inasmuch as	now that
as soon as	in case (that)	provided that
even if	in order that	so long as
even though	insofar as	so that
given that	in that	
Like the simple adverb subordinators, clauses beginning with complex adverb subordinators
can appear in various positions in the sentence:
final: You can stay with US as long as you bring your own bedding.
initial: As long as you bring your own bedding, you can stay with US.
final: Bring an umbrella in case it rains.
initial: In case it rains, bring an umbrella.
Biber, Johannson, Leech, Conrad, and Finegan (1999) point out that some of the complex
adverb subordinators occur regularly in patterns with other words or phrases. They call these
groups of words “lexical bundles” (p. 1011). A few examples that are common in conversation
are the following:
As far as I know, he arrived this morning.
As long asyou don't mind, I'll drive.
As soon os you con, give me a call.
Chapter 26: Logical Connectors
543
Among the most important issues that arise in the teaching and learning of logical
connectors, and which will be covered in this chapter, are the following:
1.	How do the connector types differ in the kinds of constructions they connect?
2.	What types of punctuation are used in written English with the connector types?
3.	How do the connector types differ in the meanings they signal between parts of text?
4.	How do the uses of connectors differ across speech and writing and within different
registers of these modes (e.g., journalism versus academic writing)?
5.	Which logical connectors deserve the most focus in language teaching based on their
frequency in speech and/or writing?
Common problems that ESL/EFL learners have with the forms, meanings, and uses of
connectors are as follows:
•	Using a connector that does not have the appropriate meaning for the context:
The golden eagle is a large bird, with a wingspan of over 8 feet.
*On the contrary, some hummingbirds are not much bigger than large insects.
•	Using a connector with an inappropriate level of formality (either more formal or less):
I had a bad cold on Sunday. *Hence, I couldn't go swimming.
•	Using incorrect punctuation for a connector:
*The road was closed, as a result, we had to take a detour.
In addition to these common problems is that of unclear reference of connectors in
extended pieces of writing. For example, when a writer uses a connector such as therefore
to signal a result or however to signal a contrast, a reader may have difficulty determining
how much of the previous text should be considered as part of the logical relationship.
(This, of course, is a problem that native English writers may have as well.) As ESL/EFL
learners develop their proficiency in academic writing, they may also tend to overuse
connectors.
This chapter, then, will describe the shared and different meanings of adverb
subordinators and linking adverbs, the ways in which these two connector groups differ
in form and use, and aspects of their teaching that deserve special attention in ESL/EFL
contexts.
The Form of Logical Connectors
CLAUSESAMkksUW^^U
We have already encountered in this book what traditional grammarians have called
subordinating conjunctions. We have-referred to them as adverb subordinators because they
subordinate one clause to another, and they have the force of an adverbial. We first introduced
them in Chapter 6, where we saw that one of the grammatical forms that adverbiais take in
English is clausal (rule 13), and that adverb clauses are in turn composed of sentences that are
introduced by adverb subordinators (rule 14).
	AdvCI
13. ADVL —> -	AdvP PrepP
14. AdvCI adv sub ร
>42
The Grammar Book
Simple Adverb Subordinators
A list of simple adverb subordinators includes the following:
after	before	since	when(ever)
although	if	though	where(ver)
as	lest	until	whereas
because	once	unless	while
We should point out immediately that many of the words listed here also fit other part-
of-speech categories, in which they would not be called adverb subordinators. You have seen how
where and when, for instance, function as ๗-question words (Chapter 13). In addition, some
words that serve as adverb subordinators before clauses function as prepositions when they
are followed by a noun phrase. This is especially true for those expressing time relationships,
such as after, before, since, and until:
adv sub: Before/After the play ended, many patrons were crying.
prep: Before/After the play, we had coffee.
adv sub: Since you talked to me about it, I've become convinced.
prep: Since Monday, it has been terribly hot.
adv sub: Until it cools off, I am not doing any yardwork.
prep: We will not have our next class until the end of the week.
Notice that what distinguishes these uses is what comes after the adv sub or prep. If it is an
adv sub, it will be followed by a clause; as a prep, it is followed by an NP.2
An additional possible point of confusion concerns the word as. This word falls into the
class of subordinators provided that it is used in the causal sense of since, as below:
She left soon as she saw no reason to remain.
As is also a preposition, and is used extensively in equatives (Chapter 34).
Complex Adverb Subordinators
To the list of simple adverb subordinators, we add certain other expressions, sometimes called
lexicalized units, that can precede a subordinate clause:
as long as	inasmuch as	now that
as soon as	in case (that)	provided that
even if	in order that	so long as
even though	insofar as	so that
given that	in that	
Like the simple adverb subordinators, clauses beginning with complex adverb subordinators
can appear in various positions in the sentence:
final: You can stay with US as long as you bring your own bedding.
initial: As long as you bring your own bedding, you can stay with US.
final: Bring an umbrella in case it rains.
initial: เท case it rains, bring an umbrella.
Biber, Johannson, Leech, Conrad, and Finegan (1999) point out that some of the complex
adverb subordinators occur regularly in patterns with other words or phrases. They call these
groups of words “lexical bundles” (p. 1011). A few examples that are common in conversation
are the following:
As far as I know, he arrived this morning.
As long as you don't mind, I'll drive.
As soon as you can, give me a call.
Chapter 26: Logical Connectors
543
The Syntax of Sentences with Adverb Clauses
When the adverb subordinator + subordinate clause appears in final position in the sentence,
the tree looks like the following:
	Sam should leave before Larry objects.
subU	PRED
NP	AUX	VP	ADVL
N	Μ	V	AdyCl
Sam	should	leave adv sub	ร
before SUBJ PRED
NP AUX	VP
NT	V
Larry -pres object
When the adverb clause appears at the beginning of the sentence, the adverb clause is
considered a sentence modifier, as you saw in the previous chapter. The reasons for the
different architecture between sentence-initial and sentence-final position are discussed later
in this chapter, in the section on using logical connectors.
Before Larry objects, Sam should leave.
ร
sm
ร
ADVL
SUBJ
PRED
AdvCl	NP	AUX	VP
adv sub	ร	N	M	V
before SUBJ	PRED	Sam	should	leave
N
AUX
VP
Larry
V
-pres
object
544
The Grammar Book
It is somewhat more difficult for adverb clauses to appear medially; when they do so appear,
they are typically separated in speech by heavy pauses:
final: You can see as far as Orcas Island when the sky is dear.
initial: When the sky is dear, you can see as far as Orcas Island.
medial: You can, when the sky is dear, see as far as Orcas Island.
Note again a parallel with other adverbial options, here a prepositional phrase:
final: We plan to take the trip during the summer.
initial: During the summer, we plan to take the trip.
medial: We plan, during the summer, to take the trip.
Thus, we see once again that adverbiais as a whole are unusually free in their placement
options in comparison with other constituents.
LINKING ADVERBS
Linking adverbs (sometimes called conjunctive adverbs), unlike adverb subordinators, do not
subordinate a clause; rather, they connect independent clauses.
Sam should leave; however, Larry will object.
The inventory of English linking adverbs is considerably larger than that of adverb
subordinators. A fairly complete list is given here. Some are individual words, and some qualify
as lexicalized units:
additionally	hence	moreover
after all	however	nevertheless
also	in addition	next
alternatively	in any case/event	on the contrary
as a result	indeed	on the one/other hand
as a consequence	in contrast	otherwise
besides	in fact	rather
by contrast	in other words	similarly
consequently	in particular	still
conversely	in spite of that	that is
despite that	in sum	therefore
first(ly)... second(ly)... finally	in turn	thus
for example/instance	last(ly)	
furthermore	likewise	
Like other adverbiais, most of these linking adverbs are capable of appearing in different
places in a clause; they may be found at the beginning, in the middle, or at the end of the
independent clauses with which they occur. (We discuss the punctuation of sentences with
logical connectors next.)
However, raccoons are much smaller.
Raccoons and bears are related animals. Raccoons are much smaller, however.
Raccoons, however, are much smaller.
Because these adverbs relate independent clauses, they are represented as two separate trees—
one for the first sentence (without the adverb) and one for the second (with the adverb).3
Following the first tree are three trees that illustrate the variable positioning of however in the
second sentence:
Chapter 26: Logical Connectors
545
Raccoons and bears are related animals.
	ร SUBJ	PRED
NP	conj	NP	AUX	VP
	and	T	cop	NP
raccoon -pl	bear -pl -pres	be ΑΡ^^Ν^\ ADJ animal -pl related However, raccoons are much smaller. ร
sm	
ADVL	SUBJ	PRED
AdvP	NP	AUX	VP
ADV	N^/^y	T	cop	AP\
however	raccoon -pl	-pres be	ADV	ADJ much smaller Raccoons, however, are much smaller. ร
รบรฺโ	ADVL	PRED
NP	AdvP	AúV^^^VP
N^^	ADV	T cop	AP
raccoon -pl however -pres be ADV ADJ
much smaller
46
The Grammar Book
Raccoons are much smaller, however.
รบBJ
NP
raccoon -pl
however
It is also possible for linking adverbs to follow coordinating conjunctions and to relate
grammatical categories other than an independent clause, such as a noun phrase or a verb
phrase:
This is a possum and therefore a marsupial. (NP and therefore NP)
You can raise the car or, alternatively, lower it to remove the engine. (VP or
alternatively VP)
She is on the one hand very helpful and on the other hand completely untrustworthy.
(AP and on the other hand AP)
When occurring with coordinating conjunctions, linking adverbs serve to join like constituents.
PUNCTUAT μΓοΗ>ΕΝΠΝ€Ε5^ΓΤΪ^
Punctuation conventions play an important role in the teaching of logical connector forms
for writing. This is true for teaching English speakers as well as ESL/EFL learners; most
writing classes other than for very young learners give attention to where commas, periods,
or semicolons are used with connectors and the clauses they connect. As with punctuation
rules for other structures, such as prepositional phrases or noun phrases in a series, there is
not always complete agreement as to when punctuation is necessary or optional, especially in
the case of commas.
The punctuation of sentences with logical connectors, including coordinating
conjunctions, adverb subordinators, and linking adverbs, can be even more challenging for
ESL/EFL learners than for native English speakers for several reasons:
•	Because the three classes of connectors are functionally so similar, students may
consider them grammatically equivalent as well. As one example, ESL/EFL learners
sometimes conftise the adverb subordinate although with the linking adverb however
and use although followed by a comma to signal a contrastive sentence:
I wanted to take an economics class winter term. * *Although, I need to take a
statistics course first.
Note that in this case, although without a comma would begin an adverb clause sentence
fragment that actually should be joined to the preceding clause.
•	Not all languages distinguish the three classes of connectors in the way that English
does. For some that have more than one class, there is a different correspondence
between meaning and class than that which exists in English. Japanese, for example,
Chapter 26: Logical Connectors
547
has a single word that translates as “because,” which may begin a clause that is
freestanding both orthographically and intonationally. LI Japanese students may, as a
result, create sentence fragments with because-dmses when writing in English:
I wanted to see all the Harry Potter films. *Because I had read every book in
the series.
Similarly, not all languages that have commas use them in quite the same way that
English does; ESL/EFL learners may transfer their punctuation rules to their written
English.
• Many of the linking adverbs such as in addition, nevertheless, and consequently are rarely
used in conversational English; as a result, intonational cues as to where one might
put commas or other punctuation are not available to learners. In other words, asking
a learner to read a piece of writing out loud in order to add or delete punctuation
might not be a successful editing strategy.
The next sections will summarize the punctuation rules for the three types of connectors. We
will use the following words, which all signal contrast, as our first examples:
coordinating conjunction: but
adverb subordinator: although
linking adverb: however
Punctuation with Coordinating Conjunctions
The general rule in writing handbooks for punctuating two clauses in a sentence joined by a
coordinating conjunction is to use a comma after the first clause:
They had just arrived at their vacation retreat, but already they wanted to leave.
If, however, the clauses are quite short, and ideas can be easily comprehended without the aid
of punctuation, a comma is not considered necessary:
They had just arrived and dinner was served.
Quirk, Greenbaum, Leech, and Svartvik (1985) report that English speakers tend to be more
accepting of no punctuation when and rather than but is the coordinating conjunction.
Coordinators can also begin a clause that is a sentence by itself.
They had just arrived. But they wanted to leave when they learned that heavy rain
was expected for the entire week.
Students are sometimes instructed not to start sentences with coordinating conjunctions; the
intention may be to encourage students to use linking adverbs as more register-appropriate
signals (e.g., to use however rather than but). Nevertheless, coordinating conjunctions are
used sentence initially in written English as any investigation of corpus data will reveal.
Quirk et al. point out that independent sentences are more frequently introduced by but
than by and.
Punctuation with Adverb Subordinators
With subordination, punctuatioiTdepends on whether the subordinate clause comes before
or after the main clause. If the subordinate clause comes first, a comma is placed at the end to
separate it from the main clause:
Even though she tried every means possible, she could not steer the boat out of the storm.
Usually no comma is used when the subordinate clause follows the main clause:
She could not steer the boat out of the storm even though she tried every means possible.
548
The Grammar Book
While the “no comma” rule for sentence-final subordinate clauses is typically taught to
student writers, in fact commas sometimes follow the main clauses that precede subordinate
clauses in academic English when the adverb subordinator signals a contrast, as we mentioned
in the previous chapter, and as in this example from the Corpus of Contemporary American
English (COCA):
New York state has personal finance standards in high school, although the standards
are not required to be implemented. (College student Journal, March 2011,45.1)
To some extent, punctuation may be determined by the length of the subordinate clause, with
shorter clauses tending not to be punctuated?
As noted earlier, a subordinate clause cannot be separated from the main clause in
formal written English regardless of whether it comes before or after the main clause. To do
so creates the writing error known as a sentence fragment as in these examples:
"She could not steer the boat out of the storm. Even though she tried every means possible.5
"Even though she tried every means possible. She could not steer the boat out of the storm.
And if we look at transcribed spoken data in corpus data, commas mark international pauses
before sentence-final subordinate clauses, which are afterthoughts, as in this example from
COCA discussing an increase of jumbo squid in California coastal waters:
Well, I don't think there's a danger to swimmers, although that's a huge big news
thing that makes the news about every year or so. (NPR Science, 2010 100212)
From the large amount of data now available through corpus analyses, it becomes clear that
the prescriptive rules have more exceptions than we may have thought; thus, ESL/EFL
learners may need to be aware that some of the rules given in textbooks are only general
guidelines.
Punctuation with Linking Adverbs
As most teachers of written English find, students tend to have problems in punctuating
clauses joined by linking adverbs, and this is sometimes the case for speakers of English as
well as ESL/EFL learners. The following chart summarizes the most common rules:
Punctuation Rules with Linking Adverbs	Examples
When two clauses are connected by a linking adverb, there are two options: 1)	A period can be used to create two separate sentences. 2)	Two clauses can be connected by a semicolon to emphasize that the ideas are logically related.6 With both options, a comma is used after the linking adverb	She tried every means possible. However, she could not steer the boat out of the storm. She tried every means possible; however, she could not steer the boat out of the storm.
Clauses connected by linking adverbs cannot be separated with only a comma.This common writing error is known as a comma splice or sometimes a run-on sentence.	"She tried every means possible, however, she could not steer the boat out of the storm.
Chapter 26: Logical Connectors
549
When some linking adverbs are sentence- medial, they are marked with commas both before and after.	She tried every means possible. She could not, however, steer the boat out of the storm. Her experience at sea was very frightening. She was not, as a result, eager to pilot a boat again.
Other linking adverbs, such as also and thus, do not need to be punctuated when they are sentence-medial. Many writers do not put a comma after an initial thus either.	She tried every means possible to steer the boat. Her friend also tried.
Some linking adverbs can be placed at the end of the sentence, in which case a comma is not needed.	She decided not to try to pilot a boat again. She still enjoys sailing with others however.
Because of the high frequency of linking adverbs in written English, especially academic
writing, teachers can easily provide opportunities for students to notice punctuation
conventions and summarize the rules that govern their use.
OTHER FORM PROBLEMS WITH LOGICAL CONNECTORS ____________
There are a few issues of form specific to individual logical connectors that arise for ESL/
EFL students.
Because versus Because Of. Students often confuse the adverb subordinator because with
the prepositional construction because of. While semantically and functionally similar, these
two forms are syntactically distinct. Most often students follow because of, which requires a
noun phrase object, with a full clause, as in the following sentence.
*We were late because of we had car problems.
As a Result versus As a Result Of. Similarly, ESL/EFL students sometimes confuse the
adverb subordinator as a result and as a result of in sentences like:
*As a result of I had a bad car accident, I missed several weeks of school.
Due To versus On Account Of. Then, too, often the synonymous prepositional
constructions due to and on account of are mistakenly used by learners as adverb
subordinators, as in the sentence
*1 couldn't finish my homework due to it was too hard.
For Example versus Such As. Another common area of confusion concerns the
semantically similar expressions for example and such as. The former functions as a linking
adverb, while the latter functions as a complex preposition:
We like beaches that have good surf. For example, we like Hapuna and Rincon.
We like beaches that have good surf. * *Such as, we like Hapuna and Rincon.
Such as is best presented as a prepositional construction: in normal use, it is most often
followed by a noun, not by a full clause:
We like beaches that have good surf such as Hapuna and Rincon.
550
The Grammar Book
For example, as a linking adverb, may semantically connect constituents smaller than full
clauses, including nouns. However, when it is used in this way, it is most often set off from the
main clause by a dash or a colon:
We like beaches that have good surf—for example, Hapuna and Rincon.
We like beaches that have good surf: Hapuna and Rincon, for example.
During versus While. Finally, let us mention the confusion that occurs between while, an
adverb subordinate, and during, which acts as a preposition.
*During I was making the dinner, the phone rang.
While I was making dinner, the phone rang.
Semantically speaking, the ideas expressed by while and during are the same. However, during
can appear only before noun phrases:
During the course of the day, four meals were served.
During 1999,1 was working in Europe.
While cannot appear before noun phrases.
"While 1999,1 was working in Europe.
Teachers will find that students are confused with all of these functionally similar but
syntactically distinct expressions. To the extent that a teacher wishes to draw attention to
them, they may merit classroom treatment on a case-by-case basis.
The Meaning and Use of Logical Connectors
TRUTH CON PIT	_____
Much of what was said in Chapter 24 about the meaning and use of coordinating conjunctions
applies equally to logical connectors. Though we would like to say that logical connectors all
have “meanings” in just the same way as other words and expressions and sentences have
meanings, an examination of a large percentage of the connectors soon reveals that they
“mean something” much different from the common truth-conditional sense used in most
semantic analyses. To see how this is so, we will look first at the cases where the meanings
are quite clear—in the cases of expressions that mark temporal (time) relationships (ibefore,
after, until, when), place relationships {where), or causal relationships (because, consequently). The
distinction can be illustrated with two examples. Here is the first:
Julius Caesar's career was finished long before Napoleon rose to power in France.
If the adverb subordinate before is replaced with after, the resulting sentence is simply
false. The words before/after contribute something to the truth or falsehood of the sentence; one
can respond to the sentence with after, “That’s not true! Napoleon lived almost two millennia
after Caesar!” This illustrates that explicit temporal logical connectors, like before and after,
contribute something to the main propositional content of the sentences with which they are
associated. The same can be said where place subordinates and causal subordinates are used.
However, not all connectors contribute to propositional content in this way. Compare
the following sequence with the previous one:
Caesar was a strong Roman leader; ??thus, Napoleon powerfully ruled France.
We cannot say that this sequence says anything false, but we can say that something seems
wrong in the way that the word thus is used. We are asked to infer a certain connection between
the sentences that does not make sense at all. To understand exactly what the problem is, let
us first ask what purpose inferential connectors serve in discourse.
Chapter 26: Logical Connectors
551
The need for inferential logical connectors is in some ways parallel to the need for
coordinating conjunctions like and, as we discussed in Chapter 24. It may be illustrated by
looking at the following pair of adjacent sentences, taken from Blakemore (1992, p. 136):
Barbara isn't in town. David isn't here.
Why would a speaker set these sentences side by side? What has been said prior to the utterance,
or what both speaker and listener already share as background knowledge may make the
reason clear. But contexts may not always be available or obvious enough to make intentions
transparent. For this reason, in Blakemore’s view, languages tend to create expressions whose
primary purpose is to clarify these intentions. In English, these sentences might be joined with
separate connectors, each of which makes the speaker’s intention much clearer:
a.	Barbara isn't in town. Thus, David isn't here.
b.	Barbara isn't in town. After all, David isn't here.
c.	Barbara isn't in town. Moreover, David isn't here.
It is certainly possible for the speaker to achieve the same effects in periphrastic ways. For
example, we could say in the (a) and (b) cases,
David isn't here. The reason I know that is that Barbara isn't in town.
Barbara isn't in town. The reason should be clear to you: it's because David isn't here.
However, connectors enable US to achieve the same effects more economically. It
goes without saying that speaker intentions can easily be lost, or badly misunderstood,
if no connector is used or if the wrong connector is used. In reading, where there are no
paralinguistic cues (e.g., tone of voice) or extralinguistic cues (e.g., gestures) to aid the
reader in comprehension, writer intentions may be missed even more easily without proper
connector use. As with some uses of conjunctions, the proper use of connectors plays a vital
role in leading readers/listeners to accurate inferences about the writer’s/speaker’s intentions.
We therefore say that there are two types of connectors:
a.	Truth-conditional connectors like before/after, which contribute to propositional
content and the truth-falsity of the sequences in which they occur
b.	Inferential connectors like thus and therefore, which do not contribute to truth or
falsity but which do clarify the logical relationship the speaker/writer intends
In particular, it is the inferential connectors that ESL/EFL students will need guidance in
interpreting and using. We will call special attention to these in the discussion that follows.
THE MEANINGS AND USES OF ADVERB CLAUSES
As we discussed in Chapter 25, there are differences across languages in the uses of adverb
clauses. However, according to Thompson and Longacre (1985), all languages seem to have
some means to use clauses to modify other clauses in a way consistent with English adverb
clauses. The authors further claim that the types of clausal connectors come from a relatively
small set most of which are truth-conditional:
Time: after, as long as, as soon as, before, since, when, whenever, until
Location: where, wherever
Manner: as (e.g.. Do that as your brother does it.), in that
Purpose: so that, in order that
Reason: since, because, as (e.g., He left, as it was late.), inasmuch as, now that
Time: after, as long as,...
Simultaneous: while (e.g., While she sang, he played.), as (e.g., As I was leaving, I saw her.)
Conditional: if, even if, as long as, in case, provided that
552
The Grammar Book
Concessive: although, even though, though, while
Substitutive: —
Additive: —
Absolutive: —
Those types that have no adverb subordinators associated with them are expressed
by other means in English. Substitutives are expressed by the complex prepositions instead
of and rather than, as well as by the linking adverb rather. Additives in English are marked
with coordinating conjunctions (and) and linking adverbs (e.g., in addition, moreover,
furthermore), and absolutives come into English as participial constructions, already
discussed in Chapter 25.
The meanings of most of these expressions are rather straightforward, and most ESL/
EFL students have little difficulty with them. The Concessive and Reason types, however, do
merit some discussion here.
Concessives
The concessives—although, even though, though, and while—fall within the class of inferential
connectors. A concession is a special variety of contrast where the sense conveyed is “Yes,
but ... ": where concession occurs, the speaker/writer wishes to grant the truth of one
proposition while asserting the truth of another proposition in such a way as to make the first
proposition seem of lesser importance:
Even though that is a good restaurant, I still think we should try this one.
Although she has done good paintings, she is not a real artist.
While but might be used to substitute for the subordinator in either one of these sentences,
neither although nor even though is appropriate simply to mark semantic contrasts in the way
that but often is used:
New York is huge, but my hometown is small.
?Although New York is huge, my hometown is small.
The use of concessive expressions involves a functional sort of contrast; the information
in the main clause is normally intended as the primary focus, and it is the concessive expression
that draws the reader/listener to that inference.
Reason
The word because, placed in the Reason category, is used in two distinct ways that are often
distinguishable in speech by intonation patterns and in writing by punctuation conventions.
The more common of the two meanings clearly contributes to truth-conditions in specifying
a cause; there is no intonation drop until the end of the complete sentence:
a.	My friend was fired because he didn't come to work on time.
b.	The poplar tree died because it was attacked by a disease.
The idea in sentence (a) is that being late led to the dismissal; similarly, the idea in (b) is that
the disease caused the tree to die.
Used in a different, more colloquial, sense, because is an inferential connector that signals
warrant for a particular belief. When the word is intended in this sense and when the main
clause comes first, the main clause is sometimes followed by a comma in print, reflecting a
complete sentence intonation contour in the main clause and another in the second:
c.	My friend was probably fired, because I don't see him anywhere.
d.	I think this is a poplar tree, because the leaves are pointed at the top.
Chapter 26: Logical Connectors
553
In sentence (c), the speaker is saying that his/her inability to find the friend constitutes
evidence for the belief that the friend has been fired; in (d), the speaker is justifying his/her
belief that the tree is a poplar. In neither case is causation being asserted, unlike in the previous
examples (a) and (b).
SEQUENCING ADVERBCU^	LINKS
Another issue of use has to do with the placement of an adverb subordinate clause within
a sentence. As we mentioned in the section on the form of adverb clauses, these clauses
generally appear either before or after the main clause, although they can also appear clause
medially. One may ask whether there is a difference in overall effect if the clause is placed in
one position rather than another. What determines which order below will be chosen?
Main clause + subordinate clause:
He always brought flowers when he visited.
Subordinate clause + main clause:
When he visited, he always brought flowers.
There is a strong tendency, according to Ramsay (1987), for initial subordinate clauses
to be thematically linked with the material that has come before in the discourse, while
subordinate clauses in second position seem to be more closely linked with their main clauses
(see the discussion of theme-rheme in Chapter 2). This is our justification for treating sentence-
final subordinate clauses as we would any other adverbiais, but classifying a sentence-initial
adverb clause as a sentence modifier. It is a sentence modifier in that it acts as a “discourse
pivot,” establishing links between what has come before the sentence and the main clause of
the sentence it is in. To take a simple constructed example:
The rivers dried up during the drought. Because there was so little water, the city
imposed a water rationing program. It worked rather well.
To reverse the order of the two clauses in the second sentence if used in the context of the first
sentence would result in a less coherent text.
THE MEANINGS AND USES OF LINKING ADVERBS
Linking adverbs have typically been classified according to the semantic functions they serve in
signaling logical relationships between segments of discourse. The classification we offer here
is a simplified version of Halliday and Hasan’s (1976) framework. As Liu (2008) pointed out in
his corpus study of linking adverbs across different registers, this classification (outlined in the
previous edition of this book, i.e., Celce-Murcia and Larsen-Freeman, 1999), has been widely
used in other corpus research on linking adverbs, including those comparing usage between
native and non-native English speakers in specific registers and genres such as student essays and
research papers. It has been expanded here somewhat, based on Chen (2006) and Liu (2008)7
Category	Core Meanings	Types and Examples
Additive	addition, introduction, similarity	•	simple: in addition, also, too, furthermore, moreover, and •	emphatic: at the same time, besides, as well, what is more •	appositive: that is, in other words, for instance/example •	comparative: likewise, similarly
554
The Grammar Book
Adversative	contrary to expectations contradiction, concession	•	concessive: however, nevertheless, despite this, in contrast •	contrastive: in fact, actually, however, on the other hand, at the same time •	correction: instead, rather, on the contrary, at least •	dismissal: in any case, anyhow, anyway, at any rate
Causal	true causes, logical relationships	•	resultative: therefore, as a result, consequently, hence, for this reason, thus, accordingly •	causal conditions: then, in that case, otherwise, in turn
Sequential	real-time relationships, sequence in text	•	listing: then, next, eventually, first, second, last, finally, up to now •	simultaneous: meanwhile, in the meantime •	summative: all in all, in short, to sum up, in conclusion •	transitional: by the way, incidentally
For teachers, frameworks such as the one we present here provide an overview
of the broad categories of connectors, the general meanings they signal between parts
of text, and examples of some of the most frequent linking adverbs that belong to
each category and subcategory. However, as researchers and teachers have pointed out
(Crewe, 1990; Conrad, 2004), textbooks and websites for English learners often present
lists of linkingiadverb categories and examples without distinguishing the differences
in the meanings and uses they have in real discourse. Such materials produced for
classroom teaching or self-study can have the unfortunate result of leading learners
to think that lexical items in a subcategory are interchangeable. This is clearly not the
case, as we can see from the following sentences using three different concessive linking
adverbs:
Calvin wanted to fly to the moon. However, he did not know how.
Calvin wanted to fly to the moon. ??Nevertheless, he did not know how.
Calvin wanted to fly to the moon. IIDespite this, he did not know how.
Another challenge for learners related to the meanings of linking adverbs is that
a number of expressions can be used to signal different meanings. For example, the
expression at the same time can signal an adversative relationship or a sequential one, as in
these examples:
Example	Meaning	Paraphrase
We see several advantages to	adversative	on the other hand
the proposed plan.
At the same time, there are
some drawbacks.
Tonight my uncle will be on his way to	sequential (simultaneous) meanwhile
Beijing. At the same time, my sister
will be flying into Chicago from London.
Chapter 26: Logical Connectors
555
In what follows, we will be concerned with still another type of challenge for ESL/
EFL learners in using linking adverbs: namely, the need to identify correctly the kinds
of logical relationships encoded in a text. In other words, speakers and writers must not
only understand what a linking adverb means, but must also perceive how two stretches of
discourse relate to each other in order to choose an appropriate connector to signal that
relationship.8
When language users make errors in selecting an appropriate linking adverb to
connect two parts of a text, does the problem arise from misunderstanding the adverb’s
meaning or from incorrectly identifying a logical relationship? This was the question that
Goldman and Murray (1992) investigated in an experimental cloze test study in which
undergraduate students, both native English speakers and ESL learners, were asked to
select from a set of linking adverbs the one that expressed the logical relationship between
two parts of a text. What they found was that learner errors in selecting connectors
typically resulted not from a lack of knowledge regarding connector meanings, but from
a “failure to infer the appropriate logical relation between ideas in a text” (p. 511). For
example, both LI and L2 users selected additive connectors in additive contexts, but they
also erroneously selected causal or adversative connectors for texts requiring additive
connectors. From the results of their study, Goldman and Murray concluded that language
learners need to work on discourse-based understandings of the relationships between
sentences in texts and that drilling on the meanings of connectors in isolated use is not
helpful.
A framework for identifying the logical relationships between parts of text is offered by
Williams (1996). The function of linking adverbs, as Williams explains, is to call attention to
propositional frames that are encoded in a text, either explicitly or implicitly. If the frames
(i.e., logical relationships) are only implicit, the listener or reader will have to reconstruct
them from the meaning of the text. The following chart summarizes frames that Williams
proposes to distinguish meanings of some of the most common connectors within the
semantic group of adversatives, which are among the most difficult for many ESL/EFL
learners to distinguish:
Meanings and Uses of Adversative Linking Adverbs
Linking Adverb	Meaning	Example	Use
nevertheless	X implies Y. X is true, but Y is not true. One is led to expect one thing but finds something different to be true.	Sara has always been a top math student. Nevertheless, she failed calculus this quarter.	If someone is a good math student (X), we expect that person to be good at calculus (Y). For this reason, if (Y) is that she failed history this quarter, nevertheless would not be the appropriate connector.
556
The Grammar Book
in contrast	X (a) in contrasty (b) Two different topics are different in at least one respect.	South Carolina is mild in the winter. เท contrast, South Dakota is frigid.9	Here, the two "topics" are states, which differ in their winter climates, mild versus frigid.
on the contrary	Y denies proposition X	City living is supposed to be difficult. On the contrary, 1 really enjoy the conven- ience of living in a city.	On the contrary is often confused with in contrast. Notice, though, that in contrast is used to compare two things; on the contrary contradicts the first proposition. Compare: 1 like skiing. เท contrast, my partner likes ice skating. 1 like skiiing. *On the con- trary, my partner likes ice skating.
on the other hand	X (a) on the other hand X (b) Only one topic is needed here; the contrast is made with respect to two contrasting qualities	Minnesota is one of our more scenic states. On the other hand, it is bitterly cold in the winter.	Often the qualities being contrasted are of the "good/bad"sort; one feature is positive, the other negative. Here, Minnesota is described as good in one way, bad in another.
in any case	X implies YOR Not X implies Y Whether or not a condition holds, it implies the truth of the second proposition.	We can take this apartment, or we can take the other one. In any case, we have to take something soon!	เท any case expresses succinctly the notion of whether or notX occurs. If we take this apartment (X), it is true that we must take something soon (Y). Or, if we do not take this apartment (not X), it is still true that we must take something soon (Y).
Missing from this chart is the most frequent by far of the adversatives, however. This
connector may be used almost generically whenever speaker/writers want to draw attention
to a difference. For example, of 30 native-English speakers who provided acceptability
judgments in Williams’s (1996) study, almost all considered however an acceptable
replacement for nevertheless. The differences signaled by however are various, as summarized
in the following chart:
Chapter 26: Logical Connectors
557
Meanings Signaled by However
Meaning	Example
Certainty versus uncertainty	We may go to Hawaii, or we may go to California. However, we have to find a way to escape the snow this winter.
Semantic opposition	Jill doesn't do well เท school. However, her sister is a straight A student.
Topic change marker	1 lost $2,000 in Las Vegas last week. However, let's talk about something else.
Turning now to two other categories of adverbs, additives and causais, we will consider how the meanings and uses of individual connectors in these categories differ.10	
Meanings and Uses of Additive Linking Adverbs
While the additive meanings of linking adverbs are generally not as complex as some other
semantic groups, they do pose challenges to ESL/EFL learners in using them for appropriate
contexts. The following chart summarizes some of their differences:
Linking Adverb	Meaning	Example	Use
also	Simple addition; often inter- changeable with coordinating conjunction and	To get better organized, spend a little time reflecting on the day. Also, periodically clear your mind with a walk or some other activity.	เท spoken and less formal written English, also often connects a piece of advice or other imperative with understood you subjects, especially when the connector begins a sentence.
เท addition	Simple addition; often used to connect ideas that are describing situations or concepts rather than arguments	The Transportation Department reported today that 80 percent of all flights were on time this year. เท addition, the rate of baggage being mishandled was the lowest during a five-year period.	Typically, the subjects of sentences joined by เท addition are not identical.
in addition to (+NP)	Simple addition; in written texts, often used to connect longer spans-of discourse	Calcium, found in dairy products, orange juice, and other foods, is needed for bone strength. เท addition to good nutrition, weight- bearing exercise is important.	เท addition to + a classifier NP (such as nutrition) can summarize and connect ideas in a paragraph or even larger text. เท addition alone might not clearly signal what is being connected.
558
The Grammar Book
moreover	Simple addition; often introduces a second point used to support a claim	Students applying to law schools need to know whether the schools have the resources to help them choose the right job. Moreover, prospective students need data about schools'career counseling services.	เท this example, moreover connects two points in a news article concerned with obligations of law schools to betruthful about what they can offer students.
furthermore	Simple addition; typically introduces a third or fourth point to support an argument	We find that students who work part time performed better in the pre-test of managerial finance. We also find that student ownership of a checking account positively affected performance. Furthermore, we find that higher student participation improved student learning.	Here, furthermore con- nects the third of three research findings in a journal article.
besides	Emphatic; often used to introduce an additional reason or final argument in support of a point just made	Those items—a gun case and ammo pouch—were found in his home. But the defense said none of it was proof of murder. And besides, they had another suspect in mind.	This adverb is most commonly used in informal written or spoken English. เท more formal English, it tends to connect a statement to a stretch of discourse longer than just the previous sentence.
similarly	Comparative; signals a semantic correspondence of ideas, such as similarity, in the ways things occur or operate	เท the United States, there has long existed a sense of stewardship toward wild and domestic animals.The creation of national parks and wildlife refuges recognized the right to life of whole ecological communities. Similarly, until the mid-20th century, the small, diverse family farm was a place where animals were generally accorded love and dignity.	เท written English, the clauses connected by similarly are often ideas supporting a generalization or claim as in this example, in which the claim is presented in the first sentence.
Chapter 26: Logical Connectors
559
likewise
Comparative;
used much
like similarly,
though often
in less formal
contexts; often
the subjects
of clauses
connected are
the same or
similar
The Fair Credit Billing
Act limits credit card
holders'liability. If the
theft is reported before
the card is used, the card
holder isn't responsible
for unauthorized
transactions. Likewise,
card holders aren't
responsible for fraudulent
purchases if only the card
number is used.
เท this example, note
that both subjects refer
to credit card holders.
This contrasts with the
example for similarly, in
which the subjects of the
two clauses are different.
Meanings and Uses of Causal Linking Adverbs
The connectors described as causal invite the listener/reader to assume a direct inferential
relationship between propositions in two clauses:
Linking Adverb	Meaning	Example	Use
therefore	Introduces results or conclusions that can be logically deduced or inferred from information to which it is linked	One pound of weight equals 3,500 calories stored in fat. Therefore, for Mr. X to shed 10 pounds, he must consume 35,000 calories less than he expends.	The information in the second sentence follows from the factual information given in the first one.The reader/listener could logically deduce what Mr. X must do to lose the specified weight. เท less formal written and spoken English, therefore is often preceded by and.
thus	Used similarly to therefore to introduce a result that can be inferred from previous information. It may also introduce a conclusion from evidence	There is strong statistical evidence that drivers respond rather slowly to changes in fuel prices. Thus, the continued decrease in driving today reflects, in part, a delayed reaction to the earlier rise in the cost of oil.	เท this example, a specific result (current reduction in driving) is inferred from the general claim expressed in the first sentence.
hence	Generally equivalent to therefore, introducing a deduction following reasons	This website photo tool is very easy to use. Also, it does not require registration. Hence, the perfect tool to share with your students!	Hence is most frequent in formal written English. เท less formal English, such as this example, it is often followed by a phrase (such as an NP) representing a clause with an ellipted subject and verb (e.g., it is in this example).
560
The Grammar Book
consequently
Signals a result
consistent with
information
previously given:
a true causal
relationship rather
than a deduction
Most of the paintings
the artist sold in
his lifetime were to
friends, and he got
no commissions.
Consequently, he
was poor.
In this example, the
result (the artist's
state of poverty) is
believed to be caused
by the circumstances
previously stated.
DIFFERENCE ACROSS REGISTERS
Frequency Patterns
The summary charts we have presented in the previous sections have given some indication
that certain linking adverbs are more commonly found in written English registers. Analyses of
large corpora of spoken and written data have examined both the frequency patterns of linking
adverb semantic categories, such as additives and adversatives, that occur across various registers
and also the frequency of particular linking adverb words and expressions in these registers.
Of the four registers that Biber et al. (1999) examined—conversation, fiction, news
and academic prose—conversation and academic prose had notably higher frequencies of
linking adverbs than the other two. The individual expressions used in these two registers
differed considerably, though. Of all linking adverbs identified, those we have called “causal
connectors” occurred frequently in both conversation and academic prose. However, in
conversation, occurrences of so accounted for the majority of the causal connectors, with
then as the next most frequent, while in academic prose, there was more variety, including
therefore, thus, and as a result. Adversative linking adverbs were the least common in the news
register; as with the causal connectors, the frequency of lexical items in this category differed
markedly in the conversation and academic prose registers. Anyway and though were by far the
most frequent adversatives in conversation, whereas in academic prose, the most frequent was
however. All in all, academic prose had the highest frequencies of linking adverbs per number
of words, including higher proportions of what we have termed additive (e.g., in addition)
and sequential (e.g., first, in summary) connectors. As Biber et al. summarize, this register
requires its users to mark explicitly the connections between ideas, especially in presenting
and developing arguments (p. 880). While in all registers, one-word linking adverbs were
most frequent, Biber et al. also note that prepositional phrases (e.g., as a result of, in addition to)
often serve as linking adverbs in academic prose (p. 884).
Liu’s (2008) analysis of linking adverbs in the British National Corpus (BNC) supports
the findings of Biber et al. (1999) that linking adverbs are most frequent in conversation
and academic prose registers. Liu also found that a small set of lexical items (including also,
however, then, and so) accounted for the majority of linking adverbs for some categories. One
interesting finding in Liu’s data is a much higher frequency of meanwhile in the news register
than in other registers; there, it was used to narrate several events taking place at the same
time. Another of Liu’s findings that could be of interest to teachers of English as well as
materials writers is that in comparison to conversational data, fictional dialogue tended to
frequently use colloquial expressions such as again (additive meaning), as a matter of fact, and
by the way.
A study by Peacock (2010) of 320 published research articles in eight disciplines (four
science and four non-science) found that linking adverbs were very important as signaling
and cohesive devices and more frequent than those in the general academic prose used
Chapter 26: Logical Connectors
561
in the Biber et al. (1999) study. Peacock’s analysis determined a frequency of over 12,000
linking adverbs per million words, much higher than Biber et al.’s frequency for academic
prose in general, which was a little over 7,000. However, the frequencies within disciplines
differed significantly, including much lower occurrences in two of the science categories.11
While frequencies of linking adverbs across registers can help teachers identify which
semantic categories and individual expressions may deserve focus, frequency alone should
not determine what is covered. For example, we can assume that summary connectors would
be much less frequent than some other types due to their discourse roles. Nevertheless, they
serve an important function and deserve some attention in teaching contexts.
Position of Linking Adverbs in a Sentence
Perhaps one of the most interesting findings of recent corpus analyses is the difference
between conversational English and written registers in the distribution of these connectors
in positions other than sentence-initial. Biber et al. (1999) found that initial position was by far
the most common for both conversation and academic prose. However, the final position was
second most frequent in conversation and infrequent in academic writing, while the medial
position was the second most common position in academic prose and rare in conversation
(pp. 890-891).
When linking adverbs appear in medial position in academic prose, they are often found
immediately after the subject as in this example:
Einstein, therefore, set to work to try to demolish the accepted version of quantum
mechanics. (Biber et al., p. 891)
They can also occur frequently in other positions, such as after introductory prepositional
phrases expressing a contrast, as in this example from COCA:
Tigers were once found in forests and other dense vegetation throughout Asia, from
the Caucasus and the Caspian Sea to Siberia and Indonesia. เท the past century,
however, the number of wild tigers worldwide has plummeted from more than
100,000 to little more than 3,000. (Cheryl Dybas, Last of the Forest Guardians, Natural
History, Feb. 2011, Vol. 119.4)
It should be noted that some linking adverbs, such as causal connectors thus and therefore,
quite often follow the conjunction and as in this COCA example:
...the radius of the current observable universe is about 47 billion light-years,
and thus it would be more than 90 billion light-years across. (Liz Kruesi, Ask Astro,
Astronomy, January 2011,39.1)
More research is needed to identify possible reasons why linking adverbs occur in the more
marked medial position in written English. These reasons may be specific to particular
semantic categories.
In accounting for the high frequency of final-position linking adverbs in conversation,
Biber et. al. (1999) note that this positioning is related to the lexical items that are the most
frequent of linking adverbs in thisRegister: then, anyway, and though. Some studies, however,
suggest that these concessive markers may have functions other than signaling logical
connections. For example, Barth-Weingarten and Couper-Kuhlen (2002) have observed
that sentence-final though not only expresses concession by one speaker concerning what
another speaker has just said, but may also serve as a discourse marker to signal a topic shift
in the conversation.
562
The Grammar Book
ISSUES IN THE TEACHING OF LINKING ADVERBS TO ESL/EFL STUDENTS
As we have discussed, linking adverbs are frequently found in spoken English as well as written
registers. However, most ESL/EFL instructional materials and studies have focused on their
use in written English. Recent research has identified some of the most typical problems for
learners in acquiring their use in academic or professional contexts. These problems can be
broadly categorized as follows:
•	Assigning incorrect meanings to specific linking adverbs
•	Inappropriate register (levels of formality)
•	Unclear reference
•	Overuse
The next sections will discuss each of these problems and implications for teaching.
Problem: Incorrect Meanings
Studies of advanced English learners’ use of linking adverbs in written English have identified
specific linking adverbs that tend to be misused, presumably due to the misperception that
expressions with similar functional labels as expressed by broad categories such as “additive”
and “adversative” can be used to signal the same meanings. For example, Crewe (1990) notes
the common mistake of Chinese LI writers using the corrective adversative on the contrary
instead of the appropriate in contrast or on the other hand to signal a contrastive meaning
(p. 317). An example of this type of problem is the following:
Most primates, including humans, are active during the day. *On the contrary, some
primate families, such as South American night monkeys, are solely nocturnal.
In the example above, the second sentence does not contradict the claim made in the first, so
on the contrary is an inappropriate connector.
Other studies have attributed the misuse of linking adverbs to cross-linguistic influence.
Field and Yip’s (1992) comparative study of Cantonese and native English student writers
found that the Chinese writers sometimes used the adversative on the other hand to add a point
without a contrast. They suggest this may result from translation of a Chinese expression
meaning “another side of aspect” used in an additive sense. A study by Granger and Tyson
(1996) of essays written in English by advanced French writers also noted that some writers
misused on the contrary for contrastive rather than corrective meaning when a phrase such as
on the other hand should have been used. They also attributed writers’ misuse of in fact and
indeed to cross-linguistic influence. In French, these expressions are used as stylistic enhancers,
whereas in Englisn, readers expect them to introduce new information in relation to what was
previously stated. The misuse of besides by German scholars writing abstracts in English is
discussed by Ventola (1994), who attributes some of these problems to direct translation from
German. In any event, Ventola points out that, in the misuses she observed, besides typically
needs to be replaced by in addition to + a noun phrase to create a clear connection.
Not all misuse errors result from the two causes discussed above; i.e., from beliefs that all
linking adverbs in the same broad semantic category are interchangeable or from LI influence.
A third type of problem, which we touched on earlier in our treatment of propositional frames,
is the misinterpretation of the logical relationship holding between two connected stretches
of discourse. ESL/EFL writing teachers may be familiar with one common manifestation of
this problem: the use of therefore where a causal relationship between two parts of text does
not exist. Milton and Tsang’s (1993) study described how student writers used therefore to
force a conclusion from inadequate evidence, a phenomenon that Chen (2006) also noticed
in her study of papers written by MA TESOL students in Taiwan. Field and Yip (1992)
Chapter 26: Logical Connectors
563
describe a similar problem with the connector besides, which they claim writers use to “weld
together points which do not fit coherently” (p. 2 7). To address this issue of “cohesion without
coherence,” Crewe (1990) recommends that instructors provide students with guidelines for
questioning the relationships between sections of text and that they offer students one or
more linking adverb choices based on responses to the questions. Of course, in cases where
logical connections may not actually exist, student writers may need to restructure the parts
of text being connected.
Problem: Inappropriate Register
Generally speaking, register-inappropriate use of linking adverbs can be of two types:
(1) using informal connectors in formal registers, such as academic prose; and (2) the reverse—
using connectors appropriate to formal registers in less formal contexts. Field and Yip (1992)
found evidence of both types in their 1992 study of English essays written by native Cantonese
speakers. On the one hand, some writers used connectors such as anyway, actually, and besides
in ways that were more appropriate for conversational contexts. At the same time, the writers
in their study sometimes used more formal connectors, such as additive adverbs moreover
and furthermore, for essay topics that required a less formal register. This mix of registers
resulted in an overall inconsistent style. Inappropriate informal connector usage was also
identified in the academic papers that Chen (2006) examined, including the use of informal
connectors plus and what's more, as well as actually.
Problem: Unclear Reference
A final type of connector problem is that which results because a linking adverb alone is not
sufficient to express clear reference to the ideas being connected. While this may happen in
spoken English, it is generally not as noticeable since speakers can negotiate to clarify meaning.
But in written English, a lack of clear connection to previous information can create reader
comprehension problems. So, for example, instead of a linking adverb such as in addition used
alone for creating a connection, a linking adverb prepositional phrase such as in addition to,
followed by a noun phrase (e.g., in addition to the problem of global 'warming), can provide readers a
better idea of the link to the new information. Granger and Tyson (1996), in discussing teaching
implications of their findings of linking adverb misuse in English essays by French writers, stress
that students need instruction in other forms of cohesion that will help them express logical
relationships more clearly (p. 26). Similarly, Crewe (1990) proposes what he calls an expansionist
approach in addressing the problems of connector misuse (and overuse, which we discuss next),
giving examples of explicit causal markers such as on account ofthis situation and because of these events
that could substitute for what he calls implicit causal markers like therefore and thus (pp. 322-323).
Such use of noun reference with finking adverbs can help ESL/EFL students identify more
specifically not only for readers but for themselves the ideas they are trying to link.
Overuse
A topic that often comes up in discussions on the teaching of linking adverbs to ESL/EFL
students is the problem of their overuse. Anecdotally, teachers often complain that their
students overuse connectors in academic writing tasks, especially essays. Thus, it becomes
important not only to teach the meanings of these connectors, but when they should
and should not be used. Many of the studies cited so far comparing the use of linking
adverbs by ESL/EFL writers either with their use by native English-speaking peers
or with frequencies in published writing have identified problems of overuse by ESL/
564
The Grammar Book
EFL writers.12 But what does this really mean? If we consider the categories of problems
described, the findings about “overuse” are often, though not always, also misuse in some
sense. For example, the overuse of but and and as linking adverbs by Hong Kong student
writers in a study by Bolton, Nelson, and Hung (2002) may reflect inappropriate use based
on register. Both Bolton, Nelson, and Hung’s study and that done by Field and Yip (1992)
found that adversative on the other hand and additive besides occurred only in the data by the
Hong Kong writers; that is, they were not used at all by native English writers for similar
text types. Again, at least some of these “overuses” may involve misuse, either meaning-
based or, in the case of besides, inappropriate register. In keeping with this observation,
Yueng (2009) also reports the overuse of besides by learners of English in Hong Kong,
and she adds that the learners tend to use it to simply mean "in addition," whereas in the
COBUILD database, besides is more often used to reinforce an argument, giving it a sense
of finality.
Additive linking adverbs in general have been noted as being overused by ESL/EFL
writers in comparative studies, especially the connectors furthermore and moreover. As
we discussed earlier, these additive adverbs have specialized uses in discourse and are not
necessarily interchangeable with other additives such as also or in addition. So here, too, a type
of misuse may overlap with overuse.
It should also be noted that some studies found that ESL/EFL writers underused certain
categories of linking adverbs. For example, Chen (2006) found that the EFL graduate writers
in her study significantly underused adversative adverbs, though they did tend to overuse
additive and sequential connectors. Chen suggests that researchers and teachers go beyond
the frequency patterns of overuse to examining what the causes may be of certain usage
patterns among their students.
While most studies of linking adverb use by ESL/EFL students have involved
written texts, Zareva (2011) has examined overuse of these connectors in the academic
oral English presentations of university students from seven different LI backgrounds.
Comparing their presentations to those of native English speakers, she found that L2
presenters tended to overuse so as a result connector (in addition to its overuse as a filler).
They also tended to overuse the sequential connector first, which Zareva noted was often
not followed by another sequential connector, thus lessening its effectiveness as a discourse
organizer.
In summary, current research on linking adverb usage by ESL/EFL students in classroom
contexts suggests the following kinds of focus for teaching these structures:
•	Distinguishing differences in meaning among connectors within the same category
(e.g., additives, causais);
•	Helping students to become aware of register differences in the use of linking adverbs
(e.g., differences between besides and in addition or but and however)·,
•	Identifying the logical relationships between parts of text being connected and checking
whether connectors supplied signal these relationships;
•	Giving students noticing and production practice in other forms of cohesion that can
combine with linking adverbs, such as the use of pronouns;
•	Considering specific lexical items that are often overused by ESL/EFL student writers
and helping students understand the causes of such overuse;
•	Discussing why overuse (in contrast to misuse) of linking adverbs in writing may hinder
rather than facilitate reader comprehension.
Chapter 26: Logical Connectors
565
Conclusion
During the decades after the publication of Halliday and Hasan’ร Cohesion in English in 1976,
much attention was given in the fields of applied linguistics and composition to the need for
connectors as a means of achieving cohesion in writing. Consequently, ESL/EFL composition
textbooks began routinely to include a section on “transitional expressions,” which typically
offered lists of expressions under the semantic categories of addition, contrast, cause/effect,
and so on. Students were encouraged to learn and use these expressions in their writing.
From our current perspective, this presentation of lists of connectors, especially the
linking adverbs, has had some unfortunate results, which we have discussed in this chapter.
One was the misunderstanding by ESL/EFL students that words and phrases under the
same semantic category were interchangeable, resulting in misuse of connectors, both in
terms of meaning and level of formality. In addition, some writing and grammar textbooks
encouraged overuse of connectors by asking students to use connectors multiple times in
short texts; this practice produced stilted prose in which the connectors failed to serve their
functions of making prose more understandable to readers. In addition to the problems
created by textbooks and other materials, the difficulty of having few large corpora made it
almost impossible to determine patterns of usage among speakers and writers, both native
and nonnative speakers of English.
Recent work in corpus linguistics and other linguistic areas has provided a great deal
of information for ESL/EFL teachers and materials developers on how connectors are used
within and across different registers. Corpus-based studies on ESL/EFL students’ writing
and academic speaking have identified some of the more specific areas for teaching focus.
With this information, and undoubtedly more to come, teachers can offer ESL/EFL students
instruction and practice of logical connectors that targets particular challenges with the
forms, meanings, and uses of these important structures.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form. Students need to be aware of the different patterns of connected clauses. A teacher
might construct pairs or sets of sentences that have connectors that are semantically
or functionally similar in order to illustrate the syntactic differences (and resulting
differences in punctuation):
They couldn't play ball because the dog ate the ball.
The dog ate the ball. As a result, they couldn't play ball.
They tried to catch the train, but they woke up too late.
They tried fo catch the train. But they woke up too late.
Although they tried to catcTTthe train, they were too late.
They tried to catch the train. However, they were too late.
The train had gone, so they left the station.
_ The train had gone. Consequently, they left the station.
If teachers, in modeling the sentence sequences, accentuate the relevant intonation
heavily each time, it may create a classroom atmosphere that makes such repetitive
566
The Grammar Book
exercises not only bearable, but amusing. Teachers may ask individual students to repeat
a sentence-pair and then ask the other students whether they “heard” a comma, period
(full stop), or no punctuation at all. In this way, the relation between intonation and
punctuation may be highlighted. At the same time, teachers should remind students that
some of these connectors are seldom used in speaking. The point of this activity is to
“hear” the punctuation.
2.	Meaning. Give students a scrambled paragraph. Some of the sentences should contain logical
connectors. Ask the students to unscramble the sentences and reconstruct the paragraph.
3.	Form/Meaning. Some functional relationships, such as reason-result, are especially
common in academic writing. Students in advanced composition classes need to learn
and practice different ways in which these relationships can be expressed. For example,
the following sentences express reasons for high levels of pollution in Los Angeles using
various connector types:
Because/Since air inversion occurs in the Los Angeles Basin, pollution is high.
Pollution is high in the Los Angeles Basin because of /due to/on account of/as a result
of air inversion.
Air inversion occurs in the Los Angeles Basin. As a result, pollution is high.
Pollution is high in the Los Angeles Basin due to the fact that there is air inversion.
Pollution is high in the Los Angeles Basin. The reason is that there is air inversion.
The existence of air inversion causes pollution to be high in the Los Angeles Basin.
Air inversion exists in the Los Angeles Basin. Consequently, pollution is high.
Students might be given pairs of grammatically unconnected sentences and asked to
paraphrase each pair in three ways that show the cause-effect relationship. Then, they can
be asked to incorporate these ways into their own writing on a topic that naturally involves
a cause-effect relationship (for example, “What are the effects of extensive online reading
on people’s reading habits?” or “What will happen when global warming increases?).
4.	Form. Studies have indicated that ESL/EFL learners tend to place the majority of
linking adverbs sentence-initially, which can increase the reader’s impression that they
are overusing these connectors. As a noticing exercise, students could be given examples
of sentences with sentence-medial connectors.
For each, teachers could ask students to do the following:
•	Circle the connectors.
•	Note what kinds of punctuation, if any, are used before and after the connector.
•	Discuss what sentence parts the connectors follow (e.g. noun phrases, verbs or verb
phrases). This step would be most appropriate with older, advanced students who
know grammar terminology.
An authentic text could be used for this activity. Online concordances such as the
Corpus of Contemporary English (COCA) or the Compleat Lexical Tutor can also
provide examples to be adapted as needed (deleting words, rephrasing or providing more
context). In either case, authentic examples will show where the connectors are placed in
relation to other constituents. Here is an adapted example from COCA, discussing the
fairy tale “Cinderella”:
Cinderella's stepsisters had noble blood. Cinderella, born of a peasant father and mother,
had none. It was no accident, therefore, that she was not invited to the ball. (Steven
Popkes, The Secret Lives of Fairy Tales, 2010, Vol. 118.1/2, p. 167)
Chapter 26: Logical Connectors
567
If a class meets in a computer lab, students can be shown how to research the positions of
connectors on their own. This can help students become aware of which linking adverbs
tend to appear most often in positions other than sentence-initial since not all linking
adverbs can or tend to be used this way. As a follow-up, in a writing class, students can
examine their drafts to see if any sentence-initial connectors might be more effectively
placed sentence-medially.
5.	Meaning. Teachers can highlight the meaning differences among the connectors by
creating single sentences and then asking students to add one sentence using different
logical connectors. Students could work in pairs, with each pair given a different connector
to use in the second sentence. They could then share the results and discuss differences.
For example,
When I got up this morning, I discovered my bicycle was missing.
Therefore,...
เท addition,...
Moreover,...
Nevertheless,...
While this activity can serve to review a variety of logical connector meanings, the teacher
may want to remind students that in written assignments, they should avoid overuse of
connectors.
6.	Use. Often clear connections between sentences in academic writing require more
than one kind of cohesive device. To give advanced students practice in creating clear
links between parts of a text, give them short paragraphs in which they need to complete
the last sentence by providing (1) a prepositional logical connector followed by (2) a
noun phrase that links to preceding text (e.g., in addition to these reasons, as a result of this
mistake, because of these problems). The paragraph could be based on information taken
from sources such as Wikipedia and adapted. Here is an example:
Many people today live a more sedentary lifestyle than in the past. Their work
outside the home is not physically demanding, and they use labor-saving devices
at home. Their recreational pursuits, such as television watching, are also less active.
, people worldwide increasingly rely on automobiles and
other motorized vehicles for transportation. (Information source: http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Obesity)
7.	Meaning. As this chapter has discussed, students often know the meanings of linking
adverbs but need practice in identifying logical relationships between sentences or longer
spans of text in order to use ones that are appropriate. Ίο provide such practice, the teacher
could give students groups of three sentences, with the first sentence introducing a topic and
the second and third logically related. Students can first identify what the relationship is, and
then choose a linking adverb to add to the last sentence. Here are several examples:
1.	Roses have been a favorite flower for centuries. They are known for their wonderful
fragrances. They have come to symbolize personal feelings such as love or friendship.
(Addition)
2.	Red roses are associated with love and faithfulness. White roses may symbolize purity
or innocence. (Contrast)
3.	Roses do not like hot temperatures. เท hot climates, they need to be protected from
late afternoon รนท. (Result)
568
The Grammar Book
8.	Use. Away to make students sensitive to register differences might be to have them substitute
a logical connector of one register with one from another—for instance, to have them change
each of the following example sequences with informal or universally acceptable connectors
to ones with formal connectors:
Possums have sharp claws and teeth. Also, they are not easily trained.
So they do not make good pets.
(Also -»Moreover; So -»Therefore, Consequently, Thus)
The team was losing the game badly. But they decided to continue to play their hardest.
(But —> Nevertheless, However)
They wanted a Rolls-Royce. I mean, they wanted the best car they could possibly find.
(I mean —» That is)
9.	Use. To practice putting clauses in an order that will promote cohesion within a text, give
students a passage in which certain sentences in the passage are presented in two forms:
a. Subordinate clause + main clause; and b. Main clause + subordinate clause. When they
come to such a choice, students should choose order (a) or (b) and explain why they chose as
they did.
10.	Meaning. Research on connectors has identified adversative linking adverbs as one of the
most difficult semantic categories for ESL/EFL learners; in particular, they have trouble
distinguishing connectors such as on/to the contrary, in fact, and in reality, which signal
contrastive and corrective information in relation to a previous statement, from simple
contrast connectors. To give students practice using these connectors, the instructor could
ask them to research commonly held beliefs that aren’t true about people, places, or things.
Students would then write the false belief or assumption followed by a sentence with a
linking adverb and a factual statement. The following sentences regarding beliefs about
animals are examples:
Bats are often said to be blind. เท fact, while some bats have poor vision, other bats,
known as megabats, have excellent eyesight.
Many people believe that bulls will attack anything colored red, based on the fact
these animals charge waving red capes in bullfights. เท reality, bulls do not
attack because of the color, but rather because of the waving of the cape. (Information
source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Animal_stereotypes)
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1.	Provide an original sentence illustrating each of the following terms. Underline the
pertinent words in your example.
a.	adverb subordinate	e. purpose connector
b.	linking adverb	f. causal connector
c.	concessive connector	g. inferential connector
d.	time connector
Chapter 26: Logical Connectors
569
2.	Draw tree diagrams for the following sentences:
a.	The business did not have enough employees; therefore, they hired more.
b.	You can try that route to San Francisco; you will never get there, however.
c.	Mary is always punctual. Her sister, in contrast, never arrives on time.
d.	They bought the blue car even though they preferred the red one.
3.	Account for the unacceptability of the following sentences:
a.	*You see lots of trees in Oregon; on the contrary, there are few in Arizona.
b.	*We took the extra class, as a result, we understood the material completely.
c.	*1 liked some parts of the movie, although, I wouldn’t recommend it to most people.
d.	*Crystal glasses are very fragile; nevertheless, plastic glasses are stronger.
e.	David was working hard in the garden. * While George was napping in the
hammock.
Test your ability to apply what you know.
4.	There is increasing use of the word plus in everyday American speech in ways like
those below:
They had to drive five miles out of the way. Plus, they had to drive through mud.
There are three midterms in the class. Plus, you have to write a 10-page paper.
This word is normally not found in lists of conjunctions or logical connectors.
How would you characterize this word—as a coordinating conjunction, an adverb
subordinator, a linking adverb, or none of these? Make your case by constructing
relevant acceptable and unacceptable examples and providing syntactic arguments.
5.	Suppose that you are faced with the following sentences in student compositions.
Assuming that you want to offer some rationale for correction, how would you explain
the problems below?
a.	* Although I wanted to attend that college, but it was too far away from home.
b.	*The rain came down in torrents, as a result, we had to cancel the picnic.
c.	*My sister loves to go to movies in the afternoon; on the contrary, I hate that.
d.	*If he tells me how to get there, so I will follow his directions.
e.	*Even you gave me the money, I wouldn’t go to see that movie.
6.	Suppose that you have said in a writing class that subordinate clauses cannot stand
alone but need a main clause attached in order to create a properly formed sentence.
A student approaches you with the following advertisements and asks for an
explanation:
Caffall, the caffeine tablet. When you can't get that morning cup of coffee.
Use Stayfresh deodorant. Because you can't afford to worry about body odor.
Such fragments are quite common in the media, especially in advertising. How would
you respond to such questions?
570
The Grammar Book
7.	The following is adapted from a student essay:
My family decided to take our usual family vacation at my grandparents' home in
the northern part of the island. At that time, my family consisted of me, my mother,
my father, and my brother and sister. Also, one of my cousins was going on the
trip. So we packed up our car with food; in addition, we took camping supplies.
Moreover, we also brought scuba-diving equipment; however, only my brother and
I were really interested in that. Therefore, we had a car which was full of equipment,
and in addition to that, we did not have enough room for all of US. Consequently, we
had to decide what we should do....
In what ways might you respond to the student's use of connectors given the
discussion of connector problems in this chapter?
Bibliography
rêfêíríeínces
Barth-Weingarten, D., & Couper-Kuhlen, E. (2002). On die development of final thoughะ A case
of grammaticalization. In I. Wischer & G. Diewalds (Eds.), New reflections on grammaticalization
(pp. 345-361). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins.
Biber, D., Johannson, ร., Leech, G., Conrad, ร., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman gram.mar of spoken and
written English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ltd.
Blakemore, D. (ÍP92). Understanding utterances. Oxford, England: Blackwell.
Bolton, K., Nelson, G., & Hung, J. (2002). A corpus-based study of connectors in student writing.
International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 7(2), 165-182.
Celce-Murcia, Al., & Larsen-Freeman, D. (1999). The grammar book (2nd ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle &
Heinle.
Chen, c. พ. (2006). The use of conjunctive adverbiais in the academic papers of advanced Taiwanese
learners. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 11 (1), 113-130.
Conrad, ร. (2004). Corpus linguistics, language variation, and language teaching. In J. M. Sinclair (Ed.),
How to use corpora in language teaching (pp. 67-85). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins.
Crewe, พ. J. (1990).The illogic of logical connectives. ELT Journal, 44(4), 316-325.
Davies, M. (2008). The corpus of contemporary American English (COCA): 425 million words, 1990-present.
Retrieved from http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/
Emonds, J. E. (1972). Evidence that indirect object movement is a structure-preserving rule. Foundations of
Language, 8, 545-561.
Field, Y., & Yip, L. M. o. (1992). A comparison of internal conjunctive cohesion in the English essay
writing of Cantonese speakers and native speakers of English. RELC Journal, 25(1), 15-28.
Goldman, ร., & Murray, J. D. (1992). Knowledge of connectors as cohesive devices in text: A comparative
study of native-English and English-as-a second language speakers. Journal of Educational Psychology,
84(4), 504-519.
Granger, ร., & Tyson, ร. (1996). Connector usage in the English essay writing of native and non-native
EFL speakers of English. World Englishes, 15(1), 17-27.
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion in English. London, England: Longman.
Liu, D. (2008). Linking adverbiais: An across-register corpus study and its implications. International
Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 13(4), 491-518.
Milton, J., & Tsang, E. ร. c. (1993). A corpus-based study of logical connectors in EFL students’ writing:
Directions for fixture research. In R. Pemberton & E. ร. c. Tsang (Eds.), Lexis in studies (pp. 215-246).
Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
Chapter 26: Logical Connectors
571
Peacock, Μ. (2010). Linking adverbiais in research articles across eight disciplines. Ibérica, 20, 9-34.
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, ร., Leech, G., & Svartvik, J. (1985). A comprehensive grammar of the English language,
London, England: Longman.
Ramsay, V (1987). The functional distribution of preposed and postposed “if’ and “when” clauses in
written discourse. In R. Tomlin (Ed.), Coherence and grounding in discourse (pp. 383^4-08). Amsterdam,
Netherlands: John Benjamins.
Thompson, ร., & Longacre, R. (1985). Adverb clauses. In T. Shopen (Ed.), Complex constructions·. Language
typology and syntactic description (2nd, ed., Vol. 2, pp. 171-234). Cambridge, England: Cambridge
บทiversity Press.
Ventola, E. (1994). From syntax to text: Problems in producing scientific abstracts in L2. In ร. Cmejrkova
& F. Sticha (Eds.), The syntax of sentence and text: A Festschrift for Frantisek Danes (pp. 283-306).
Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins.
Williams, H. (1996). An analysis of conjunctive adverbial expressions in English (Unpublished doctoral
dissertation). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Yueng, L. (2009). Use and misuse of 'besides': A corpus study comparing native speakers' and learners'
English. System, 37, 330-342.
Zareva, A. (2011). “And so that was it”: Linking adverbiais in student academic presentations. RELC Journal,
42(5), 5-15.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
For an extensive discussion of interciausal coherence, see:
Givón, T. (1990). Syntax: A functional-typological introduction (Vol. 2). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John
Benjamins.
For a reference that inventories adverb subordinators in 50 European languages, see:
Kortmann, B. (1996). Adverbial subordination: A typology and history of adverbial subordinators based on European
languages. Berlin, Germany/New York, NY: Walter de Gruyter.
For an alternative view of connectors that is grounded in cognitive psychology and the theory of
relevance, see:
Blakemore, D. (1992). Understanding utterances. Oxford, England: Blackwell.
For an extended treatment of clause combining that is accessible to intermediate to advanced ESL/EFL
students, consult:
Sinclair, J., & Fox, G. (1990). Collins COBUILD English grammar. London, England: Collins.
For a discussion of the misuse and overuse of connectors, see:
Crewe, พ. J. (1990).The illogic of logical connectives. ELT Journal, 44(4), 316-325.
For ESL/EFL textbooks that devote substantial attention to logical connectors, consult:
Cake, c. D. (2009). Gram-mar connection·. Structure through content 5. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form,, meaning, and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
572
The Grammar Book
Endnotes
1.	There is no reason why the conjunctions treated in Chapter 24 could not also be considered logical
connectors, especially when considered at the clause-connecting level.
2.	Data like these led Emonds (1972) to the conclusion that many if not all of these subordinates are, เท
fact, better seen as prepositions that take clausal objects. One reason supporting his claim was that
just as some verbs take phrasal, clausal, or either phrasal or clausal objects, so may prepositions take
different object types; the lexical overlap in the common words in the above pairs of sentences may be
no accident. While Emonds's arguments are quite convincing, we continue to use the traditional term
adverb subordinator.
3.	We do not draw a line connecting the two independent clauses as we did for clauses conjoined by
coordinating conjunctions in Chapter 24. The reason is that while there is a meaning relationship
between the clauses, there is no special syntactic relationship.
4.	Perhaps this clause length principle explains เท part the prescriptive rule of no comma; the subordinate
clauses in the made-up examples used for illustration in student textbooks tend to be rather short (and
conceptually simple); e.g., Jack failed the math test although he had studied very hard. However, even in
COCA, many sentence-final subordinate clauses separated from the main clause by a comma are not
especially long.
5.	เท spoken English, this type of construction could occur with a pause after the first clause and falling
intonation เท the second clause as a kind of "afterthought clause," where a speaker appends the
subordinate clause as if suddenly realizing that the thought that has just been expressed is incomplete.
6.	A semicolon and a period are associated with the same end-of-sentence falling intonation. The chief
difference between the two types of punctuation is often said to be that when one uses a semicolon,
one is attempting to show that the two sentences are more strongly integrated in some way. There is, in
fact, a strong correlation between the use of semicolons and the use of linking adverbs.
7.	More specifically, the framework here has been revised and expanded somewhat from Celce-Murcia and
Larsen-Freeman (1999) to include several subcategories from Liu's (2008) analysis of linking adverbs in
four written registers and spoken English. The examples include additional linking adverbs identified in
Liu (2008) and Chen (2006) as frequently occurring, at least in some registers, in their corpora.
8.	It should be noted that not only ESL/EFL learners, but native speakers of English, especially younger
learners, may also fail to correctly identify logical relationships between propositions and may use
inappropriate connectors.
9.	This frame distinguishes whereas as well:
Chicago is a fun place, whereas Centerville is dead.
*Chicago is a fun place, whereas it is an expensive place.
10.	All chart examples are adapted from spoken and written data in COCA.
11.	It should be noted, however, that exact comparisons of frequencies between studies cannot be made
because the connector categories and lexical items included are not identical in these studies.
12.	Some studies, such as Bolton, Nelson, and Hung (2002), have found that native English-speaking student
writers also overuse some linking adverbs in comparison with published writing though the lexical items
overused may differ between the two.
Chapter 26: Logical Connectors
573
Conditionals
Introduction
In a survey of the most serious teaching problems in English grammar encountered by ESL
teachers in the Los Angeles area, Covitt (1976) found that conditionals ranked fifth.1 This
is not difficult to understand. Conditional sentences consist of two clauses, a subordinate
clause and a main clause, and therefore are more complex syntactically than many other
structures. Furthermore, the semantics of all the various types of conditionals are subtle and
hard to understand—sometimes even for proficient English speakers. Good comprehensive
descriptions are not readily available. Moreover, ESL/EFL students need a good grasp of the
English tense-aspect system, as well as the modal auxiliaries and negation, before they can
cope with the full range of conditional sentences in English.
In addition to the general problems noted previously, we must point out that ESL/
EFL textbooks and reference grammars typically provide oversimplified information. For
example, some texts introduce and practice only three types of conditional sentences (the
labels used to describe these structures vary):
Type า. Future conditional: If I have the money, I will take a vacation.
Type 2. Present conditional: If I had the money, I would take a vacation.
Type 3. Past conditional:	If I had had the money, I would have taken a vacation.
Several reference grammars refer to the first sentence as a “real” or “possible” conditional, as
opposed to the second and third sentences, which refer to the “unreal/hypothetical” present
and past, respectively.
Another problem is that ESL/EFL students, who have learned to associate past tense
with past time, often find it hard to believe that sentences like the second one here refer to
present and not past time. In addition, they become confused because they hear and read
many types of conditional sentences that are not included in the three types cited. In fact, a
significant problem with this traditional three-type description is that it does not treat the
most frequent (and also the simplest) conditional sentence type in English:2
If you boil water, it vaporizes.
If Mark goes swimming, he catches a cold.
575
In this chapter, we provide a more comprehensive description of conditionals that should help
ESL/EFL teachers better understand this topic and thus prepare you to teach conditionals
more effectively.
The Form of Conditionals
The
A SYNTACTIC ANALYSIS OF CONDITIONAL SENTENCES
A conditional sentence is a complex sentence that consists of a main clause and a subordinate
clause; the latter prototypically begins with the adverb subordinator if. Quirk and
Greenbaum (1973) state that conditional sentences express the dependence of one set of
circumstances (i.e., the result clause) on another (i.e., the if clause); furthermore, in most
cases, two clause orderings are possible (p. 323):
If I go, George will go. If Dracula returns, I will faint.
George will go if I go. I will faint if Dracula returns.
In either order, the r/ clause expresses the condition, and the main clause gives the
result or outcome. We will treat the if clause as an adverb clause of condition. By so doing,
conditional clauses are placed in final position using the system of phrase structure rules
presented in Chapter 6.
รบBJ
George will go if I go.
ร
PRED
M
AdvCl
George
will
go adv sub ร
if SÜBJ PRED
NP AUX
I -pres
go
In order to account for the if clause in initial position, we place the adverb clause under the
sentence modifier (sm), as was discussed in Chapter 25:
576
The Grammar Book
If I go, George will go.
sm
ADVL
SUBJ
PRED
AdvCl
NP
AUX
ร
ร
adv sub รุ
M
N
if SUBJ PRED
George
will
go
NP AUX
pro
I -pres
go
There is one other possibility. When the //clause occurs in initial position, there is the option
to have then occur before the main clause in certain cases to be discussed later. Let US assume
that we wanted to account for:
If I go, then George will go.
We would start with the same phrase structure rules used previously for the second tree
diagram and optionally include then as a sentence modifier (sm) of the rightmost ร:
ร
ร
sm
ADVL
AdvCl
NP AUX	VP
pro T	V
George	will go
I -pres go
Note that the inclusion of then is optional, and it occurs only if the conditional clause is in
initial position; that is, then is unlikely to occur when the if clause follows the main clause:
*Then George will go if I go.
If such a sentence were to occur in a conversation, it can be argued that such an instance
of then is not part of the conditional proposition proper. Rather, it is a discourse marker
in the sense of Schiffrin (1987) that, similar to so, occurs in conversations independent of
conditional clauses:
Then/So we can expect to see you at noon tomorrow?
Chapter 27: Conditionals
577
___________________________________________________
OTHER SYNTACTIC AND LEXICAL DETAILS	__________
Subject/Operator Inversion in Conditionals
In hypothetical conditionals with initial if clauses containing certain auxiliary verbs such as
should, had, or were, it is possible to delete the initial if; however, when such a deletion takes
place, subject/operator inversion must follow:
If the guests should arrive early, no one will be here to greet them.
Should the guests arrive early, no one will be here to greet them.
If I had known that, I wouldn't have said anything.
Had I known that, I wouldn't have said anything.
If I were in his shoes, I'd say nothing.
Were I in his shoes. I'd say nothing.
These conditionals with subject/operator inversion are not frequent—especially those with
had or were. They are rare in conversation and occur most often with should in academic prose
(Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad, & Finegan, 1999, p. 852).
Conditional Clause Pro-Forms
As Halliday and Hasan (1976) have pointed out, certain pro-forms can be used to replace an
entire clause. Thus, following if so is used when the clause is affirmative, and not is used when
the clause is negative. For example:
[if so, volunteer.
Would you like to make a class presentation?	____1^ 1____A
[If not, you don't nave to.
Form of Main Clauses
Carter and McCarthy (2006) observe that the main result clause of a conditional usually takes
statement form, but that it can also take the form of a question or an imperative, especially in
conversation (p. 751):
If you want to see him, why don't you make an appointment?
If you have a bad headache, take some aspirin.
Formulaic Expressions
Carter and McCarthy (2006) also found that many colloquial formulaic expressions take the
form of if clauses in conditionals (p. 757). Among these are
If I may (say so)	If it'll help
If you see/know what I mean If that's okay/all right with you
If you don't mind	If it's not rude to ask
These are very useful lexical formulas for conversational purposes, and it might be worthwhile
to give them some attention and practice in an oral skills class.
Other Constructions That Express Conditions and Outcomes
Carter and McCarthy (2006) identify several other constructions that function as conditionals:
• 'พh- + (ever) sentences
Whatever she says, don't believe it.
(If she says anything, don't believe it.)
578
The Grammar Book
Whenever the team loses, they are miserable for days.
(If the team loses, they are miserable for days.)
•	imperative + or/otherwise
Finish your meal, or/otherwise there's no dessert for you.
(If you don't finish your meal, there's no dessert for you.)
•	imperative + and
Do that again, and I'll get very angry.
(If you do that again. I'll get very angry.)
•	inclusive imperative with no conjunction, just juxtaposition
Let's not be late. They'll leave without US.
(If we're late, they'll leave without US.)
Ίο this list, we should add another construction cited by Frazier (2003):
•	generic relative clauses
A car that gives good mileage saves the driver a lot of money.
(If a car gives good mileage, it saves the driver a lot of money.)
The Meaning of Conditionals:
A Semantic Overview
Dancygier and Sweetser (2000) adopt a cognitive linguistics approach to explain the core meaning
of conditionals. They posit that conditionals normally precede the main clause because they
provide a conceptual framework or mental space for the interpretation of subsequent clauses.
In what follows, we will distinguish within this general framework, more specific meanings.
English conditional sentences express three different kinds of semantic relationships: factual
conditional relationships, future (or predictive) conditional relationships, and imaginative
conditional relationships. We will discuss each of these types with its subtypes in turn.
timeless
A Semantic Taxonomy of Conditional Sentence Types
Conditional
Factual
time-bound
Future (predictive)
Imaginative
(i.e., subjunctive)
generic habitual implicit
explicit
inference inference
strong
condition
and result
degrees of hypothetical
weakened
condition present future
or result
counterfactual
present
past
FACTUAL CONDITIONAL SENTENCES	________
Factual conditional sentences occur with great frequency in everyday English, and yet they
are overlooked altogether in many ESL/EFE textbooks. Factual conditionals consist of four
Chapter 27: Conditionals
579
types: generic and habitual, which are timeless; and implicit inference and explicit inference,
which are time-bound.
Generic Factual Conditionals
Generic factual conditionals express relationships that are true and unchanging; for example:
If oil is mixed with water, it floats. If you boil water, it vaporizes.
Because of their unchanging truth value, these conditionals normally take a simple present
tense in both clauses. However, one also encounters generic factual conditionals that refer to
past states of affairs and take past-tense verb forms:
If prehistoric animals came too close to the La Brea tar pits, they got stuck in the tar
and died.
Generic factual conditionals are especially frequent in scientific writing, since the sciences are
typically concerned with such absolute relationships.
Habitual Factual Conditionals
Habitual factual conditionals resemble generic factuais in that they also express a relationship
that is not bounded in time; however, the relationship is based on habit instead of physical
laws. Habitual factuais express either past or present relationships that are typically or
habitually true; for example:
Present: If I wash the dishes, Sally dries them.
Pt If Nancy said, "Jump!" Bob jumped.
If Nancy said, "Jump!" Bob would jump.
This type of conditional sentence is frequent in conversation. Both clauses usually have the
same tense: simple present in both clauses if the habitual relationship refers to extended
present time; simple past in both clauses or would + verb in the result clause if the sentence
refers to a past habit.
Note that for both generic and habitual conditionals, it is possible to substitute when or
whenever for r/and still express more or less the same idea:
When(ever) you boil water, it vaporizes.
When(ever) I wash the dishes, Sally dries them.
Implicit Inference Conditionals
Factual conditionals that express an implicit inference are different from generic or habitual
factuais in that they express inferences about specific time-bound relationships. As such, they
use a much wider range of tense and aspect markers, and they also tend to occur with certain
modal auxiliaries. Schachter (1971) provides some examples of what we refer to as implicit
inference conditionals (p. 70):
If smog can be licked in L.A., it can be licked anywhere.
If the radicals haven't made the government more responsive, they have wasted their time.
If there was a happy man in the world that night, it was John Tunney.
To these, we add a few more examples of our own:
If Jane is the first vice president of the club, Don is the second vice president.
If it's Tuesday, it's Sam's birthday.
Implicit inference conditionals, like their habitual counterparts, are conversational in
flavor, and like generic and habitual factuais, implicit inference factuais tend to maintain the
same tense and aspect or the same modal in both clauses—even though they use a much wider
range of tenses and auxiliary verbs. However, implicit inference factuais differ from generic
580
The Grammar Book
and habitual factuais in that when or whenever cannot substitute for if without changing the
meaning and often making the sentence nonsensical:
?When(ever) it's Tuesday, it's Sam's birthday.
The lack of semantic congruity here is due to the fact that this type of conditional is expressing
a more specific time-bound or location-bound inference, rather than a generic or habitual
relationship.
Explicit Inference Factual Conditionals
The final type of factual conditional, the explicit inference conditional, is the only case where
we do not find the usual parallelism of tense, aspect, or modal in both clauses. This is because
the conditional (i.e., the if clause) is used as the basis for making an explicit inference; the
result clause thus contains an inferential modal—typically must or should·.
If someone's at the door, it must be Peter.
If anyone has the answer, it should be Rod.
Explicit inferential factuais are similar to implicit inference factuais in that both refer to
more specific time-bound events or states in the z/clause. Also, both involve making inferences;
however, only the explicit inference factual conditional overtly marks the inferential process
with a modal. Explicit inference conditionals, however, are more limited in range, since they
cannot occur with the same variety of tense and modal combinations that implicit inferences
do. Like implicit inference conditionals, explicit inference conditionals can refer to past as
well as present time, (Recall Chapter 8, where we learned that past inference with must or
should is expressed by adding have ...-en after the modal.)
Past implicit inference: If he was there, he saw the accident.
Past explicit inference: If he was there, he must have seen the accident.
Explicit inference conditionals appear to be one of the environments where then can occur
before the result clause (more on this later):
If he was there, then he must have seen the accident.
FUTURE (OR PREDICTIVE) CONDITIONAL SENTENCES
Strong Condition and Result
Many other authors have discussed “future conditionals.” For example:
If it rains. I'll stay home.
Such sentences express future plans or contingencies. The normal pattern for this type of
conditional is simple present tense in the r/clause and some explicit indication of future time
(e.g., will or be going to) in the result clause:
If you finish your vegetables, I'm going to (gonna) buy you an ice cream cone.
If Steve goes to class, he will get US the answers to the quiz.
Degrees of Weakened Condition or Result
The examples above reflect the only type of future conditional that most ESL/EFL texts
mention. However, sometimes the future outcome expressed in the result clause is not
sufficiently certain to warrant the use of will or be going to, in which case a weaker modal of
prediction such as may, might, or should is used:
If you finish your vegetables, I may buy you an ice cream cone.
If Steve goes to class, he should get US the answers to the quiz.
Chapter 27: Conditionals
581
Thus, the prediction scale that we outlined for modals in Chapter 8 also applies to the result
clauses of future conditional sentences:
certain (strong result)
probable
possible (stronger than might or could)
possible (weaker than may}
will, be going to -
should =
may =
might/could =
(i.e., a progressively weakened prediction about the result from will to might)
There is also a way to weaken the condition expressed in the if clause of a future conditional
sentence by using the modal should or the verb happen—or both of them together:
should
rain. I'll stay home.
happens to
should happen to
Therefore, we feel that it is an incomplete treatment of future conditionals to present only-
one form to students (e.g., If it rains, ril stay home)—especially if the students are at an
intermediate or advanced level in their study of English; such students will be encountering
“weakened” versions of this construction in both spoken and written English.
IMAGINATIVE CONDITIONAL SENTENCES
The imaginative conditional sentences are the most problematic of the three main types
in our description.3 There are two subtypes of imaginative conditionals—hypothetical^ and
counter factuais.
Hypothetical Conditionals
Hypothetical conditionals express what the speaker perceives to be unrealized or unlikely, yet
theoretically possible events or states, in the if clause:
If Joe had the time, he would goto Mexico, (present time hypothetical)
The if clause is not strongly negated here. There is always an outside chance that Joe has
(or will have) the time. In hypothetical conditionals, the negative quality of the //clause can
be weakened such that the possibility of the result occurring becomes perceptibly weaker:
should
If Joe
happened to
have the time, he would go to Mexico.4
should happen to
Hypothetical conditionals can refer to the future as well as the present (they are open to
change in the present or future). Depending on the strength of the speaker’s belief, different
modals can be used in the main clause:
Present: If Joe had the time now, he would/could/might go to Mexico.
Future: If Joe were to have the time next year, he would/could/might go to Mexico.
Counterfactual Conditionals
Counterfactual conditionals, on the other hand, express impossible events or states with the
if clause:
If my grandfather were alive today, he would experience a very different world.
(present time counterfactual; my grandfather died in 1978)
582
The Grammar Book
The if clause is strongly negated (i.e., my grandfather is not alive today, nor will he be
alive in the future).
Weakening is odd in a counterfactual conditional since the if clause is strongly negated
and the condition remains impossible:
should
?lf my grandfather	be alive today, he would experience a very
should happen to	^r|d.
Counterfactual conditionals refer to impossibilities with reference to the present or the
past, but not the future [we don’t know what (im)possibilities the future holds] ะ5
Present: If workers had the proper training, unemployment would be much lower than it is.
Past: If workers had had the proper training, there wouldn't have been such a bad accident.
Tenses in Imaginative Conditionals
One problem with imaginative conditionals arises with the tenses used. The past tense in the
conditional clause refers to the present time, and the past perfect tense refers to past time.
Furthermore, we have a vestige of the Old English subjunctive mood6 to refer to the present
in the use of were with singular first and third person subjects where was is the expected form:7
If my grandfather were here now, he would be angry.
If I were the president, I would make some changes.
And, the subjunctive form of the phrasal modal be to is used for the hypothetical future:
If I were to run for president, it would surprise everyone.
Even rarer in current English than the use of were to express the subjunctive mood in
imaginative conditionals is the occasional use (now slightly archaic) of subjunctive be in
present conditionals; for example:
If it be inappropriate to have said this, I humbly apologize.
Sometimes the difference between using a future conditional and a hypothetical
conditional is a matter of speaker choice or stance:
Future: If it rains, I will stay home.
Hypothetical: If it
were to ไ______________
!■ rain, I would stay home,
should J
If it rained, I would stay home.
The choice reflects the degree of confidence in the speaker’s mind concerning the
fulfillment of the condition: the future conditional—if not weakened, as discussed previously—
expresses a greater degree of confidence that the condition is a real possibility than does the
hypothetical conditional.
A SEMANTIC TAXONOMY OF CONDITIONAL SENTENCES
We realize that the abovementioned semantic taxonomy of conditional sentences, while
more comprehensive than most other descriptions available, still does not account for every
possible conditional sentence in English. However, we believe that it provides a sufficiently
rich set of distinctions to present to intermediate and advanced ESL/EFL students, since the
most frequently occurring types have been included. Our semantic categories and their forms
are summarized in this figure, inspired by a request from Julia Miller:
Chapter 27: Conditionals
583
Conditionals
Factual
Future
(predictive)
Timeless
Time-bound
Strong
condition or
result
Weakened
condition or
result
Generic
(scientific)
Habitual
(habit)
If+ simple
present, simple
present
If+ simple past,
simple past
(rare)
If+ simple
present, simple
present
If+ simple
past, simple
past or If+
simple past,
would
If you heat
water to 100 c,
it boils.
If prehistoric
animals came
too close to the
La Brea tar
pits, they got
stuck in the tar
and died.
If I drink coffee,
I (always) get a
headache.
If the snow
was deep, we
snowshoed/would
snowshoe.
Scientific facts
Habits
Present or past time		Present or past time		Future time		Present or future time
						
If + tense or modal, same tense or modal		If+ simple present or past, modal (must or should) (+ perfect aspect, if past time)		If+ simple present, will/be going to		Weakened condition: If+ should/happen to/should happen to, will/be going to Weakened result: If+ simple present, future modal other than will be going to (1may might should)
						
If fane is the first vice president of the club, then Sue is the second. If smog can be licked in L.A., it can be licked anywhere. If there was a happy man in the world that nighty it was John Tunney.		If anyone has the answer, it should be Rod. If he was there, he must have seen the accident.		If Steve goes to class, he will get us the answers to the quiz. If you finish your vegetables, Pm going to (gonna) buy you an ice cream cone.		
						
						If it happens to rain, ril stay home. If it should rain, ril stay home. If it rains, I may stay home.
						
Implicit inferences		Explicit inferences		Predictions, plans, contingencies		Less certain predictions, plans, contingencies
The Grammar Book
584
Imaginative
If Joe had the
time, he would
go to Mexico.
If Joe were to
have the time
next year, he
might go to
Mexico.
Weakened:
If Joe should
have/happened
to have/should
happen to have
the time, he
could go to
Mexico.
If workers had
the proper
training,
unemployment
would be much
lower than it is.
If my
grandfather were
alive today, he
would be 100
years old.
If my
grandfather had
still been alive in
2006, he would
have been 100
years old.
Unrealized or
unlikely yet
theoretically
possible event
... but he isn't.
... but he
wasn't.
Chapter 27: Conditionals
585
SOME OTHER MEANING DISTINCTIONS:
CONDITIONAL AND RELATED CONNECTORS
Only If. Compare the following sentences:
I will stay home if it rains.
I will stay home only if it rains.8
In these sentences, only if marks a condition that is exclusive; that is, no other condition
will bring about the stated result. If on the other hand, expresses a weaker or more neutral
or open condition, in that it does not exclude the possibility that other conditions might also
bring about the same result. Thus we have the following semantic relationships expressed by
conditional adverb subordinators in English:
open (unmarked) conditions: if
exclusive (marked) conditions: only if (sometimes: if and only if)
Unless versus If...Not. Most reference grammars and ESL/EFL textbooks equate unless
with if... not. This is misleading, as Whitaker (1970), Quirk and Greenbaum (1973), and
Dancygier (2002) have pointed out. We believe that Dancygier provides the best account to
date for the two possible meanings of Tinless (i.e.,“except if’ and “if...not”). The first important
point that she makes is that to arrive at the proper interpretation of unless, more context
is needed beyond just the sentence containing the unless clause. While it would require a
lengthy digression to explain Dancygier’s “mental spaces” framework here, we note she points
out that in certain contexts, :unless is paraphrasable as except if but not if...not) and in other
contexts, the reverse is true. Dancygier gives the following example (p. 366):
[context: a car accident] I know how it sounded, but really I am not mad, there was
NOTHING that could have made her swerve to the side like that and hit the rock unless
the steering rod is going. (Susan Cooper, The Grey King, p. 13)
In this example, unless can be paraphrased as except if (except if the steering rod is going) but
not if ..not (*if the steering rod isn’t going). In the following example, the opposite paraphrase
pattern occurs (Dancygier, 2002, p. 368):
"I have pulled my tail off," replied the younger Mouse, "but as I should still be on the
sorcerer's table unless I had, I do not regret it." (Andrew Lang, Red Fairy Book, Univ, of
Virginia Electronic Text Center)
In this example, we can paraphrase unless as if ..not (if I hadn’t [pulled my tail off]) but not except
if (*except if I had [pulled my tail off]). A simplified version of the explanation that Dancygier
gives is that the first context is hypothetical, and the unless clause offers a hypothetical reason
for the accident. In the second context, the unless clause is counterfactual; i.e., the mouse
had in fact pulled his tail off to get away from the sorcerer. For Dancygier (2002), “in such
cases if not and unless are indeed similar, although it would be hard to claim that if not is
equivalent to unless, because it lacks'the exceptive meaning” (p. 374). She adds that if not
is not always counterfactual, but that it is understood to be so in the absence of context that
would yield a different interpretation. Thus we come back to her initial observation that the
larger discourse context is needed to accurately interpret sentences containing unless clauses.9
Carter and McCarthy (2006) agree that unless has two paraphrases (i.e., if ...not and
except if.U} However, they also point out that there are many instances of if ..not that cannot
be paraphrased by unless—a point also made by Huddleston and Pullum (2002):
I think Dave would be happier if he didn't work so hard.
(*l think Dave would be happier unless he worked so hard.)
586
The Grammar Book
Thus we conclude that ESL/EFL teachers should refrain from teaching that unless is the
equivalent of if...not since the entire matter is rather complicated and requires authentic
discourse-grounded examples that should be presented to learners who have a grasp of more
straightforward conditional sentences.
Even Though versus Even If. Consider the following examples:
You should visit Vienna even though it is expensive.
You should visit Vienna even if it is expensive.
In the first sentence, the speaker knows that Vienna is expensive (i.e., the state of affairs exists)
but advises that the addressee visit it despite the cost. In the second sentence, the speaker
doesn’t know definitely whether or not Vienna is expensive—there is a possibility that Vienna
is expensive, but it also might not be (i.e., it is unclear whether or not the state of affairs
exists)—but in any event, the advice is to visit the city.
Thus, even though expresses a concession. It is an emphatic form of although. Even if is
conditional—in this case, an explicit inference conditional—and it is an emphatic counterpart to if.
As the following example demonstrates, even if can also function emphatically in
hypothetical conditionals:
I wouldn't marry you if you were the last person on Earth!
I wouldn't marry you even if you were the last person on Earth!
Note that the even if clause can readily occur initially, but that, in the absence of extremely
marked exclamatory intonation, the r/clause is a bit strange if it occurs initially in this type of
emphatic conditional:.
?If you were’the last person on Earth, I wouldn't marry you!
Even if you were the last person on Earth, I wouldn't marry you!
Thus it appears that we have identified a context in which the r/clause is usually not in initial
position. We will discuss some other cases later in this chapter in the section on use, where
ordering of clauses seems critical.
Whether.. .Or Not. Thus far, we have examined sentences in which the adverb subordinator
indicates that the condition is unmarked, exclusive, emphatic, negative, or exclusive and negative:
I will stay home/fit rains, (unmarked)
I will stay home only if it rains, (exclusive)
I will stay home even if it rains, (emphatic)
I will stay home if it doesn't rain, (negative)
I will stay home unless it rains, (exclusive negative)
English has yet another adverb subordinator, whether.. .or not, which indicates that the
condition can be explicitly eliminated from playing any role in determining the outcome
expressed in the result clause. Thus we refer to such cases as irrelevant conditions:
I will stay home whether or not it rains.
Our reason for using three dots in the subheading to indicate the potential separation
of whether and or not in irrelevant conditions is that in short irrelevant conditional clauses, the
or not may also occur at the end of the clause, separated from the whether:
I will stay home whether it rains or not.
However, the longer the clause, the less likely such a separation becomes:
?l will stay home whether Professor Dickinson agrees to give the graduate students a
lecture on plasma physics or not.
Note that informally, we can substitute if for whether, but only when separation occurs:
I will stay home if it rains or not. (*if or not it rains)
Chapter 27: Conditionals
587
RELATED VERBS	__
Hope and Wish. The verb hope is similar to future (predictive) conditionals in that the same
clauses that follow hope can also function either as the r/clause or the result clause of a future
conditional. For example:
1,	[ John finishes his work
I hope that) \ โ™" ■ .11 ■■ 2"	.
[ John will come
If John finishes his work, he will come.
Both of these sentences imply that it is possible that John will finish his work and that he will come.
The verb 'wish, on the other hand, is similar to counterfactual conditionals in that the
same clauses that follow wish can also function either as the if clause or the result clause of a
counterfactual conditional:
i John hacl finished his work
I wish (that) |"hn- c0“10· hav ”0me	.
If John had finished his work, he could have come.
In these sentences, we know that John didn’t finish his work and that he didn’t come. Also, the
subjunctive forms that occur in imaginative if clauses also occur after -wish·.
I wish I were a millionaire. If I were a millionaire...
Related to the verb wish, there is also the more formal and slightly archaic expression would
that, which can be used in exclamatory imaginative conditionals to express wishes:
Would that I had a Rolls-Royce! Would that I could fly!
(I wish I had a Rolls-Royce!) (I wish I could fly!)
Imagine, Pretend, Suppose. Besides hope and wish, English uses several other verbs
of imagination, such as imagine, pretend, and suppose, all of which should be included in a
comprehensive description of imaginative clauses that have tense shifts like conditionals.
Thewlis (2007) provides the following examples (p. 287):
Let's imagine that we had a new president, (present counterfactual)
Pretend that you could fly like a bird, (present counterfactual)
Suppose we went to Europe next summer, (future hypothetical)
OTHER WAYS OF MARKING CONDITONAL CLAuSES
Our description of conditionals has focused on clauses marked by if and certain related
subordinators like unless and only if.
Other Words, Phrases, and Constructions/Formulaic Expressions
That Signal Conditional Meaning
Words	Phrases	Constructions/Formulaic Expressions
whatever	provided that	The more, the merrier.
who(m)ever	given that	To know him is to love him.
wherever	assuming that	Pay attention, or you will miss what is
however	no matter wh-	happening in the moment.
whenever	so/as long as	People who live in glass houses shouldn't throw stones, (generic relative clause)
The Grammar Book
588
Words	Phrases	Constructions/Formulaic Expressions
whichever	on condition that	1 hope that the party is Saturday, or
assuming supposing	in the event that	otherwise we can't make it. in the event of NP suppose that
A comprehensive study of conditionals would account for these items and others, and
show precisely what relationship they have to the conditional constructions discussed in
this chapter.
Conditional Would/Could Clauses without If Clauses
Frazier (2003) examined a corpus of 467 hypothetical would clauses in spoken and written
English and found that only 25 percent were linked to if clauses—21 percent to adjacent
if clauses, 4 percent to nonadjacent if clauses. Of the remaining cases, 50 percent involved
alternative constructions or connectors other than if such as those we discussed in the
previous chart; e.g.,
You could substitute anything in the Krebs cycle for pyruvate, and it would work.
Another 1 percent could not be classified, and the remaining 15 percent had no overt conditional
clause at all; e.g.,
What would Abe Lincoln do?
In the first example, another construction expresses the conditional meaning (= If you could
substitute anything in the Krebs cycle for pyruvate, it would work.) In the second example, the
implied conditional if clause is something like: If he were alive now,...
The Frequency of
Conditional Constructions
Hill (1960) has claimed that English conditional sentences may contain 324 (i.e., 18 X 18)
distinct tense-modal sequences. However, Hwang (1979) analyzed a corpus of English
speech (63,746 words) and writing (357,249 words) representing diverse discourse types
and concluded that in addition to general rules of consistency in tense sequencing (e.g., If
present, present; If past, past, etc.), only two statements can be made about ungrammatical
forms in conditional sentences: (1) inferential uses of might do not occur in if clauses; and (2)
subjunctive were and were to do not occur in result clauses:
?lf it might rain, we will need our umbrellas.
*lf the weather got too hot, I were sick.
Hwang found that out of a total of about 70 distinct patterns, seven patterns accounted
for two-thirds of the conditionals in her corpora. Furthermore, she found that these seven
patterns—with minor ranking differences—were most frequent in both the spoken and the
written corpus. The table shows the most important frequency data reported by Hwang
(1979, p.63).
Chapter 27: Conditionals
589
A FREQUENCY RANKING OF CONDITIONAL SENTENCE TYPES
Structure						This Book's Terminology	Speech (266 conditionals)	Ranking	Writing (948 conditionals)	Ranking
A: If + pres., pres.						generic factual	51 (19.2%)	1	156(16.5%)	1
B: If + pres., will/be going to						future (predictive)	29(10.9%)	2	118(12.5%)	2
C: If + past,	would might could					present hypothetical or counterfactual	27 (10.2%)	3	95 (10%)	4
D: If + pres.,	should must can may					explicit inference factual or future with weakened result	24 (9%)	4	114(12.1%)	3
£· If + Jwere ไ [were to J7		would could might		have		present or future hypothetical or present counterfactual	23 (8.6%)	5	57 (6%)	6
F· If + Jhad + -en [have + -en		■/ ■	would could might			past counterfactual	10(3.8%)	6	31 (3.3%)	7
G: If + pres.,	would could might					future with weakened result	7 (2.6%)	7	58(6.1%)	5
Although Hwang identified 45 additional structures for the spoken corpus and 57 more
for the written one, these all occurred with frequencies lower than 2 percent except for the
eighth-ranking structure in the written corpus, which occurred 21 times (i.e., 2.2 percent):
would
Structure H: If + -past,
could
might
have + -enn
Example: If they were here longer, I could have introduced you to them.
While it is impossible to compare Hwang’s (1979) structures with our semantic taxonomy
in any exact way, this table does show US that present tense factual conditionals (i.e., structure A)
are by far the most frequent type of conditional sentence in both speech and writing. They
are followed by the classic future conditional (structure B), which is also represented in
weakened form at the bottom of the table (structure G). Present imaginative conditionals are
represented in structures c and E,'2 and past counterfactuals are represented in structures F
and H. Structure D seems to be a mixed bag, including both inferential factuais (must, should)
and weakened future conditionals (can, may).
We feel that Hwang’s (1979) study indirectly validates our semantic taxonomy, and this
assures US that we have indeed accounted for the most frequent conditional structures in
English. More important, however, Hwang’s study helps to establish more realistic priorities
590
The Grammar Book
for the ESL/EFL teacher. Present-tense factual conditionals should be taught first and
introduced early, followed by future conditionals. Imaginative conditionals should be taught
at a later time—after students have learned enough about perfect tenses, modals, and negation
to provide the proper syntactic and semantic foundation for using such structures.
The Uses of Conditional Sentences
s E N T E N c E ■ IN iTliucm^
According to Ford and Thompson (1986), who did a corpus analysis of conditionals in
English, sentences with initial if clauses account for almost 80 percent of conditionals. These
sentence-initial conditionals perform four functions in both oral and written discourse.
In order of frequency, these functions are (1) to propose options for future scenarios,
(2) to introduce contrasts, (3) to provide examples following generalizations, and (4) to make
inferences based on previously mentioned assumptions.
Let us examine discourse segments illustrating each of these uses as well as two others.
Proposing Options for Future Scenarios
[from a phone call discussing the fact that B will be visiting his sister V]
B: I'll probably leave there, at the latest ten ... so I'll probably be there at your place,
at the latest midnight.
V: Okay, well if I go to bed, I'm gonna leave the door open.
B: Oh okay.
V: Okay? Cause I usually go to bed early.
[adapted from Ford and Thompson (1986)]
In this oral segment, V uses a future conditional, “...ifIgo to bed, Pm gonna leave the door open
to tell her brother what the scenario will be if he arrives late, after she has gone to bed early.
Introducing Contrasts
There is another intellectual virtue, which is that of generality or impartiality... When,
in elementary algebra, you do problems about A, B, and c going up a mountain, you
have no emotional interest in the gentlemen concerned, and you do your best to
work out the solution with impersonal correctness. But if you thought that A was your-
self, B your hated rival, and c the schoolmaster who set the problem, your calculations
would go askew, and you would be sure to find that A was first and c was last. [Russell
(1950, p. 31), cited in Ford and Thompson (1986)]
In this text, Bertrand Russell uses a present hypothetical conditional preceded by but (a
typically co-occurring connector) to propose the contrasting set of circumstances. In other
words, he introduces hypothetical emotional involvement, in contrast to the unemotional
impartiality that is expressed earlier in timeless simple present tense, to show that impartial
logic cannot prevail under such emotion-filled circumstances.
Providing Examples Following Generalizations
Any solution ... acid, base, or salt... will act chemically more readily on one electrode
than it will on the other. For example, if electrodes are placed into an orange, a poten-
tial difference will appear between electrodes, [Randall (1968, p. 47), cited in Ford and
Thompson (1986, p. 358)]
Chapter 27: Conditionals
591
Here, the future conditional sentence is preceded by the connector for example and serves to
present a specific illustration of the generalization stated in the immediately preceding sentence.
Making Inferences Based on Previously Mentioned Assumptions
A: Joyce went there last night.
B: Well, if Joyce went there'f she saw what happened.
In this segment, speaker B uses a past factual conditional in the if clause to reiterate the
information previously mentioned by speaker A in order to make an inference in the result
clause based on that prior information.
Presentation and Development of Arguments
Biber et al. (1999) point out that initial if clauses are important in the presentation and
development of arguments in academic prose (p. 824). For example:
If aggression and violence are part and parcel of what it means to be human, then
why is it that there exist societies where aggressive or violent behavior is conspicuous
by its absence?
Presenting Options in Procedures
Biber et al. (1999) also point out that initial if clauses are used in academic prose to present
options and their meanings, especially in the course of explaining procedures (p. 837):
The melting point is determined. If it is not sharp and is lower than that of the two sepa-
rate samples, then the samples are not identical. If, on the other hand, the melting point
is sharp and is not lowered, then the two samples are identical.
USES OF INITiãl~jf~clãüsesãs~^peech~ãcts~in~õraC^dííscõííírsíê...........
Sentence-initial if clauses have several speech act functions in oral discourse that one rarely
finds in written discourse (unless the writing is simulating oral discourse, as fiction often
does). Here are some of the most common speech acts:
Using If Clauses in Polite Directives
[tour guide to the people on her bus]
TG: If you look out the leftside, you'll see Mann's Chinese Theater. You'll have a chance
to walk back there and take photos in a few minutes.
Using if conditions to present directives can be viewed as polite in that, like a suggestion, it
leaves the option of performing the condition to the listener.
Using If Clauses in Polite Requests
In polite requests, the sentence structure is often incomplete, with the z/clause standing alone:
If I could just have your attention for a moment...
If you would just hold theldoor open while I move this chair...
Using If Conditionals to speak Humorously or Sarcastically
Conditionals are often used for humorous or sarcastic purposes:
If he's a Rhodes Scholar, then I'm Albert Einstein!
If you had half a brain, you'd be dangerous.
Tautologisms—where the same words are repeated in both clauses—are a special subcategory
of this case:
If she's not coming, she's not coming!
592
The Grammar Book
In these examples, initial position of the if clause is virtually obligatory since much of the
humor or sarcasm would be lost if the two clauses were reversed; and the tautologism seems
completely unacceptable if reversed:
*She's not coming if she's not coming.
Sentence-Initial If Clauses in Other speech Acts
A few other such speech act conditionals are:
Offer: If I can help you in any way, just let me know.
Command: If you're not here to help, please leave!
Apology: If I've unintentionally offended you, I'm very sorry.
Evaluation: If you get backaches all the time, it's probably because you've got
bad posture.
Warning: Unless the flow of drugs across the border is stopped, the cartels will
continue their criminal activities.
USES OF SENTENCE-FINAL IF CLAUSES
Only 23 percent of the if clauses in Ford and Thompson’s (1986) written corpus were in
final position. They found that the following three observations accounted for most of their
sentence-final if clauses:
1.	When a conditional clause occurs within a complement, a nominalization, an
infinitive, or a relative clause, it tends to occur in final position; for example:
I agree with Johnson's observation that it would be difficult to understand the
Gettysburg Address if it were presented one word at a time, [adapted from Ford &
Thompson (1986, p. 359)]
2.	English speakers sometimes prefer to introduce strong arguments and interesting
topics in the main clause, which may necessitate final position for the subordinate
conditional clause; for example:
The Soviet government would have been less fierce if it had met with less hostility in its
first years. [Russell (1950, p. 109), cited in Ford and Thompson (1986, p. 360)1
3.	Long and involved if clauses tend to occur in final position; for example:
... Lana [a chimpanzee] would not receive any apple if she pressed such incorrect
sequences as: please machine apple give or machine please give apple. [Terrace (1979,
p. 24), cited in Ford and Thompson (1986, p. 361)]
Even fewer (i.e., 18 percent) of the if clauses in the oral corpus were noninitial than in the
written corpus. Many of the examples could be explained with reference to the observations
cited previously for written discourse; however, in oral discourse, Ford and Thompson found
that sentence-final conditionals also fulfill some other functions.
To Function as Afterthoughts or Reminders
Sentence-final if clauses (or unless clauses) functioned as afterthoughts or reminders, and these
could come from the interlocutor, as well as occurring in a continuation by the same speaker:
Student: Is it practically impossible to have that? [ฝ็ certain demand curve]
Instructor: If you have this base.
Chapter 27: Conditionals
593
To Soften an Imperative
Sometimes final oral if clauses are used deferentially to soften an imperative:
Let's do the dishes later, if that's okay with you.
To Follow an Evaluation
Sometimes if clauses follow an evaluation that the speaker presents first for emphasis:
1 think it would be a lot better if you came after all.
To Follow With a Question
Perhaps one of the most interesting observations made by Ford and Thompson is that
19 percent of final (but only 5 percent of initial) if clauses occur with questions in the result
clause:
Well, why doesn't he say something, if he has a solution?
Ford and Thompson suggest that these post-question conditional clauses may be functionally
related to the “afterthought, reminder” type of conditionals described previously. Other
speech-act type functions of final (only) if (or unless) clauses include the following:
To Give Advice or Instructions
Don't sign up for English 120A unless you've already taken English 120,
Take Symbolic Logic only if you're willing to work very hard foraB,
To Impose Restrictions
You can go out with your friends only if you get back by midnight,
THE CONTEXT-SPECIFIC NATURE OF IF CONDITIONALS
O’Keeffe, McCarthy, and Carter (2007) report on research by Farr and McCarthy (2002), who
examined the use of if clauses in a 60,000-word corpus of post-observation teacher training
interactions. Of the 160 uses of if clauses, there were 30 distinct patterns, the majority of
which did not match the three traditional types of if clauses discussed at the outset of this
chapter. Instead, the researchers found that two types of if conditions seemed salient and
highly relevant to the type of communication recorded and transcribed.
Many of the trainers’ if clauses were used to soften imperatives or directives addressed
to the trainees, a function that we noted previously in the speech acts. For example:
Bite your tongue a little if you have to. (O'Keeffe, McCarthy, & Carter, 2007, p. 128)
If you're teaching that class, don't feel obliged to explain everything. (O'Keeffe,
McCarthy, & Carter, 2007, p. 129) '-·
Other if clauses from this corpus showed the trainers putting themselves in their
trainees’ shoes:
If I were to do this exercise, I would approach it from an elicitation point of view.
If I were to do it, I would go with giving good clear instructions. (O'Keeffe, McCarthy, &
Carter, 2007, p. 129)
These examples indicate that the purpose-driven nature of these interactions, in which the
trainers are giving feedback and guidance to teacher trainees, dictated, to a large degree, the
type of if conditionals that were used.
594
The Grammar Book
An example from Lerner (1995) illustrates that classroom teachers often use conditionals
when asking their pupils to solve a hypothetical problem, such as a mathematical word
problem, but often with material about other subjects as well (p. 124):
Simson [teacher]: If you were big...bigger than anybody in the whole classroom,
how could you solve that problem?
We have observed teachers engaging students in discussions of problems and dilemmas using
What.. .if questions:
What would you do if you found a lot of money on the street?
Or, more simply:
What if you found a lot of money on the street?
When Then Is Used in Conditionals With Initial If Clauses
Dancygier and Sweetser (1997) are among the few linguists who have given consideration to
the use of then following initial if clauses. As we noted earlier, this type of then does not occur
when the if clause follows the result clause. For Dancygier and Sweetser, this use of then is
related to its basic temporal deictic sense, which refers not only to the temporal setting, but
also the abstract mental spaces established in the preceding if clause. They claim that then is
both anaphoric (in that it refers back to the if clause) and connecting (in that it serves as a
sequential link between the two clauses).
Dancygier and Sweetser note that then occurs only if premises are explicitly identified in
the if clause and, as a result, reasoning and inference occur in the main clause. They propose
that then is likely in what they call “epistemic conditionals,” where such inferences occur:
If he bought her a diamond ring, then he must love her.
We had noted earlier in our initial taxonomy of conditional sentences that explicit inference
conditionals, which appear to correspond to the researchers’ epistemic conditionals, were
likely environments for the occurrence of then.
They also note that a negative mental state in the if clause that yields a negative
outcome in the result clause is another environment that permits then:
If you don't have the qualifications, then you won't get the job.
They further point out that exploring alternative outcomes in the context of counterfactual
conditionals is another context where we can expect then to occur:
If she had prepared better, then she might have passed the exam.
To Dancygier and Sweetser’s possibilities we would add the sarcastic conditionals we discussed
earlier:
If he's a Rhodes scholar, then I'm Albert Einstein!
They give consideration as well to those cases where then cannot occur. They include
all speech act conditionals where the main clause cannot be inferred as the outcome of the if
clause:
If it's not rude to ask, (*then) how old are you?
If you need any help, (*then) my name is Susie.
Another instance where Dancygier and Sweetser state that then is not a good fit are the
generic conditionals (our generic factual and generic habitual conditionals). This is because
of the specific nature of then:
If water is boiled, (?then) it evaporates.
If Gladys cries, (?then) Sam is sad.
Finally, they claim that when the initial condition is marked by even if or only if then does not
occur because it clashes semantically with these connectors:
Chapter 27: Conditionals
595
Even if it รท๐พร7 (*then) the football game will be played.
Only if it's sunny, (*then) will I visit you.
Dancygier and Sweetser have given US a good start on this topic. However, an extensive
corpus analysis would be helpful in showing US exactly when and why then is likely to occur
(or not occur) in conditional sentences.
Conclusion
We are the first to admit that one could say much more about conditional sentences in English;
however, we think that the analysis in this chapter has covered the essentials and has shown that
these structures are used in a vast array of contexts, ranging from scientific and mathematical
writing to polite directives, verbal insults, and other functions in informal conversation. Hwang
(1979) points out that in her corpora, conditional sentences were more frequent in speech (4.2
per 1,000 words) than in writing (2.7 per 1,000 words). This ratio is confirmed by Ford and
Thompson (1986), who found twice as many conditionals occurring per 1,000 words in their
oral corpus than in their written one. It is also partly confirmed by Biber et al. (1999), who found
that conditionals were most frequent in conversation and moderately frequent in academic
prose. This high proportion of conditionals in spoken language is true no doubt because spoken
English uses conditionals for sarcasm, insults, politeness/deference, and many other affectively
loaded social functions and speech acts, as well as using them for the more straightforward
inferential and hypothetical functions that predominate in the written language.
It should be obvious from our discussion that conditionals are too vast a topic for
any ESL/EFL teacher to cover with one class at one level. Therefore, if you are teaching
conditionals, it is important that you teach your students those conditional sentences that
they are prepared to handle—both structurally and semantically. If you don’t present too
much information at once, and if you always present and practice conditionals in realistic
contexts, you will be able to avoid many of the problems that learners typically experience
with conditionals. (Note all the conditionals that we have used in this closing paragraph!)
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form/Meaning. The factual generic conditional, which is often used to express physical
laws, is important for students majoring in the sciences. If the condition is satisfied, the
result is automatic. Note that the simple present tense is used in both clauses—that is,
without modals; for example:
If you lower the temperature of water to o°c, it freezes.
If you raise the temperature of water to WOT, it boils.
Given the following conditions and results, have groups of students first match the
appropriate A and B items and then generate all the possible factual generic conditional
sentence(s):
A: Conditions	B: Results
fly west/east	it curdles
mix milk with lemon juice	it floats
pour oil on water	you lose/gain time
Example: If you fly west, you gain time.
596
The Grammar Book
2.	Form/Meaning. As well as expressing general truths, factual conditionals may also deal
with inferences based on the speaker’s prior knowledge. The frequent use of should and
must in such result clauses reinforces their inferential nature; for example:
If it's 10:30, then Philip (is/must be) taking ล coffee break.
Given part of Philip’ร daily schedule, make inferences about what he is doing based on
the time:
6:30 A.M. — getup
7:00 A.M. — read the newspaper, have coffee
8:00 A.M.— go to work; sell furniture
ใ 0:30 A.M. — coffee break
ใ:00-2:00 P.M. —lunch
5:00 P.M. — go home
6:00 P.M. — eat dinner
7:00 P.M. —watch TV
Example: If it's 7 A.M., Philip must be I having coffee.
[ reading the paper.
This exercise can also be reversed so that the class can make inferences about the time
based on what Philip is doing; for example:
If Philip is reading the newspaper, it must be 7 A.M.
3.	Form/Meaning. The future or predictive conditional is often used to make plans for the
future based on various contingencies. One good context for introducing this structure is
a chart with information about pupils: their names, their grades. These pupils will either
(a) pass, (b) fail, or (c) skip a grade at the end of the school year. The class can practice all
the logical possibilities.
Pupil	Current Grade	Dossibilities at End of Year	Grade Next Year
Sam Sally Kurt	5 4 3	Pass (normal promotion) Fail "flunks" (no promotion) Skip	7
Edith	6	(double promotion)	
Example:
Teacher: What will happen if Sam passes?
Student ใ: If Sam passes, he will be เท grade 6 next year.
Teacher: What if he flunks?
Student 2: If Sam flunks, he will still be in grade 5 next year.
Teacher: What if he skips a grade?
Students: If Sam skips a grade, he will be เท grade 7 next year.
4.	Form/Meaning. We use a past habitual conditional to talk about past habits or fixed past
schedules that are no longer true. In this context, //becomes similar to when or whenever,
Chapter 27: Conditionals
597
although it is never exactly the same as 'whenever). The following exercise can bring out
this similarity.
Mr. Nelson, a retired high school history teacher, thinks about his experiences. He worked with
many different types of students and had to handle many different situations:
a.	a bright class... make lessons challenging
b.	a slow class... present the basic facts carefully
c.	an exceptionally intelligent student... give special attention
d.	a student with behavior problems... contact the parents
6.	a student with a physical disability... treat as abled
Describe what Mr. Nelson did over the years; for example:
r Mr. Nelson had a bright class, he made his lessons challenging.
5.	Form/Meaning. The present counterfactual conditional (impossible, subjunctive) uses
past tense and a special subjunctive form:
(If +
she [were X,...)
he
This is a common and frequent construction and should be practiced in a variety of
contexts:
a. Have pairs of students work at imagining that they are famous contemporary people
and describing what they would or could do if they were these people. The teacher
can provide cue cards with pictures of famous people, and students can make up
sentences; for example:
If I were the president, I would/could...
Have pairs of students imagine that they have something that they don’t really have, or
can do something that they really can’t do. For example:
If I had a million dollars, I would/could...
If I
could fly
flew
-, I would...
b.	To make the situation emphatically counterfactual (completely imaginary), Barbara
Hawkins suggests that the teacher prepare cue cards with pictures of animals and
objects—one for each student or, alternatively, five or six that the whole class can
choose from. Then each student should imagine that he or she is the animal or object
in question and write as many .sentences as possible, which can then form the basis of
a short composition. This would work well with young learners.
Example:
If I were an eagle, I would be able to fly very high in the sky.
6.	Form/Meaning. Many popular songs and folk songs use the imaginative present
conditional. The ESL/EFL teacher can take advantage of this by teaching the lyrics and
having the class sing one of these songs to introduce or reinforce the pattern:
"If I Had a Hammer"	"If I Were a Carpenter"
"If I Were a Rich Man"	"If I Had the Wings of an Angel"
598
The Grammar Book
7.	Form/Meaning. For practicing past counterfactuals, use the concept of “hindsight.”
Have each student imagine himself or herself to be a famous person (now deceased) and
describe what they would have done or would not have done; for example:
If I had been Napoleon, I would not have fought the British at Waterloo.
8.	Form/Meaning. To contextualize past counterfactuals, have the class talk about Harry
and everything that went wrong for him yesterday.
"Harry's Bad Day"
a.	Harry did not get up on time.	—>	He had to rush to get to work.
b.	He was in a hurry.	He did not lock his door properly.
c.	He did not catch his bus.	—»	He was late for work.
d.	Harry's boss was angry.	—>	The boss fired Harry.
e.	A burglar entered Harry's	—»	All of Harry's belongings were stolen,
apartment.
Have students work in pairs and write out all the things that might have happened/not
have happened if Harry had had a better day yesterday; for example:
If Harry had gotten up on time, he would not have had to rush to get to work.
If Harry had locked his door properly, the burglar would not have entered his
apartment.
9.	Meaning. The’following exercises contain suggestions for teaching unless and only if.
a.	Make your students aware of the fact that unless is frequently used along with negative
imperatives if the speaker is giving an ultimatum or a warning. The unless precedes the
condition that is necessary for neutralizing the negation in the imperative; for example:
Don't run in a marathon unless you run long distances regularly.
(affirmative implication: If you run long distances regularly, you can run in a marathon.)
Have your students advise each other not to do the following things unless a
necessary condition—which they are to specify—is met. Have them also indicate
what the affirmative implication is in each case.
apply for admission to graduate school go to a party the night before an exam
join the army	open up a restaurant
accept a job in Alaska	work for a low salary
Example:
Don't apply for admission to graduate school unless you have at least a 3.25 GPA
and good GRE scores.
(affirmative implication: If you have at least a 3.25 GPA and good GRE scores, you
can apply for admission to graduate school.)
b.	You can familiarize your students with the use of only r/by referring to the same
situations listed previously. Emphasize that although the advice is overtly positive
in this case, the implication is negative; that is, if the necessary condition is not
met, the advice in the result clause no longer applies; for example:
You (can/should) apply for admission to graduate school, only if you have at least a
3.25 undergraduate GPA and good GRE scores.
(negative implication: If you don’t have at least a 3.25 undergraduate GPA and good
GRE scores, don’t apply for admission to graduate school.)
Chapter 27: Conditionals
599
c.	At some point, your students also need to understand that an unless clause can be used
with an affirmative result clause, too. This is particularly true if future plans are being
discussed; for example:
We will vacation in Hawaii unless our schedule changes between now and May.
(implication: We expect to vacation in Hawaii, but our schedule might change between
now and May. If it does, we won’t go; but we expect to go.)
Have your students make up their own sentences using unless clauses with the plans
here to express the idea that other things could intervene. Have them paraphrase their
sentences to show the implication, too.
I'll see you next Sunday.
I will withdraw from my physics class.
Let's plan on going to the movies this weekend.
Gary will travel to Europe in July.
Sylvia is going to work part time at a restaurant.
Example:
I'll see you next Sunday unless I have too much homework to do.
(implication: I’ll see you next Sunday, though I may have too much homework to do,
and if I do, I won’t see you.)
10.	Use. Give your students these sentences from airline discourse. See if they can figure out
what speech act each refers to.
a.	This plane is going to Omaha. If Omaha isn't your destination, please deplane.
b.	If there is a loss of cabin pressure, an oxygen mask will drop from the ceiling.
c.	If there is any way that we can make your trip more enjoyable today, please ask.
d.	If the seatbelt light comes on, please return to your seats immediately.
e.	If I could have your attention for a moment...
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1.	Provide example sentences that illustrate the following terms. Underline the pertinent
word(s) in your example.
a. factual conditional	d. contrastive use of a conditional
(i.) generic	e. subjunctive use of were
(ii.) implicit inference	f. if deletion with subject/auxiliary
b. future conditional	inversion
(i.) weakened result clause	g. conditional clause pro-form
(ii.) weakened if clause	h. sarcastic use of conditional
c. counterfactual conditional.	i. hypothetical conditional
600
The Grammar Book
2.	Draw tree diagrams for the following sentences:
a.	If I had the time, I would go to Europe.
b.	If John had studied, then he would have received an A.
c.	I will not stay at the meeting if I see him.
d.	Don’t go for an interview unless you want the job.
3.	Why are the following sentences ungrammatical (or at best awkward)?
a.	*If she had been there, she did the work.
b.	?If John might be free, I’ll invite him.
c.	?Sally’ร bringing Harry to the party if she’s bringing Harry to the party!
d.	?Then he’ll keep his word if he made a promise.
Test your ability to apply what you know.
4.	If your students produce the following, how will you make them aware of the correct
forms of conditionals, and what exercises and activities will you provide to practice
them?
a.	*What happens if I pushed this button?
b.	*Why had some Americans said, “ Gesundheit, ” if someone sneezes?
c.	"Only if you help me, I will study for the quiz.
5.	One of your advanced students has heard native speakers say conditionals like these,
and he or she wants to know whether they are correct or not. What will you say?
a.	If I was the Dalai Lama, I’d do the same thing.
b.	I would be less nervous if you would stop staring at me.
6.	Use the semantic description of conditionals provided in this chapter and decide
where a sentence such as the following one belongs:
If the gardener doesn't come tomorrow. Father will have to mow the lawn.
7.	Select a passage or article and identify all the conditional sentences. Try to account
for the sentences using the semantic taxonomy provided in this chapter. Are there any
sentences that cannot be explained according to the taxonomy? If so, try to provide
your own analysis or explanation of the sentence(s).
Bibliography
REFERENCES
____________________________________________________________
Biber, D, Johansson, ร., Leech, G., Conrad, ร., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and written
English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ltd.
Carter, R., & McCarthy, M. (2006). Cambridge grammar of English. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Covitt, R. I. (1976). Some problematic grammar areas for ESL teachers (Unpublished master’s thesis).
University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Dancygier, B. (2002). Mental space embeddings, counterfactuals, and the use of unless. English Language and
Linguistics, 6(2), 347-377.
Chapter 27: Conditionals
601
Dancygier, B., & Sweetser, E. (1997). Then in conditional constructions. Cognitive Linguistics, 8(2), 109-136.
Dancygier, B., & Sweetser, E. (2000). Constructions with if, since and becauseะ causality, epistemic stance, and
clause order. In E. Couper-Kuhlen & B. Kortmann (Eds.), Cause, condition, concession, contrast: Cognitive
and discourse perspectives (pp. 111-142). Berlin, Germany: Mouton de Gruyter.
Farr, E, & McCarthy, M. (2002, July). Expressing hypothetical meaning in context: Theory versus practice in
spoken interaction. Paper presented at the Annual Conference on Teaching and Language, Bertinoro,
Italy.
Ford, c. E., & Thompson, ร. A. (1986). Conditionals in discourse: A text-based study from English. In
E. Traugott, A. ter Meulen, J. ร. Reilly, & c. A. Ferguson. (Eds.), On conditionals (pp. 353-372).
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Frazier, ร. (2003). A corpus analysis of would clauses without adjacent if clauses. TESOL Qiiarterly, 3 7(4),
443-366.
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion in English. London, England: Longman.
Harsh, พ. (1968). The subjunctive in English. Tuscaloosa, AL: University of Alabama Press.
Hill, L. A. (1960). The sequence of tenses with if clauses. Language Learning, 10(3-4), 165-178.
Huddleston, R., & Pullum, G. K. (2002). The Cambridge grammar of the English language. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Hwang, M. (1979). A semantic and syntactic analysis of “if” conditionals (Unpublished master’s thesis).
University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Lerner, G. H. (1995). Turn design and the organization of participation in instructional activities. Discourse
Processes, 19(1), 111-131.
O’Keeffe, A., McCarthy, M., & Carter, R. (2007). From corpus to classroom: Language use and language
teaching. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Quirk, R., & Greenbaum ร. (1973). A concise grammar of contemporary English. New York, NY: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich.
Randall, R. K. (1968). Auto engine tune-up. Indianapolis, IN: Theodore Andel.
Russell, B. (1950). Unpopular essays. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
Schachter, J. (1971). Presupposition and coimterfactual conditional sentences (Unpublished dissertation).
University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Schiffrin, D. (1987). Discourse markers. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Terrace, H. (1979). Nim:A chimpanzee who learned sign language. New York, NY: Washington Square Press.
Whitaker, ร. F. (1970). Unless. English Language Teaching journal, 24(2), 154-160.
SUGGESTION rFORTuRTHERREA DIN G	........______
For useful general information on conditional sentences, see:
Biber, D., Johansson, ร., Leech, G., Conrad, ร., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and
written English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ltd.
Carter, R., & McCarthy, M. (2006). Cambridge grammar of English. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press. '
Huddleston, R., & Pullum, G. K. (2002). The Cambridge gram.rn.ar of the English language. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Jespersen, o. (1940). A modern English grammar on historical principles (Vbls. 5, 7). Copenhagen, Denmark:
Einar Munksgaard.
Quirk, R.y Greenbaum, ร., Leech, G., & SvartvikjJ. (1985). A comprehensive grammar of the English language.
London, England: Longman.
602
The Grammar Book
For cross-linguistic, cross-disciplinary accounts of conditionals, see:
Jackson, F. (Ed.). (1991). Conditionals. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Traugott, E., ter Meulen, A., Reilly, J. ร., & Ferguson, c. A. (Eds.). (1986). On conditionals. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Athanasiadou, A., & Dirven, R. (Eds.). (1997). On conditionals again. Amsterdam, Netherlands:
John Benjamins.
For excellent suggestions for teaching hope and wish, as well as conditional sentences, see:
Houck, N., & Hilles, ร. (2009). Grammar connection: Structure through content 4. Boston, ALA: Heinle,
Cengage Learning.
For units and lessons that introduce factual conditionals to high-beginner ESL/EFL students, see:
Badalamenti, V., & Henner-Stanchina, c. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 1 (4th ed.).
Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Firsten, R. (2008). Grammar connection: Structure through content 2. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
For a unit that introduces hypothetical (present and past) and future conditionals to low-intermediate ESL/
EFL learner, see:
Wisniewska, I., Riggenbach, H., & Samuda, V (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 2 (4th ed.).
Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
For a unit that contrasts real and hypothetical conditionals for intermediate learners, see:
Thewlis, ร. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 3 (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage
Learning.
For a review of conditionals for advanced students, plus exercises dealing with only if, unless, even though,
even if, see:
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Cake, c. D. (2009). Grammar connection: Structure through content 5. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Endnotes
1.	The five most serious problems were ranked as follows:
1.	articles
2.	prepositions
3.	phrasal verbs
4.	verbals (infinitives, gerunds, participles)
5.	conditionals
2.	Hwang (1979) demonstrates that many ESL/EFL students cannot produce or interpret these simple,
present-tense conditionals as well as they can future conditionals—very probably as a result of
incomplete and misleading instruction.
3.	We are indebted to Schachter (1971) both for the term imaginative and also for much of the following
description and terminology.
4.	เท colloquial North American English, such an //clause sometimes contains a would:
If Joe would have the time, he would go to Mexico.
This results in a double would construction, which many prescriptive usage manuals rule out as unacceptable
in formal English. However, we wish to point out that double would conditionals do occur increasingly in
informal spoken and written English.
5; Hwang (1979) demonstrates that ESL/EFL students confuse hypothetical and counterfactual
conditionals and cannot interpret them properly, even when they are able to select the correct form on
Chapter 27: Conditionals
603
a multiple-choice test item. Many students interpret hypothetical as if they were counterfactuals—thus
ignoring a subtle but important semantic distinction in English.
6.	See Harsh (1968) for a comprehensive description of the subjunctive in English.
7.	เท colloquial English, was in fact often occurs in such imaginative conditional sentences in lieu of were.
8.	Note that when the only //clause is fronted, this forces subject/operator inversion in the main clause:
_________	โ will I stay home.
Only if it rains, <
[*l will stay home.
We believe that this occurs because of the negative implication that only if conveys as part of its exclusive
meaning; i.e., no other condition will bring about the stated result.
9.	All of Dancygier's (2002) data come from fiction, so a more comprehensive study of unless using other
corpora with other registers is warranted. Biber et al. (1999) report that unless occurred 200 times per
million words in fiction and news reports but less than 100 times per million words in conversation and
academic writing, so fiction, along with news reports, may indeed be a good source for tokens of unless
(p. 842).
10.	Carter and McCarthy (2006) are less categorical than Dancygier (2002) about the two paraphrases of
unless, and they give examples suggesting that while sometimes if...not is the preferred paraphrase, at
other times except if is the preferred paraphrase, and at still other times both paraphrases seem possible.
This may be a result of considering sentences out of context, or it more likely suggests that further
research with more data is needed.
11.	Note that this structure is very likely a simplification of structure F:
would
(If + had + -en, could
have + -en)
might
(e.g., If he had arrived late, he might have been punished.)
The simple past is replacing the past perfect in the if clause.
12.	Structure E contains were to as well as were, which means that future hypothetical are included
here, too.
604
The Grammar Book
/
Introduction to
Relative Clauses
CHAPTER
28
Introduction
Not only are relative clauses very common modifiers in English, but their forms, meanings,
and uses are quite varied within and across spoken and written registers. The following
examples from the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA) illustrate the
diversity of relative clause types and their positions in sentences:
You don't forget the person who introduced you to your first love. (Psychology Today,
May/June 2012)
All caregivers were familiar with the resident whom they assisted. (Journal of Speech,
Language and Hearing Research, April 2012)
These are the people with whom he studied... (Commentary·, 2011)
Authors whose manuscripts are accepted for publication must supply illustrations that
are of professional quality... (Geographical Review, January 2012)
That is something which we are told happens every time there is any significant storm.
(CNN,2005)
But the point that I think is important here, there's really two things. (CBS This Morning, 2012)
That's the thing / was thinking. (The Today Show, 2012)
Teachers may need to address English learner errors such as the following, which may result
from a variety of sources: cross-linguistic influence, misunderstanding of relative clause
functions, or simply a developing knowledge of complex sentence structure:
*1 talked to the teacher which is in Room 214.
*We had sushi for lunch which it was very good.
*My roommate comes from Iran is friendly.
In the first ungrammatical example above, the relative pronoun which has been inappropriately
used to modify a noun with a human reference. In the second example, the personal pronoun
it has been incorrectly retained after the relative pronoun which. And in the third example,
the obligatory subject relative pronoun (who) is missing from the embedded clause comes from
Iran.
We begin our description of the relative clause construction by defining it as a type
of adjective modifier that occurs after nouns—or more formally, a complex postnominal
adjectival modifier. Consider the following example from COCA:
Tucson is a city that is unique for its diversity and its passion. (Fox News, 2011)
605
In this example, the italicized relative clause describes Tucson.
In English, it would be very awkward, even ungrammatical, to convey the same
information using a phrase that comes before the noun (an attributive adjective):
*Tucson is a unique for its diversity and its passion city.
It would be possible, but more wordy and less elegant, to express the same information as two
independent clauses:
Tucson is a type of city; it is unique for its diversity and its passion.
Relative clauses thus give US a means to describe NPs in complex adjectival modifiers that are
easier to process than complex attributive structures in front of NPs and that are less wordy
than two independent clauses.
The Form of Relative Clauses
A relative clause derives from a basic structure consisting of more than one sentence.
So far, you have seen two types of sentence that have two or more basic structures. In
Chapter 6, and then again in Chapter 25, we showed that one basic structure sentence could
be subordinated to another when preceded by an adverb subordinator; for example:
The baby walked before she crawled.
(SI + adv sub + ร2)
This subordinate structure was also used to derive some of the conditional sentences in the
preceding chapter.
In Chapter 24, we analyzed sentences with two or more basic structures sentences that
are conjoined; for example:
The rain finally stopped, and the รนท came out.
(SI + conj + S2)
The basic structural relationship among the sentences that we consider in this chapter
differs from that of subordinating or coordinating conjunction. The relationship here
derives from a process called embedding. In this process, one clause is placed within another
higher-order or superordinate (main) clause. This embedded clause becomes a part of the
main clause.
For example:
The fans [who were attending the concert] had to wait in line for three hours.
NP	ร
Here, we see that the embedded clause who were attending the concert is closely associated
with the head NP, the fans. In fact, who is a relative pronoun in the embedded clause referring
to the fans. The embedded clause has a modifying function much like an adjective; it tells
us which “fans” had'to wait in a long line. Such clauses are often called “restrictive,” (or in
some grammars “defining,” “limiting,” “essential,” or “adjective” clauses). In most cases, these
clauses restrict or identify for us which noun(s) of all nouns in the same set we are speaking
about (in this example, people who could be called “fans”).
606
The Grammar Book
RELATIVIZATION; NOUN PHRASE ACCESSIBILITY
While many languages have relative clause structures, these languages may differ from
English in the extent to which noun phrases can be replaced by relative pronouns in certain
syntactic positions. As one example, some languages do not allow a relative pronoun to
replace an NP that is the object of a preposition as English does (e.g., The book to which she
referred has been on the bestseller list for six months). For English learners, challenges may arise
based on such cross-linguistic differences as well as, of course, the absence of relative clause
constructions in their native languages. For teachers of English as a second language, it is
helpful to understand the differences across languages.
An explanation of how languages do or do not allow NPs to be relativized (i.e., to be
modified by a restrictive relative clause) has been posited by Keenan and Comrie (1977) in
their “noun phrase accessibility hierarchy.” In this hierarchy, NPs that are most accessible to
being relativized are at the top, with the least accessible type at the bottom. The chart here
illustrates this, along with examples of each type.
CROSS-LINGUISTIC NOUN PHRASE ACCESSIBILITY HIERARCHY			
Most Accessible Least Accessible	subject NP	The book that is on the coffee table arrived today.	
	direct object NP	The story that she told is a well-known fable.	
	indirect object NP	The man	to whom they gave the award is a firefighter. who they gave the award to is a local hero.
	object of the preposition NP	The child	from whom you took the candy is crying. who you took the candy from is crying.
	genitive (i.e., possessive) NP	The advisor whose name you asked for is Sarah North.	
	object NP of a comparison	?The only person that 1 was shorter than was Fritz. *The only person than whom 1 was shorter was Fritz.	
As illustrated here, the accessibility hierarchy claims that cross-linguistically, subject
NPs are easier to relativize than direct object NPs, which in turn are easier to relativize
than indirect object NPs, and so on. This means that all languages that have relative
clauses can relativize subject NPs. It also implies that there are some languages, such as
Tagalog, that can only relativize subjects (or topics). Furthermore, it posits that languages
like Slovenian that can relativize the least accessible type, object NPs of comparisons,
can also relativize the other five types of NPs that are more accessible. English has a
rich system of relativization with almost no restrictions on the kind of NPs that can be
relativized or replaced by a relative pronoun in the embedded clause. As shown in the
chart, the only marginal NP function for relativization in English is the “object NP of a
comparison,” in which the first example might be unacceptable to some speakers and the
second is ungrammatical. This means that speakers of languages with more restrictions
on relativization, such as Tagalog, Malay, and Indonesian, which allow only subjects (or
topics) to be relativized, may have difficulty with the variety of NPs that can be relativized
in English.
Chapter 28: Introduction to Relative Clauses
607
CHALLENGES FOR ESL/EFL STUDENTS
In identifying the challenges that students may encounter learning English relative clauses, it
is useful to consider tire ways in which their native languages may construct relative clauses
differently or, in some cases, may use other types of structures for the same purpose. Schachter
(1974), identifies three main dimensions along which relative clauses can differ (pp. 202-208). In
the following three sections, we summarize Schachter’s analysis related to the three dimensions
and note some of the differences across languages described in Swan and Smith (2001).
Positions of Relative Clauses
One of the main differences between languages is the positioning of relative clauses in relation
to the head noun being modified. English relative clauses, as shown in the examples in the
previous hierarchy, follow the head noun. This structural pattern is the same for relative
clauses in most European languages and also in Arabic and Farsi. In some languages (e.g.,
Chinese, Korean, Japanese and Turkish), however, constructions that serve the function of
English relative clauses appear before the head noun they modify. (Thompson, 2001).
Marking of Relative Clauses
Another difference that we find across languages is the ways in which relative clauses are
marked. While English uses a relative pronoun (for example, who or which), Schachter (1974)
points out that languages such as Persian, Arabic, and Chinese employ other kinds of markers
between the head noun and the relative clause. For these speakers, the concept of having
some construction mark the relative clause should be somewhat familiar. Japanese, on the
other hand, uses particles in the relative clause itself to mark its modifier function. Thompson
(2001) notes that Japanese learners of English may experience difficulty in using relative
pronouns for this reason.
Presence or Absence of a Pronominal Reflex
In English relative clauses, the relative pronoun substitutes for the NP with identical reference
in the embedded sentences. For example, in the following sentence:
Shirley called out to the boy that she knew.
the that replaces the boy in the embedded sentence. Other languages—for instance, Arabic,
Hebrew, and Persian—introduce a relative clause marker for the embedded sentence but
also retain a marker to refer to the head noun in the form of a pronominal reflex. As a
result, speakers of these languages often produce errors in English such as the following:
"Shirley called out to the boy that she knew him.
Chinese and Arabic also allow pronominal reflexes to occur as objects of prepositions; so
speakers of these languages sometimes produce English sentences such as the following:
"The man who you were talking to him is my uncle.
English Relative Clause Types
There is a great diversity in English relative clause types. In the following sections, we will be
describing the roles that relative clauses serve in relation to the main clause (e.g., as modifiers
of main clause subjects or objects), as well as the syntactic roles of the relative pronouns in
the embedded relative clauses.
608
The Grammar Book
In the subheadings below with hyphenated labels, it may be helpful to keep in mind that
the first syntactic role refers to the NP in the superordinate (main) clause, while the second
syntactic role identifies the function of the NP in the embedded (relative) clause. For example,
“object-subject” means that the relative clause modifies a main clause object; the relative
pronoun is the subject of the embedded relative clause.
THE RELATΐ1τίζΑΤΊ^ΪΓθΓηΪΕ^ΰΒ7ΕθΊΓΐΓΓΗΪΪΜΒΕΡΡΕΡΤΕΝΤENcE
Subject-Subject Relatives
We will first consider sentences in which the subject of the embedded sentence becomes
relativized. Consider the following sentence:
The girl who speaks Basque is my cousin.
We understand that the “who” refers to “the girl.” We understand this as speakers of English,
despite the fact that who can refer to persons of either sex in the singular or plural:
The boy who speaks Basque is my cousin.
The girls who speak Basque are my cousins.
Who is the relative pronoun in all these sentences. We know that it has the same referent as
the head NP that directly precedes it. To account for sentences that are embedded within
NPs, we have to expand our phrase structure rule for the NP to include:
NP —> NP s
รบBJ
NP
PRED
cop NP
NP
det N
SUBJ
-pres
be det N
PRED
the girl
NP
det N
AUX
VP
V NP
my cousin
-pres speak N
who
Basque
In order to function as a relative clause, the embedded clause must contain an NP that is
identical in reference to the NP in the main clause. In this case, the subject will be the relative
pronoun who.
In addition to the relative pronoun who, that is often used as the subject of a relative clause:
The flowers that are in the vase need some water.
Here, that replaces the flowers.
Chapter 28: Introduction to Relative Clauses
60S
Object-Subject Relatives
The sentence that we have just examined has an embedded sentence that modifies the subject
NP of the main clause. An embedded sentence with a relativized subject can also modify an
NP that is the object of the main clause; for example:
I know the girl who speaks Basque.
ร
NP
pro
I
AUX
V
NP
ร
-pres
know NP
det N
SUBJ
PRED
the girl
NP
AUX VP
det N
V NP
who
-pres speak N
Basque
For this type of relative clause, the relative pronoun that can also serve as the subject:
I arranged the flowers that are in the vase.
Object-subject relative clauses are quite common, as we will discuss later.
THE RELATIVIZATION OF THE OBJECT IN THE EMBEDDED SENTENCE
Subject-Object Relatives
In this type of relative clause, the object NP of the embedded sentence is relativized. Consider
the following:
The man whom you met is my teacher.
What is the embedded sentence in this example? At first glance, the relative clause in this
sentence appears no different from the first two types we looked at. Upon closer examination,
however, we realize that the underlying embedded sentence is “you met the man” and that,
therefore, the object NP, replaced by whom in the embedded clause, will need to be moved to
the front of that embedded clause. In ofher words, with embedded sentences in which it is the
object NP that refers to the head noun, it won’t do to merely replace the object NP with a
relative pronoun. What is necessary at this point is to move the relative pronoun to initial
position in the embedded clause.
610
The Grammar Book
ร
PRED
SUBJ
be det N
my teacher
Here is one more example of this type of embedded clause with the relative
pronoun that·.
The report that you gave US was excellent.
In this example, the underlying embedded sentence is “you gave US the report.” Again, by
moving the relative pronoun to initial position in the embedded clause, we get the correct
order of constituents.
Object-Object Relatives
Earlier in this chapter, you saw that an embedded sentence with a relativized subject could
modify the object as well as the subject of the main clause. This is also true of embedded
sentences with relativized objects; for example:
I read the book that you mentioned.
ร
SUBJ	PRED	
NP	AUX	
pro	T	
I	-past	read
VP
NP
NP
det N
SUBJ
PRED
the book
NP
AUX
VP
NP
mention det N
pro
-past
you
that
Chapter 28: Introduction to Relative Clauses
611
ร
V
Besides the need to move the relative pronoun to the front of the clause, another
characteristic of embedded sentences with relativized objects is that the relative pronoun
may be optionally deleted without affecting the grammaticality of the sentence:
I read the book you mentioned.
If we had deleted the relative pronoun, in the subject-object sentence, then we would have
produced the following:
The man you met is my teacher.
We can only delete the relative pronouns that replace relativized objects; we cannot delete
pronouns when they function as relativized subjects:
*The girl speaks Basque is my cousin.
THE ORDER OF DIFFICULTY OF RELATIVE CLAUSES
So far, we have examined four basic types of relative clauses:
ss The subject of the embedded sentence refers to the subject of the main clause;
for example:
The girl who speaks Basque is my cousin.
OS The subject of the embedded sentence refers to the object of the main clause;
for example:
I know the girl who speaks Basque.
SO The object of the embedded sentence refers to the subject of the main clause;
for example:
The man who(m) you met is my teacher.
oo The object of the embedded sentence refers to the object of the main clause; for
example:
I read the book that you mentioned.
Studies in the field of second language acquisition have considered which types of relative
clauses are easier (or conversely, more difficult) to acquire. Kuno (1974) hypothesized that OS
and OO relative clause types would be easier to acquire than ss and so types. He reasoned
that when the embedded relative clauses interrupted the sentence by coming directly after
the subject of the main clause,1 they would be more difficult to process than those relative
clauses that modified the object of the main sentence and thus came at the end of the sentence.
Studies by loup and Kruse (1977) and Schumann (1980) seem to support Kuno'ร hypothesis.
Schumann, for example, examined the production data of seven ESL learners and
observed the following order (the numbers represent the percentage of times the seven
subjects used relative clauses of each “type):
OS 0.53
0๐ 0.35
SS 0.06
SO 0.04
(0.02 of the clauses could not be unambiguously assigned to any one of the four types.)
In a subsequent study of the English written production of 170 Cantonese speakers, Wong
(1991) found an order similar to that of Schuman: OS 47 percent, oo 26 percent, ss 15 percent,
SO 10 percent (2 percent unidentifiable).
612
The Grammar Book
Stauble (1978) examined the frequency of these four relative clause types in samples
of native speaker discourse drawn from three different discourse types: informal speech,
spontaneous writing, and published writing. By calculating the number of instances and the
frequency percentages for the four types of clauses, she obtained the following totals for the
three combined discourse types:2
	Instances	Percentagt
os	234	55
oo	108	25
ss	52	12
so	30	7
Total 424	99 (does not equal 100 because percentages were rounded off)
There is an obvious correlation between the rank order and frequency of occurrence of
the different types of relative clauses used by native speakers and the observed second
language production order. In support of this observation, Reali and Christiansen
(2007) report that the processing of relative clauses is made easier by their frequency of
occurrence.
Other recent studies have examined the relationship between frequency of occurrence
and ease of processing more closely by considering other elements within relative clause
types. For example, reading tasks conducted by Reali and Christiansen (2007) revealed that
when personal pronouns are subjects within object relative clauses (OS), the processing of the
relative clause,is facilitated.
The need for additional funding was emphasized
Of course, increased frequency is likely not only due to the fact that such relative clauses
are easier to process, but also because what is positioned at the end of a sentence is more likely
to require elaboration, an information-structuring principle we have encountered several
times already in this book. This is an explanation for why the object of a sentence is more
likely to be modified by a relative clause than the subject.
ESL/EFL teachers, of course, may eventually have to deal with the teaching of all four
types of relative clauses. However, since the OS and oo types are much more frequent, they
clearly deserve priority.
THE DIVERSITY OF RELATIVE CLAUSE TYPES
So far, we have dealt only with relative clauses modifying the subjects and objects of main
clauses. Such a perspective belies the complexity that actually exists. The chart on page 614
illustrates the diversity of English relative clause structures.
The Relativization of the Object of the Preposition in the
Embedded Sentence
One of the relative clause types shown in the chart that we have yet to examine is the one in
which the object of the preposition in the embedded sentence is relativized. If we analyze one
such example sentence from the chart, such as
I know the place which you spoke about.
we see that its basic structure is:
Chapter 28: Introduction to Relative Clauses
613
The Grammar Book
EXAMPLE SENTENCES FOR THE VARIOUS RELATIVE CLAUSE STRUCTURES IN ENGLISH*
	Function of relativized noun in relative clauses			
Function of head noun in main clauses	Subject	Direct object	Indirect object	Object of a preposition
Subject	The girl who speaks Basque is my cousin.	The man who(m) you met is my teacher.	The man that 1 gave the book to is over there.	The place which you spoke about is Denver.
Direct object	1 know the girl who speaks Basque.	1 know the place that you mentioned.	1 gave the man that you mentioned the book.	1 know the place which you spoke about.
Indirect object	We gave the boy who broke the window a warning.	1 sent the boy that Mary saw a letter.	1 told the boy that you gave the book to a story.	1 gave the boy that you were talking about the book.
Object of the preposition	1 talked with the girl who speaks Basque.	1 work for the man that you met.	Mary knows about the boy that 1 gave the book to.	1 know of the place which John spoke about.
Predicate noun	Mr. Thomas is a teacher who prepares his lessons.	Latin is the subject that Mr. Thomas teaches.	He's the boy that 1 gave the present to.	Denver is a place which you'll want to goto.
*Note that in addition to these structures, the possessive determiner whose can relativize any noun functioning as a subject, direct object, indirect object, object of a
preposition, or predicate noun, giving us in effect 40 distinct relative clause structures in English.
ร
SUBJ
NP
pro
I
PRED
-pres
know NP
SUBJ
NP
det N
the place
PRED
Another possibility, however, involves fronting the preposition along with its relativized
object. If we were to do this, we would get:
I know the place about which you spoke.
This construction, with the fronting of the preposition and the relative pronoun, is a
rather formal one. It is rarely used in informal spoken discourse; however, it is fairly common
in more formal spoken English, such as speeches or news programs on television, and in
written English in various registers as illustrated by the following examples taken from COCA:
She is charged with a crime about which her memory is a complete blank.
(NBC Dateline, 2012 12057)
There is also variability เท the age at which children acquire linguistic structures.
(Eisenberg, ร., Language Speech & Hearing Services in Schools, 43.1,2012)
I remember an old person to whom I was speaking 20 or 30 years ago...
cTalk of the Nation, 2012 12032)
The social network has become the means by which many online users communicate,
get news and find entertainment. (Cass, ร. Technology Review, March/April 2012)
In this more formal version in which the preposition is fronted, we cannot use that to replace
the relativized object of the preposition:
*The person with that you were talking is the principal.
*The chair on that you were sitting broke.
In other words, U)ho(m) and which are the only acceptable relative pronouns with fronted
prepositions.
The relative pronoun that can be used, however, if the preposition is not fronted along
with the relative pronoun:
The person that you were talking with is the principal.
The chair that you were sitting on broke.
Chapter 28: Introduction to Relative Clauses
615
Finally, we have already learned that the relative pronoun that replaces an object can be
deleted (e.g., I read the book you mentioned). This is also possible for relative pronouns that
substitute for objects of prepositions. Keep in mind, however, that the relative pronoun can
be deleted only if the preposition has not been fronted along with the relativized object NP:
Preposition not fronted	Relative pronoun deletion possible
The place which you spoke about is Denver. -> The place [ ] you spoke about is Denver.
Preposition fronted	Relative pronoun deletion ungrammatical
The place about which you spoke is Denver. *The place about [ ] you spoke is Denver.
Although relative pronoun deletion is possible when the preposition has not been fronted, Stauble
(1978) found that in all three discourse types she sampled, retention of the relative pronoun was
preferred over deletion. Where deletion was more frequent in Stauble’s data, the head noun was
almost always human. While Biber, Johannson, Leech, Conrad, and Finegan (1999) did not look
specifically at relative pronouns with prepositions, their analysis of zero-relativizers (i.e., relative
pronoun deletion) found that in all registers of spoken and written English, the majority of
restrictive relative clauses retained the relative pronoun, especially in academic prose (90 percent
of all restrictive relative clauses) (p. 620). Their analysis, however, does include relative clauses
for which relative pronoun deletion would not be possible. Thus, further research is needed on
the issue of deletion or retention of relative pronouns that substitute for objects of prepositions.
The Relativization of the Possessive
Determiner in the Embedded Sentence
The relative clause type we will look at next is one not illustrated in the chart on page 614. It
is an embedded construction that speakers use to express possession related to a noun in the
main clause. The basic structure for a sentence of this type follows:
The man whose wife you are admiring is a wrestler.
ร
SUBJ
NP
NP
det N
die man
cop NP
be det N
a wrestler
As the example shows, a determiner marked for possession (the man's) in the embedded
clause refers to a noun in the main clause (the man). The relative determiner whose substitutes
for the man's. When the relative determiner whose is fronted, the noun it modifies (wife) must
also be fronted (*the man whose you are admiring wife is a wrestler).
SIS
The Grammar Book
The Meaning of Relative Pronouns
Recall from the introduction that restrictive relative clauses modify head nouns and are thus
sometimes called adjectival or limiting clauses since they serve to restrict and identify the head
noun to that subset of individuals that the speaker wishes to refer to. However, we have
thus far been substituting relative pronouns for NPs without really being specific about the
rules governing their use. Every relative pronoun is entered in the lexicon together with its
semantic (and other) features. The feature specifications allow US to select the appropriate
relative pronoun depending upon the features of the NP it replaces and the discourse context
in which it will be used. The following are the relative pronouns in English and some of their
salient semantic and syntactic features:
who + subject NP which + subject/object NP
+ human	— human
whom + object NP that + subject/object NP
+ human	± human
whose ± human
+ possessive
+ determiner
Earlier in this chapter, we summarized some of the challenges for ESL/EFL learners
in producing English relative clauses as they concerned three dimensions: the position of
relative clauses, markers other than relative pronouns, and the presence or absence of
pronominal reflexes. Another important difference across languages concerns whether or
not relative pronouns distinguish the feature + human or -human of head noun NPs for
which they substitute. Descriptions of relative clause constructions for a number of languages
in Learner English (Swan & Smith, 2001) note that there is no equivalent of English who
used to replace NPs with the semantic feature +human. Dutch, German, French, Russian,
Polish, and Scandinavian languages are among those that do not have a relative pronoun
used only for this purpose. This difference may result in EFL/ESL students using which in
English to replace NPs that are +human. Some ESL/EFL learners may use the who/which
distinction to mark features related to their native languages that are not present in English.
Papaefthyrniou-Lytra (2001) notes that Greek learners of English may use who in relative
clauses to replace NPs that in Greek are masculine or feminine, while using which to replace
NPs that are neuter in Greek; thus, for example, a native speaker of Greek may modify an
inanimate noun in English with a relative clause using the relative pronoun who (p. 140).
Similarly, Smith (2001) points out that Arabic has three relative pronouns equivalent to
which, who, and that, which are used to distinguish the grammatical gender of NPs in Arabic
rather than human or non-human features (p. 206).
The Use of Relative Pronouns
and Relative Clauses
We will begin our discussion of use with an overview of the distributions of relative
pronouns in the registers identified in Biber et al. (1999), focusing on those that tend to
be most relevant to ESL/EFL learners, at least for language production: conversation,
Chapter 28: Introduction to Relative Clauses
617
news, and academic prose. We will also give attention to several relative pronoun pairs
and groups that are often the focus in ESL/EFL instruction, especially at more advanced
levels: the who/whom distinction, the use of that/who or which in restrictive relative clauses,
and the use of พhose/of which. Following this discussion of relative pronouns, we will turn
to uses of relative clauses in conversation and in writing.
RELATIVE PRONOUNJUSE
It should be no surprise that the relative pronouns who, which, and that were found by Biber
et al. (1999) to be the most frequent relativizers in restrictive relative clauses in their corpus
of spoken and written American English. That in particular was quite common in all registers;
as we have mentioned before, this relative pronoun, unlike who and which, is not restricted
in relation to the +/— human feature of the NP for which it substitutes. However, while
that was by far the most frequent relative pronoun in conversation, both who and which were
more common relativizers in news. And which was by far the most frequently used relativizer
in academic prose. Biber et al. note that animate (typically +human) references are not very
common in academic prose, thus resulting in less frequent occurrences of who and accounting
for the high frequency of which (p. 610).
Of course, another reason for the high frequencies of relative pronouns that and which is
that they can substitute for NPs in a range of syntactic positions (subjects, direct objects, and
objects of prepositions) unlike, for example, object pronoun whom or possessive determiner whose.
Who/Whom in Object Positions. The use of whom typically arises in instruction related to
writing for advanced ESL/EFL learners as well as native speakers. Although it would always
be prescriptively correct to use whom to replace a relativized human NP in object position as
a direct object or as the object of a preposition without a fronted preposition, native speakers
do not generally use it this way in spoken English. Often they opt for the simpler subject case
form, who, instead:
I spoke with the student who(m) I loaned the book to.
If, however, who(m) is replacing the object of a preposition and the preposition is fronted
along with the relative pronoun, whom will occur much more frequently:
I know the student to.
whom
?who
you loaned the book.
Although whom is quite rare in English conversation, it is used in more formal spoken contexts
such as in this example from COCA:
The companion whom she met online is behind bars. (C/V/V_Velez 2011,110815)
Regardless of register, whom is most frequently used as the object of a preposition and
not as a direct object. In the COCA spoken corpus (mostly TV news programs), for example,
whom, with prepositions accounts for over two-thirds of the total uses of whom (5037). Across
all registers, the most frequently occurring prepositions occurring with whom, are of and
with; of whom alone accounts for between 24 percent and 30 percent of tokens (including
direct objects as well as objects of prepositions) across spoken and written registers; with
whom represents 12 percent of all whom tokens in coca’s spoken corpus and a similar
percentage (14 percent) in the written categories of news, magazines, and academic prose.
Further, the lexical bundles consisting of quantifier + of whom (e.g., all/many/some of whom)
are quite common across all registers; such partitive constructions (see Chapter 17) account
for approximately half of the of whom uses in coca’s spoken corpus. These frequencies
618
The Grammar Book
and patterns for the use of whom suggest that for ESL/EFL instruction at advanced levels,
teachers may want to put more focus on the use of whom as a prepositional object rather than
as a direct object, particularly with commonly occurring prepositions such as of, with, for, by,
and to, as well as to provide instruction and practice with high-frequency lexical bundles such
as many of whom and some of whom, especially for academic writing.
That/Who or Which. As mentioned earlier, Biber et al. (1999) found that to be by far the
most frequently used relative pronoun in conversational English, where it is often preferred
over either which or who(m).
In written discourse, who(m) is usually preferred over that for human antecedents; which and
that are used to indicate a nonhuman head noun.3 However, sometimes that is used for human
antecedents in written registers, as in these examples from COCA’s academic prose corpus:
A teacher that is interactive with students, who cares and is enthusiastic impacts
students'enjoyment of physical education. [Smith, M & st. Pierre, R, 2009, Physical
Educator, 66(4), 209-221]
He'd be a man who could prance when he walked, a man that could really fool and
surprise you. [Atkins, J., 2012, Journal of American Culture, 35(2), 166-180]
Note, however, that in both these examples, who is also used for the same referent as that.
The frequent occurrence of that with indefinite pronouns (e.g., everybody and something)
as a head NP is discussed by Biber et al. (1999) as a pattern observed in academic and news
registers, as well as conversation (p. 617). The following examples from COCA’s academic
prose corpus illustrate both the dispreferred (less common) and preferred patterns:
Dispreferredi But chronic pain is something which nobody really wants to know about.
(Community Care, 2010,1822,28-29)
Preferred:	... students often view energy as something that enables organisms to
carry out a function, with objects either needing or having energy.
[Hartley, L. 2012, BioScience, 62(5), 488-496]
Whose/Of Which. Whose historically refers to a human head noun, including collective
nouns whose members are human, such as clubs, government agencies, or businesses. As
we mentioned earlier, however, corpus analysis of academic prose reveals that whose is often
used to indicate genitive relationships with inanimate, even abstract, nouns, as Biber et
al. (1999, p. 617) have pointed out. The following text examples from COCA’s corpus of
academic journals exemplify this use:
It does not include ecosystem services whose economic value... may nonetheless
provide critically important benefits.[Turner, พ., Brandon, K., Brooks, ไ·., Gascon, c., Gibbs,
H., Lawrence, K., Mittermeier, R., & Selig, E„ 2012, BioScience, 62(1), 85-92]
This plain ceramic jar... contains residue of a white cosmetic whose complex formula is
evidence for an extensive knowledge of chemistry among the city's ancient inhabitants.
[Lawler, A., 2011, Archaeology, 64(6), 24-31 ]
As for of which, Biber et al. (1999) note that this alternative form for possessive relationships
is, in general, less common than whose, but again academic prose stands in contrast to other
registers, with of which occurring almost as frequently as whose (p. 618), as in this example
from COCA:
Renovating the structure will be a slow and difficult project, the cost and duration of
which remain unclear. [Rose, G. 2012, Foreign Affairs, 91(1), 3-6]
Chapter 28: Introduction to Relative Clauses
SIS
In summary, tire teaching of these relative pronouns in ESL/EFL classrooms will need to
distinguish their uses across different registers, keeping in mind that some of them, such as
-whom and of-which, are in fact very rarely used in informal conversation.
THE USE OF RELATIVE CLAUSES
Recent studies of relative clause usage have been concerned with both their frequency
distribution across different genres and with semantic and discourse factors that may account
for different patterns of usage, especially as these patterns include the optional deletion of
relativized objects.
An overview of relative clause frequency is provided by Biber et al. (1999), supporting
the general impression that relative clauses are much more frequent in written registers than
in conversational English. Their analysis also indicates that for all registers, relative pronoun
deletion (what they refer to as “zero-relativizer”) is somewhat common in all registers, though
it occurs most frequently in conversation (p. 610).
Use of Relative Clauses in Conversation
Some of the most interesting and detailed research to date on the use of relative clauses
in spoken English has been conducted by Fox and Thompson (1990; 2007), who have
explored how the linguistic choices that speakers make in order to manage information flow
in interactional contexts affect the patterns of relative clauses used. The following sections
summarize the communicative functions related to specific patterns that Fox and Thompson
identified.
Grounding. As explained by Fox and Thompson (1990), grounding refers to the way in which
speakers make a newly introduced NP relevant for their listeners; that is, how they relate
it to a referent already known to their interlocutors (p. 300). So for example, a personal
pronoun (I, she, -we) representing a person or persons known to the listeners often provides
this relevance or grounding for a newly introduced NP:4
[The car] that she borrowed had a low tire. (SO)
One of the striking patterns that Fox and Thompson (1990) found, illustrated in this
example, is that when nonhuman head nouns functioned as subjects (e.g., car), the relative
clauses modifying them typically had relativized objects (e.g., that substituting for car) with
a context-relevant pronoun (e.g. she) serving as the subject of the relative clause. Through
the speaker’s use of a pronoun representing someone known to listeners in order to mark
the head noun’s relevance to the discourse, the entire relative clause (e.g., that she borrowed)
serves to ground, or anchor, a head noun that has not until this time been established in
the discourse. Here is another example from their data, with the object relative pronoun
deleted and the relative clause subject personal pronoun you referring to the interlocutor:
[The only thing] you'll see is the table. (SO)
Characterizing. A second pattern that Fox and Thompson (1990) identified was that in which
nonhuman head NPs functioned as objects of the main clause, with relativized subjects in the
modifying relative clause: an OS type, as in these examples from their data:
o ร
They're selling [these candies] that explode when you chew on them.
o ร
I don't like [the pants] that come down narrow and then bell out.
620
The Grammar Book
The relative clauses in this pattern had a strong tendency to characterize or describe
the head NP rather than functioning to anchor or ground it, as we saw in the so pattern. The
object noun heads (e.g., these candies, the pants') tend to be definite and already grounded in
the discourse, so the relative clauses simply provide descriptive information about them.
Giving New Information. Another pattern of relative clause use in Fox and Thompson’s
(1990) data involved sentences with “existential” head nouns (i.e., logical subjects) following
nonreferential there subjects (see Chapter 23):
logical subject
There were [two people] there who were constantly on stage.
logical subject
เท the บ.ร. there are [over a hundred thousand people] who are over a hundred years old.
As in these examples, the logical subject head nouns tend overwhelmingly to have indefinite
determiners (e.g., two, over a hundred thousand) but are specific in reference as well as being human.
Furthermore, they strongly favor relativized subjects (who in these examples) over relativized
objects. In these two cases, the italicized locatives there and in the บ.ร. ground the head nouns in
the discourse.5 With this grounding, the relative clauses move the discourse ahead—that is, they
provide new information that contributes to the development of the discourse.
Use and Non-Use of Relative Pronouns for Object Relative Clauses
In a more recent study, Fox and Thompson (2007) again closely examined features of relative
clauses in conversational data, but this time, they turned their attention to the discourse
factors that influence speakers’ choices in the use or non-use of relative pronouns for object
relative clauses. In other words, they looked at what factors might account for the choice to
use a relative pronoun when it is optional or, as commonly occurs in conversational English,
to use a zero-relativizer. The following examples from their data illustrate this variation:
Relativizer: I have [one] that you can use.
Zero-relativizer: There was [something] we needed.
Analyzing 195 relative clauses for which they determined a relativizer was optional, they
identified seven variables that they found strongly correlated with the presence or absence
of a relative pronoun. We present here five variables that seem most relevant for pedagogical
purposes, with all examples from their data.
1.	Emptiness of the Head NP
Empty Head NPs were defined as “those which are not lexically specific and/or which
index generic groups or sets of individuals or objects” such as time, thing, way and all
(p. 297). Empty Head NPs tend to be followed by zero-relativizers, as in this example:
Is there [any way] he could like, meet US in Great Falls or something?
2.	Complexity of Main Clauses
Fox and Thompson found that complex main clauses favored a relativizer, while less
complex clauses correlate with a zero-relativizer. They measured complexity of main
clauses in two ways. First, they determined the number of words in the Head NP; longer
Head NPs tended to be followed by a clause with a relativizer:
[this pair of suede pants] that I got.
A measure of less complex main clauses was the presence of a copular verb. Zero-
relativizers were typically used with Head NPs in copular clauses, such as a predicate
nominal, as in this example:
that's just [a bed] they move around.
Chapter 28: Introduction to Relative Clauses
621
Z. บทique Head NPs
These NPs, including superlatives and those with the modifiers only and first, without
exception, took zero-relativizers in Fox and Thompson’s (2007) data. An example is
the following:
that's [the first compliment] I've got เท a long time,
4.	Length of the object relative clause
As with the length of the Head NP discussed in (2), the length of the relative clause
affected the use of the relativizer, with longer and more complex clauses, such as the
following, favoring relativizers:
[all the stuff] that Vicki's told me that she pulls.
5.	Personal pronouns as subject of object clauses
When the subject of an object relative clause is a personal pronoun, the object relativizer
is typically omitted:
I have [two cats] I'd like to turn in to the Humane Society.
Fox and Thompson (2007) note that this finding supports those in Biber et al. (1999)
for all registers, but that they found this correlation to be most frequent in their
conversational data when the personal pronoun subject is I, as in the previous example.
While we would not advocate that these findings be presented as a set of rules for
ESL/EFL students in developing conversational skills, instructional contexts may arise in
which students have questions about conversational forms they see in written texts, such as
newspapers, magazines, and fiction, that include conversation or other spoken dialogue with
zero-relativizers. And, as we will discuss further, the question of what factors account for
variation in the use of use or non-use of relativizers is relevant to written discourse as well.
One final point that Fox and Thompson (2007) make is that speakers tend to use zero-
relativizers in contexts in which the main clause and the relative clause are most closely
integrated with each other. They consider these constructions to approach what they call a
“monoclausal” status; that is, the utterances with these clauses are more like a single clause
than two clauses (e.g., It's the stuff I like.). They note that these constructions are similar to
Jespersen’s (1933) description of “contact clauses” that have no connecting words between
them. We can expect that ESL/EFL students may not be consciously aware of many relative
clause constructions they encounter in spoken English that are different in their forms and
functions from those in written discourse.
Use of Relative Clauses in Writing
Biber et al.’s (1999) large-scale corpus analyses of written and spoken English confirms
what past studies have indicated in terms of the higher frequencies of relative clauses in
written registers. Restrictive relative'· clauses are more frequently used in fiction, news,
and academic prose than in conversation. And even zero-relativizers are more frequent
per million words in all written registers.
Discourse motivations for the choice between a zero-relativizer and a relative pronoun
have been explored in written discourse, as well as in conversation. Temperley (2003),
examining relative clauses in the Penn Treebank corpus of articles from The Wall Street Journal,
considered lexical and syntactic factors that influenced whether or not an object relative
pronoun was used. He identified two primary factors influencing the use of the optional
object relative pronoun: (1) ambiguity avoidance; that is, the need for clarity of meaning in a
construction that without the relative pronoun is potentially ambiguous; and (2) anaphoricity
622
The Grammar Book
of the relative clause subject; i.e., whether or not the subject pronoun of the relative clause
has been previously mentioned. Both motivations involved the nature of the relative clause
subject used. Temperley points out that relative subjects that are plural or mass nouns without
determiners can, if adjacent to the head NP modified, be misinterpreted as part of the head
noun as in this example:
{declared bankruptcy.
like to lease is a Ford Taurus, (relative clause)
Temperly notes that ambiguity would be much less likely in the case of relative clause subjects
with modifying adjectives (e.g., large companies) instead of nouns (car companies). Just as Fox
and Thompson (2007) found in their conversational data, if the relative clause subject is a
pronoun (e.g., they) with anaphoric reference to previous discourse, the writer tends to choose
a zero-relativizer for the object pronoun. In summary, Temperley proposes that the desire
to avoid ambiguity can account for writers’ use of object relative pronouns in cases where
anaphoricity of the relative clause subject is not an issue.
Other recent research on the use of relative clauses in written texts has revealed the
important functions they serve in specific academic genres. Tse and Hyland (2010), in
a study concerned with relative clause use in academic journal article descriptions across
disciplines, found that these constructions typically restricted or defined the scope of nouns
that related to four topics: the format of acceptable contributions to the journals (e.g., [studies]
that contribute to the fundamental understanding of fluid phenomena1: the research themes
(e.g., studies on [species] which are more primitive}·, the journal itself (e.g., [an international journal]
that publishes research.. .*) and the audience (e.g., [readers] ... who are interested in qualitative,
discourse analytical approaches}. Over half of the uses across all disciplines involved describing
the formats of studies that journals accepted. However, the disciplines varied as to the
frequency with which NPs were modified by relative clauses for the other three topics. For
example, engineering journals used a much higher proportion of relative clauses specifying
the journal’s research themes than its audience, while sociology journals more often used
relative clauses to describe the readership than research themes. In discussing their findings,
Tse and Hyland emphasize the value of looking at the functions of relative clauses in both
research and teaching.
While relative clauses are certainly an important grammatical construction to focus
on in the teaching of writing, it should be noted that instruction in their use needs to be
contextualized and treated as part of a modification system that includes other, simpler forms.
Biber, Conrad, and Reppen (1994) found that relative clauses and participles are not nearly
as frequent as prepositional phrases used as adjective modifiers after nouns in three genres:
editorials, fiction, and letters. Thus, they recommend that teachers familiarize learners with
the range of constructions writers use for similar purposes and with the patterns that are
found in particular registers or genres. Some of these patterns will be taken up in more detail
in the next chapter.
RELATIVE CLAUSE VARIATION IN WORLD ENGLISHES
Finally, we should note that in recent decades, increasing attention has been given to
patterns of relative clauses in countries where English is widely spoken, such as Hong Kong
and Singapore. Gisborne (2000) summarizes a number of studies that have explored Hong
Kong English patterns not present in Standard American or British English. Such patterns
can help to explain what may be regarded as errors in Standard English when used by EFL
Chapter 28: Introduction to Relative Clauses
623
students. For example, Newbrook (1998) claims that the use of “zero” subject relatives such
as “This is the student did it” is so typical that Hong Kong students are often unaware that
it is nonstandard (p. 47). Another pattern identified by Newbrook in Hong Kong English is
also one seen frequently as a type of relative clause error in Standard American and British
English, a construction in which a subject relative pronoun is used with only a participle
for the main verb; i.e., the auxiliary has been omitted (p. 47):
This is the student who admitted last year.
According to Newbrook, this variation is a reduced relative clause with a redundant
relative pronoun. Also looking at Hong Kong English, Yip and Matthews (1995, as cited
in Gisborne, 2000; Yip and Matthews, 2007) have proposed that some relative clause
variations that differ from those in Standard English, such as the use of resumptive
pronouns (e.g., When we see a new chair at home that we never see it before...). may be
motivated by speakers’ attempts to make more difficult constructions such as oo easier
for listeners to process.
These and other studies remind US that it is helpful for teachers to know that learners’
grammatical “errors” may reflect a variety of English that differs in patterned and often
systematic ways from Standard English forms and to realize that these patterned variations
reflected a local variety rather than cross-linguistic influence.
Conclusion
In this chapter, we explored the syntactic diversity of restrictive relative clauses in
English. Without considering the use of whose as a relative determiner, there are at least
20 different structural types of restrictive relative clause, as exemplified in the chart on
page 614:
OO	(12 types)
OS	(4 types)
SO	(3 types)
ss	(1 type)
If we add the relativized determiner whose to these, there are at least 40 different types.
Learners clearly face formidable challenges of form when trying to master relative clauses:
where to place the relative clause in relation to the head noun, which relative pronoun to
choose, the internal structure of relative clauses, and so on. However, the studies on use that
we have reported here strongly suggest that instead of trying to teach all possible patterns
for relative clauses, we would do well to discover which patterns our learners are most likely
to need for their own oral or written discourse in English. Carrying out a relevant corpus-
based study of relative clauses that would reveal syntactic, lexical, and discourse-functional
patterns, such as those that Fox and’Thompson (1990; 2007) found for conversation and
Biber, Conrad, and Reppen (1994)_and Tse and Hyland (2010) found for written discourse,
would be a useful way for ESL/EFL teachers to decide what to teach about relative clauses
and when and how to present the information. Teachers or students can also consult the
Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English (MICASE) to search for discipline-specific
use of relative clauses. Usage tendencies seem to be linked very specifically to given discourse
genres, topics, and also to modality (speech versus writing). Much more research is needed
along the lines of the studies reported here if we are to establish better informed pedagogical
priorities in this area.
624
The Grammar Book
Finally, we can learn from cross-linguistic studies of relative clauses how their uses may
differ. For example, a study by Yan (1985) using parallel written texts in Chinese and English on
the same topic and of the same length reveals that Chinese uses one-third fewer relative clauses.
The difference is particularly significant in view of the fact that Chinese exhibits a structural
diversity similar to English in its inventory of relative clause types. Usage differences across
languages make it all the more imperative that ESL/EFL teachers present relative clauses to
learners in rich and clearly defined discourse contexts, rather than simply at the sentence level.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form. Ordinarily we don’t recommend introducing tree diagrams; however, for this
particular construction, it has proved helpful for our ESL/EFL students to be able to
see how relative clauses are formed in English. You may not wish to draw trees, but
introducing the concept of an embedded sentence and showing how relative pronouns
replace an NP in the embedded sentence seems to be a useful first step for many ESL/
EFL students. For instance, give students handouts with sentences in brackets embedded
within a main clause; for example:
The students [the students arrived late] missed the announcement.
Show them how the who is substituted for the coreferential NP. Have them do exercises
of a similar nature on their own.
2.	Form. Legin oral production using fairly tightly controlled contexts and perhaps only
concentrating on one relative pronoun at a time. For instance, use a class information
sheet to practice producing relative clauses with who. The students can make sentences to
identify one of their fellow students who has some unique attribute; for example:
The student who comes from Romania is.____________
The student who speaks French is.____________
The student who studies economics is.____________
A variation of this activity is for the teacher to create a worksheet with questions about
members of the class (e.g., Who is the student who speaks French?). Students then circulate
around the room finding one or more classmates who match the descriptions.
3.	Form/Meaning. In activities for beginning and low intermediate learners that involve
responding to commands as a technique for developing interactional proficiency,
teachers can ask students to complete tasks using that-clauses to describe concrete items
(Cuisenaire rods, classroom objects, or other realia), such as the following:
Pheng, give Misha the green rod that is beside the yellow one.
Darya, put the notebook that has a blue cover on my desk.
4.	Form. To develop proficiency in using the various forms of relative clauses, students will
need practice in noticing how the different types are constructed. To provide contextualized
practice, give students a passage to read (authentic or adapted) with examples of different
types of relative clauses. Have students work in small groups or pairs to identify all the
relative clauses. Ask the groups or pairs to put brackets around each relative clause and
draw a line under the relative pronoun, as in this example:
What are some of the qualities that make people happy? According to recent research,
people [who are happy] design their lives to bring joy into it. For example, they might try
Chapter 28: Introduction to Relative Clauses
625
to include an activity [that they really like], such as spending time with friends, into their
daily schedule. Expressing positive emotions is another trait [that happy people have]
and one [that may even increase longevity]. เท one study, nuns [whose autobiographies
expressed positive emotions such as gratitude and optimism] lived seven to 10-and-a-half
years longer than other nuns. (Adapted from "Five Things Happy People Do" by Gabrielle
LeBlanc: http://reggio1234.wordpress.com/2010/02/28/5-things-happy-people-do-by-
gabrielle-leblanc/)
To begin with, practice should focus only on relative clauses with explicit relative pronouns
(that is, not those with zero-relativizers or other reduced forms).
5.	Form/Meaning. Have students play a game in which they try to identify the name of
a person or thing you or another student is thinking of. You may wish to use a “Twenty
Questions” format, with the modification that questions must contain a restrictive relative
clause. Students ask questions such as:
Is this person someone who once was president of the United States?
Is this thing something (that) I would use in the kitchen?
6.	Form/Meaning. Have students work in small groups to create and conduct polls with
their classmates, asking them to complete statements about things they like related to one
or more topics of interest. They can use the following or a similar template statement to
complete: I like X who... /I like X that... For example:
I like teachers who...
I like movies that...
Responses could be elicited by having groups exchange their sentence completion tasks
with another group, or, if one topic, passing around a sheet of paper on which each
student could write a response. The completed responses can be returned to the groups,
who report on the results.
7.	Form/Meaning. Thewlis (2007) suggests an activity for relative clause production of
various types in which groups of students discuss “the ideal life partner.” Each group
would prepare a list of 5-10 statements based on their discussion. Thewlis gives the fol-
lowing as examples: The ideal partner is someone who takes an equal responsibility for raising
the children. The ideal partner is someone whom I can always trust (p. 215).
Groups could then present some of their statements to the class, commenting on
which met with most agreement or, conversely, were most controversial.
8.	Form. Advanced level students often find challenging the production (and sometimes
the comprehension) of relative clauses with prepositions in formal academic prose,
constructions in which the relative pronoun is fronted along with a preposition such
as in/at/for which. Such sentences-often express time or place relationships in academic
English and are frequently found in definitions of processes, concepts, or mechanisms.
To give students practice in writing sentences with this form of relative clause, find
examples from concordances such as COCA, try typing them into a search engine like
Google (e.g., at which, to whom^for which) to find text examples, or simply make up your
own examples from definitions. Then break the complex sentence into two sentences that
students will need to combine. The following is an example:
Original sentence: Photosynthesis is a process in which sunlight is used to
manufacture carbohydrates from water and carbon dioxide.
626
The Grammar Book
Sentences given to students:
a)	Photosynthesis is a process.
b)	เท this process, sunlight is used to manufacture carbohydrates from water and carbon dioxide.
Explain that when we want to combine the two sentences for better flow and conciseness,
we can “borrow” the preposition from the second sentence. Instruct students to identify
the repeated noun (in this case, process) and then place the preposition after that noun in
the first sentence following it with which and complete the sentence.
Here is another example:
a)	The turbine has two parts.
b)	The generator is connected to the turbine.
Original sentence: The turbine to which the generator is connected has two parts.
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1.	Provide an original sentence that illustrates each of the following terms. Underline the
pertinent word(s) in your examples.
a.	restrictive relative clause	d. relative pronoun substitution
b.	relativized object of a preposition	e. relative pronoun deletion
c.	relativized subject	f. relativized possessive determiner
2.	Draw tree diagrams for the following sentences:
a.	The boy who spoke with John is my d. Ann wrote the story you like.
brother.	e. The family with whom I am staying
b.	The boat that he is building is large.	lives in town.
c.	I know the student whose article
was published.
3.	Why are the following sentences ungrammatical?
a.	"The river who is wide is the Mississippi.
b.	"The woman with that you were working quit.
c.	"I thought about the man whose we heard story.
Test your ability to apply what you know.
4.	If your students produce the following, what will you tell them to make them aware of
the correct forms of relative clauses?
a.	"The woman whom is walking towards US is my aunt.
b.	"The boy who John hit him is on the ground.
c.	"The student sits next to me is sick.
d.	"That she is wrapping the package is for the holiday.
e.	"I like people they are friendly.
Chapter 28: Introduction to Relative Clauses
627
5.	An ESL/EFL student asks you to explain the difference between the following two
sentences:
a.	The person that called to you was a stranger.
b.	The person that you called to was a stranger.
How would you answer?
6.	Assume the following excerpt had appeared as part of an editorial in a small town
newspaper:
... a week earlier, this state's education commissioner, Bob Smith, reported that
the state's fourth- and eighth-graders cannot write well.... "It's a rare student that
writes really well with a sense of personal expression, or what teachers call voice,"
Smith said. Grammar probably isn't a strong point, either, especially if students
are taking their cue from Smith. The Commish, if he were speaking proper English,
would have said, "It's a rare student who writes really well... ."The pronoun "that"
refers to things;"who" refers to people.
Is the writer of this editorial correct in what he says about Smith's grammar?
Bibliography
REFERENCES
Biber, D., Conrad, ร., & Reppen, R. (1994). Corpus-based approaches to issues in applied linguistics.
Applied Linguistics, 15(2), 169-189.
Biber, D., Johannson, ร., Leech, G., Conrad, ร., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and
written English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ltd.
Davies, M. (2008). The corpus of contemporary American English (COCA): 425 million words, 1990-present.
Retrieved from http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/
Fox, B. A., & Thompson, ร. A. (1990). A discourse explanation of the grammar of relative clauses. Language,
66(2), 297-316.
Fox, B. A., & Thompson, ร. A. (2007). Relative clauses in English conversation: Relativizers, frequency, and
the notion of construction. Studies in Language, 31(2), 293-326.
Gisborne, N. (2000). Relative clauses in Hong Kong English. World Englishes, 19(3), 357-371.
Gustafson, L. (1992). Relative clause type and other relative construction frequency in talk show conversation
(Unpublished paper). University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
Jespersen, o. (1933). Essentials of English grammar. London, England: Allen & Unwin.
loup, G., & Kruse, A. (1977). Interference versus structural complexity as a predictor of second language
relative clause acquisition. In c. Henning (Ed.), Proceedings of the second language research forum, (pp.
22-3 5). Los Angeles, ÇA: University of California, Los Angeles.
Keenan, E., & Comrie, B. (1977). Noun phrase accessibility and universal grammar. Linguistic Inquiry, 8,
63-99.
Kuno, ร. (1974). The position of relative clauses and conjunctions. Linguistic Inquiry, 5(1), 117-136.
Loch, B. (1992). Relative clauses in published writing (Unpublished paper). University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN.
Newbrook, M. (1998). Which way? That way? Variation and ongoing change in the English relative clause.
World Englishes, 77(1), 43-59.
Papaefthymiou-Lyra, ร. (2001). Greek speakers. In M. Swan & B. Smith (Eds.), Learner English: A
teacher's guide to interference and other problems (2nd ed., pp. 129-144). Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
628
The Grammar Book
Reali, E, & Christiansen, M. (2007). Processing of relative clauses is made easier by frequency of
occurrence. Journal of Memory and Language, 57, 1-23.
Schachter, J. (1974). An error in error analysis. Language Learning, 24(2), 205-214.
Schumann,}. (1980). The acquisition of English relative clauses by second language learners. In R. c.
Scarcella, & ร. D. Krashen (Eds.), Research in second language acquisition (pp. 118-131). Rowley, MA:
Newbury House.
Smith, B. (2001). Arabic speakers. In M. Swan, & B. Smith (Eds.), Learner English: A teacher's guide to
interference and other problems (2nd ed., pp. 195-213). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Stauble, A. (1978). A frequency study of restrictive relative clause types and relative pronoun usage in English
(Unpublished paper). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Swan, M., & Smith, B. (Eds.). (2001). Learner English: A teacher's guide to interference and other problems
(2nd ed.). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Temperley, D. (2003). Ambiguity avoidance in English relative clauses. Language, 79(3), 464—484.
Thompson, I. (2001). Japanese speakers. In M. Swan, & B. Smith (Eds.), Learner English: A teacher's guide
to interference and other problems (2nd ed., pp. 296-309). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Tse, p., & Hyland, K. (2010). Claiming a territory: Relative clauses in journal descriptions. Journal of
Pragmatics, 42,1880-1889.
Wong, J. (1991). Learnability of relative clauses: A Hong Kong case. Working Papers of the Department of
English, 5(1), 108-117. City Polytechnic of Hong Kong.
Yan, G. (1985). A contrastive textological analysis of restrictive relative clauses in Chinese and English written text
(Unpublished master’s thesis). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Yip, V., & Matthews, ร. (2007). The bilingual child: Early development and language contact. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
For other second language acquisition studies that examine the effect of native language background on the
acquisition of relative clauses by ESL/EFL learners, see:
Chiang, D. (1980). Predictors of relative clause production. In R. c. Scarcella & ร. D. Krashen (Eds.),
Research in second language acquisition (pp. 142-145). Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Dekydtspotter, L., Edmonds, A., Liljestrand, A., & Renaud, c. (2010). Modularity of L2 sentence processing:
Prosody, content, and morphology in relative clause ambiguity in English-French interlanguage. In
M. Iverson , I. Ivanov, T Judy, J. Rothman, R. Slabakova, & M. Tryzna (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2009
Mind/Context Divide Workshop (pp. 13-27). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Proceedings Project.
Gass, ร. (1980). An investigation of syntactic transfer in adult second language learners. In R. c. Scarcella &
ร. D. Krashen (Eds.), Research in second language acquisition (pp. 132-141). Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Montag, J. L., & MacDonald, M. c. (2009). Word order doesn’t matter: Relative clause production in
English and Japanese. In N. A. Taatgen, & H. van Rijn (Eds.), Proceedings of the 31th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2594—2599). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
For other studies investigating motivations for relative pronoun use, see:
Guy, G., & Bayley, R. (1995). On the choice of relative pronouns in English .American speech, 79(2), 148-161.
For more syntactically sophisticated analyses of relative clauses than the one we provide, see:
Baker, c. L. (1995). English syntax (2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jacobs, R. (1995). English syntax: A grammar for English language professionals. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
van Riemsdijk, H., & Williams, E. (1989). Introduction to the theory of grammar. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
For information on relative clause formation for many different languages, consult:
Keenan, E., & Comrie, B. (1979). Data on the noun phrase accessibility hierarchy. Language, 55(2), 333-351.
Chapter 28: Introduction to Relative Clauses
629
Maxwell, D. N. (1979). Strategies of relativization and NP accessibility. Language, 55(2), 352-371.
Swan, M., & Smith, B. (Eds.). (2001). Learner English: A teacher's guide to interference and other problems
(2nd ed.). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
For an article with pedagogical suggestions, see:
Nakamori, T. (2002). Teaching relative clauses: How to handle a bitter lemon for Japanese learners and
English teachers. ELTf, 56(1), 29-40.
For texts with exercises designed to give ESL/EFL students practice in forming and using relative clauses,
consult:
Bland, ร. K. (with Savage, A., & Mayer, p.). (2008). Grammar sense: Advanced grammar and writing 4. New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Cain, J. (2003). Eye on editing: Developing editing skills for writing 2 (pp. 54-62). White Plains, NY: Pearson.
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form,, meanings and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Houck, N., & Hilles, ร. (2009). Grammar connection: Structure through content 4. Boston, MA: Heinle,
Cengage Learning.
Pennington, M. c. (1995). Relative clauses. New ways in teaching grammar (pp. 25-37). Alexandria, VA: TESOL.
Porter, p, & van Dommelen, D. (2005). Ready write, edit: Grammar for college writers. Boston, MA: Houghton
Mifflin.
Thewlis, ร. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 3 (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage
Learning.
Wisniewska, I., Riggenbach, H., & Samuda, V. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 2
(4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Endnotes
1.	This is called center embedding.
2.	The percentages that emerge depend to a large extent on the data one uses. Examining exclusively oral
TV talk show data in English, Gustafson (1992) found more 00 clauses and fewer ss and so clauses than
stauble, but the overall rank order remained the same.
3.	Very often, professional editors change all which restrictive relative pronouns referring to nonhuman
antecedents to that. This serves to further distinguish restrictive and nonrestrictive relative clauses.
This is in fact the pattern found by Loch (1992) when she analyzed relative pronouns occurring in the
February 3,1992 issue of Newsweek.There are other differences between these relative pronouns that
we will call attention to in the next chapter.
4.	We have used examples adapted from those given in Fox and Thompson (1990) to illustrate their
generalizations.
5.	Fox and Thompson also show cases where propositional linking or propositional coherence provides the
grounding, but these examples are longer and more complex.
The Grammar Book
: H A p T
More on Relative
Clauses:
Nonrestrictive and
Relative Adverb Clauses
Introduction
In the previous chapter, we described restrictive relative clauses. In this chapter, we introduce
nonrestrictive relative clauses. Then we treat reductions that occur in both types of relative
clauses—restrictive and nonrestrictive, which account for a variety of structures. Finally,
we examine relative adverb clauses, which are additional relative constructions in English
that are formed by means other than relativizing a noun phrase or a possessive determiner.
Like the constructions that we described in Chapter 28, these relative clause types
have variants in structure that may pose challenges to English learners in their acquisition of
both forms and uses in different registers (e.g., in conversation versus academic prose). For
example, consider the underlined constructions in the following sentence pairs, which express
much the same information, la contains a nonrestrictive relative clause, and lb its reduced
form. 2a contains a restrictive relative clause, and 2b a relative adverb clause:
1.	a. We met the keynote speaker, who was an archeologist, during the reception
b. We met the keynote speaker, an archeologist, during the reception.
2.	a. That was the place inwhiçh they discovered ancient artifacts.
b. That was where they discovered ancient artifacts.
In teaching ESL/EFL learners, you will want to help them explore what factors may
account for the choices of speakers/writers when they have options such as the ones in these
examples. And, special attention may need to be given to constructions that are either not
used in students’ first languages or are used differently. Swan (2001), for example, cites the
restrictive/nonrestrictive distinction in English as a problem for native speakers of German.
As Swan observes, these speakers, in beginning to learn English, may not understand what is
ungrammatical about a sentence such as *Her mother, that lives in Paris, is visiting for a week.
631
The Form of Nonrestrictive
Relative Clauses
NONRESTRICTIVE^jfÊRSÜrRESTRICnvÊ^ELÃTÍvFaÃUSES
Thus far, the relative clauses that we have been examining limit or characterize the meaning of
the noun phrases they modify. Not all relative clauses have such a limiting function, however.
For instance, in the following sentence, we could just as easily do without the relative clause
yet remain sure of the identity of the head noun in the main clause:
Kay Jensen, who lives next door, is a lawyer.
The relative clause in this sentence is called a nonrestrictive relative clause. Since it merely
supplies additional information about Kay Jensen, it is not necessary for telling US which
woman is a lawyer in the same way that the restrictive relative clause is in the following
sentence:
The woman who lives next door is a lawyer.
Perhaps a contrastive example would be useful at this point. Compare the two following sentences:
The climbers who reached the summit were exhausted.
The climbers, who reached the summit, were exhausted.
As you already know, the first sentence contains a restrictive relative clause. We interpret
the head noun in this sentence, the climbers, as representing some portion of the group
of climbers who began the ascent: those who were successful at reaching the summit. In
the second sentence, the relative clause does not restrict the meaning of the head noun; we
understand that the head noun refers to the entire group of climbers. In other words, they
were all successful in reaching the summit and were all exhausted from their efforts. This
type of relative clause we term nonrestrictive. We signal this meaning in writing through
punctuation, usually commas, and in speech through pauses and lowered pitch.
While sentences with restrictive relative clauses have information embedded in the
main clause, sentences with nonrestrictive relative clauses contain two somewhat independent
pieces of information.1 For this reason, we adopt the convention of labeling the main clause ร 1
and the nonrestrictive relative clause as 82; we further indicate the status of the nonrestrictive
in relation to the main clause by bracketing it, as follows:
SI	52	SI
The climbers, [who reached the summit], were exhausted.
The two nonrestrictive relative clauses that we have discussed so far have contained
noun phrases that are identical to noun phrases present in the main clause:
Kay Jensen, who lives next door, is a lawyer.
The climbers, who reached the summit, were exhausted.
The other type of nonrestrictive relative clause has a relative pronoun (always which)
that refers to the entire preceding clause instead of just one noun phrase. For instance, in the
following sentence, the relative pronoun which refers to an event in the main clause (Jason’s
getting off.work early), and the nonrestrictive relative clause is a comment on this event:
Jason got off work early, which was nice.
In addition to the differences already mentioned, a number of other characteristics serve to
distinguish restrictive and nonrestrictive relative clauses. The following chart provides a summary
of these differences, adapted from the analysis provided in Stockwell, Schachter, and Partee (1973):
632
The Grammar Book
SUMMARY OF DIFFERENCES BETWEEN RESTRICTIVE AND NONRESTRICTIVE
RELATIVE CLAUSES
Restrictive	Nonrestrictive
1.	Provides information needed to identify or limit a noun in the main clause. 2.	Derived from an underlying embedded source. 3.	No pauses or special punctuation (commas, parentheses, dashes) to set off the relative clause from the main clause. 4.	May not modify an entire proposition, only a head noun. 5.	That is freely used as a relative pronoun (as well as wh-pronouns who(m), which, etc.) 6.	Does not usually modify proper nouns.2 7.	May modify a head noun with a generic determiner like any or every.	ใ. Provides additional information that is nonessential to determining the identity of a noun in the main clause. 2.	Derived from two independent underlying sentences. 3.	Commas (or parentheses or dashes) เท writing and special pauses and lower pitch in speech set the relative clause off from the main clause. 4.	May modify either a head noun or an entire proposition in the form of a comment. 5.	That cannot be used as a relative pronoun. Only wk-pronouns are possible. 6.	May modify proper nouns as well as common nouns.2 7.	May not modify a head noun with a generic determiner like any or every.
Later in this chapter, in the section entitled “Use of Nonrestrictive Relative Clauses,” we will
look at other differences between these clauses in spoken and written English.
REDUCTION OF RESTRICTIVE AND NONRESTRICTIVE RELATIVE CLAUSES
In the last chapter, we saw that relative pronouns that replaced some sort of object in the
relative clause could be deleted. For example,
The curry that I cooked was too hot.
allows deletion of the relativized object that·.
The curry I cooked was too hot.
We also noted that relative pronouns replacing the subject of the embedded relative clause
could not be deleted:
The ice skater who is in the show looks familiar.
*The ice skater is in the show looks familiar.
While the relativized subject pronoun, such as who in this example, cannot be deleted by itself,
deletion is possible if the subject is followed by a he verb.3
The ice skater in the show looks familiar.
In the sections that follow, we will look at several different types of reduced relative clauses
involving constructions that are noun phrase (NP) postmodifiers:
•	Prepositional phrases
•	Appositives
•	Present or passive participle phrases
•	Complex postnominal adjective phrases
To conclude our discussion, we will point out one type of -ing participle used as an adjectival
postmodifier that is not derived from a relative clause.
Chapter 29: More on Relative Clauses: Nonrestrictive and Relative Adverb Clauses
633
Prepositional Phrases
As we have just seen, a prepositional phrase modifying a head noun can occur from the
reduction of a relative clause:
The ice skater in the show looks familiar.
However, not all postnominal prepositional phrases are related to reduced relative clauses; recall
that in Chapter 5, we have an independent means of generating postnominal prepositional phrases
to account for such expressions as these: the city of New York, a man of means, a lady of leisure, and so on.
Then, too, prepositional phrase may sometimes be ambiguous as to whether it is a reduced
relative clause or an adverbial prepositional phrase. For example, consider this sentence:
Carla drew the picture in the den.
We may interpret the prepositional phrase in the den as telling US where Carla drew the picture, in
which case the prepositional phrase would be adverbial and the tree would look like this:
ร
SUBJ	PRED
NP aux"-	VP	ADVL
N	T	V	NP	PrepP
Carla	-past	draw det N prep NP the picture in det	N the	den
Alternatively, we may interpret the prepositional phrase as telling US which picture it was that
Carla drew (i.e., the one in the den, as opposed to the one in the dining room). This latter
interpretation requires a structure of a different sort, one where the prepositional phrase is
adjectival, originating in a restrictive relative clause which is subsequently reduced when the
subject relative pronoun that and the be verb are deleted:
SUBJ
NP
N
Carla
AUX
PRED
-past
det - N SUBJ
the picture NP
det N
the picture
PRED
634
The Grammar Book
Because of the potential ambiguity of prepositional phrases such as this, writers may opt to
use a full relative clause rather than a prepositional phrase when the intended meaning is
adjectival and not adverbial.
Appositives
Relative pronoun + be deletion can also operate on some of the nonrestrictive relative clauses
that contain a noun phrase with the same referent as an NP in the main clause:
Mr. Chun, who is our new neighbor, comes from Taiwan.
—> Mr. Chun, our new neighbor, comes from Taiwan.
Lansing, which is the capital of Michigan, has a population of 115,000.
—> Lansing, the capital of Michigan, has a population of 115,000.
In these examples, our new neighbor refers to Mr. Chun and the capital of Michigan refers to
Lansing, allowing deletion as shown. The resulting phrase is what traditional grammarians
refer to as an appositive—that is, a word or phrase following an expression that gives further
information about that expression.
Present or Passive Participle Phrases
Deleting relative pronoun + be may also produce constructions with participle phrases. When
a restrictive relative clause contains a relativized subject and a verb in the progressive aspect,
deletion of the relative pronoun and be will result in a present participle phrase modifying the
head noun:
Full relative clause
How old is that boy who is riding the surfboard near the pier?
Present participle phrase
How old is the boy riding the surfboard near the pier?
Another participle construction results when the relativized subject + be is deleted from a
relative clause in the passive voice:
Full relative clause
The surfer who was tossed by the huge wave won the competition last year.
Passive participle phrase
The surfer tossed by the huge wave won the competition last year.
Complex Postnominal Adjective Phrases
The final type of sentence in which relative pronoun + be deletion can occur is when a
relativized subject and be copula are followed by a complex adjective phrase, such as an
adjective + prepositional phrase, as in this example:
Full relative clause
The editorial that was favorable to the project appeared yesterday.
Complex adjective phrase
The editorial favorable to the project appeared yesterday.
Participles That Do Not Derive From Relative Clauses
It should be noted that there are also adjectival -ing participles that could not possibly be
accounted for via relative pronoun + be deletion. Recall that verbs which are stative rather
Chapter 29: More on Relative Clauses: Nonrestrictive and Relative Adverb Clauses
635
than dynamic (e.g., be, know, hear, measure, etc.) rarely take progressive aspect, yet stative verbs
can and do occur as adjectival participles:
Max built an additional room measuring 12 by 12 feet.
This -ing participle cannot be derived from a reduced relative clause:
*Max built an additional room, which is measuring 12 by ใ 2 feet.
How to account for the structure of such adjectival participles remains an unsolved problem
in need of further research.
The Form of Relative Adverb Clauses
Another relative construction that we have yet to discuss is the relative clause that begins with
a relative adverb. Consider the following:
Sam knows the place where we're meeting and the time when we're meeting, but he
doesn't know the reason why we're meeting.
We claim that each of the underlined clauses here are related to and therefore analyzable in a
manner similar to restrictive relative clauses of the sort that we have already analyzed in the
preceding chapter. Let US examine the tree for one of these clauses.
Sam knows the place where we are meeting.
ร
รบBJ
PRED
NP
AUX
V
N
NP
ร
636
Sam
-pres
know NP
det
the
SUBJ
PRED
place
NP
AUX
The Grammar Book
N
At this point, we produce:
Sam knows the place at which we are meeting.
However, another possibility also exists. We could produce a less formal variant of this sentence
by substituting the relative adverb where for the locative prepositional phrase at which:
Sam knows the place where we are meeting.
Here is the semantically related relative adverb for the corresponding preposition and relative
pronoun combination:
prep + which [+ place)-» where
prep + which [+ time]-» when
prep + which [+ reason]—» why
There is also one other combination that we will examine shortly:
prep + which [+ manner/way]—»how
The other two clauses in our original sentence are produced in the same way. They are less
formal variants of clauses in which the preposition and the relative pronoun are retained:
Sam knows the time at which we are meeting —»
Sam knows the time when we're meeting.
Sam doesn't know the reason for which we are meeting -»
Sam doesn't know the reason why we're meeting.
___________________________________________________________________
HEAD NOUN DELETION ________________
You may have noticed that although it is perfectly grammatical to say the place where in Sam
knows the place where we are meeting, it does seem redundant. A less redundant and less formal
variant of such a statement is:
Sam knows where we are meeting.
Here, we delete the head noun where the use of both the head noun and the relative adverb is
redundant. Such a structure is often called a free relative since it allows a relative adver clause
to exist without a head noun in the surface structure. It could apply to our other example
sentences as well:
Sam knows the time when we are meeting. —»Sam knows when we are meeting.
Sam doesn't know the reason why we are meeting. -»Sam doesn't know why we are meeting.
Although deletion of the head noun is optional in all three of these instances, it becomes
obligatory if the relative adverb is how:
*That is the way how he writes.
By deleting the head noun, this sentence becomes grammatical:
That is how he writes.
It is interesting to note that the sequence “the way how” was acceptable in earlier forms of
Standard English and still is acceptable in some dialects—but not in Present-day Standard
English. ESL/EFL students predictably have trouble with this exception.
Of course, while we say that head noun deletion is optional except for the relative
adverb how, the head noun cannot be deleted without a concomitant loss of information in
those cases where it is more specific than the general norms the place, the time, the reason, the
way/manner.
Chapter 29: More on Relative Clauses: Non restrictive and Relative Adverb Clauses
637
Here are a few examples from the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA)
(Davies, 2008), in which the head noun contains more specific information:
It was the time of day when the temple was closed to the general public... (Heat of the
Night by Silvia Day, 2008)
I had never seen coffee until I went to the village where I'm a resident now and met
with second and third-generation coffee farmers. (Ebony, June 2005).
In such cases, deleting the head noun would result in a sentence that is less precise semantically.
RELATIVE ADVERB DELETION	~
Another way to make sentences of “the way how” type acceptable is to delete the relative
adverb:
That is the way he writes.
Relative adverbs where, when, and why can also be deleted after the head noun as in these examples:
... the place I lived longest in mv life was Hanoi. (COCA, Christian Science Monitor, 2008)
The first time you mention or you quote from one of the authors that you read for this
essay for this paper that you're writing, footnote that person. Okay? (Michigan Corpus
of Academic Spoken English, Simpson, Briggs, Ovens & Swales, 2002) (MICASE, Transcript
SEM300MU100)
... students said right out the reason I want to speak Spanish is because I want to be
considered Latino. (MICASE,Transcript STP355MG011)
It is not clear, however, what the exact conditions on relative adverb deletion are. For instance,
the relative adverb where cannot always be easily deleted for all speakers of English:
?Jersey City is the place I was born.
If the preposition is retained, grammaticality is restored:
Jersey City is the place I was born in.
Or, if the head noun is deleted but the relative adverb retained, the sentence is also grammatical:
Jersey City is where I was born.
Further study is needed to determine precisely when it is appropriate to delete the relative
adverb as opposed to deleting the head noun. In fact, we mention this topic again along with
some related issues of use at the end of this chapter.
Nonrestrictive Use of Relative Adverb Clauses
While the majority of relative adverb clauses occur in restrictive relative clauses, the relative
adverb clauses with where and when are also found in nonrestrictive clauses, as illustrated in
these examples from COCA:
Most emissions originate from fires set in tropical rain forests and savannas, where
they cause recurrent episodes of severe pollution that affect some of the poorest
regions of the world. (Environmental Health Perspectives, May 2012)
The percentage of working adults is at Its lowest level since 1983, when women were
still entering the workforce, (Mechanical Engineering, April 2012)
Although the nonrestrictive clauses above both occur at the end of sentences, such clauses can
also occur sentence medially:
Back in 2000, when the USDA was developing the National Organic Program standards,
the first draft did not prohibit genetically modified foods. (Futurist, May/June 2012)
638
The Grammar Book
FREE RELATIVE CLAUSES VIA SPECIAL SUBSTITUTION
In our previous discussion of head noun deletion, we indicated that a head noun can be
deleted when it is semantically redundant with the relative adverb (e.g., deleting time before
’พheท or deleting place before inhere). Head noun deletion can also occur in the absence of an
adverb clause when the head noun functions as a subject, object, or predicate noun:
The new teacher is just the (person/one) who we're looking for. —>
The new teacher is just who we're looking for.
Here are some corpus examples from MICASE:
A lot of the... offenders we're now admitting... are not maybe as dangerous
as... who we're letting out [of prison]. (Transcript SEM340JG072)
How do we understand the connection between who we think we are and
... the institutions that we attempt to build. (Transcript COL999MX036)
We cannot, however, delete a head noun from certain combinations of head nouns and
relative pronouns. For example, the predicate head nouns in both of the following sentences
from COCA need to be retained:
It was something that I couldn't change. It was just the person that I was. (NPR Talk of the
Nation, 2011 [110205])
Another possibility is to substitute the free relative pronoun what for the thing that/which
when the head noun is nonhuman.
Painting is the thing (that/which) he does best. -> Painting is what he does best.
The examples so far have shown predicate head nouns followed by relative pronouns. Here
are additional examples showing free relatives in subject positions:
Who you are usually determines how you're doing and where your interests lie. (Natural
History, July/Aug 2003)
What she does is a lot harder than what I do. (20/20,2011 [1101181)
Through increasingly accessible corpus data, ESL/EFL teachers can find appropriate
examples to help learners become familiar with the forms and uses of these constructions in
a variety of spoken and written contexts.
Use of Relative Clauses
RELATIVE PRONoinr+^	____________
Earlier in this chapter, we indicated that relative pronoun + be deletion is optional. By now,
you understand that when we use the term optional, we mean that the sentence is grammatical
with or without the application of the particular operation. However, we do not mean that
the operation is arbitrary. Presumably, there are discourse constraints limiting the application
to appropriate contexts. To date, much of the research on functional differences between full
relative clauses and their reduced forms involving relative pronoun + be deletion has looked
at the frequency and use of these constructions in scientific and technical writing, especially
in academic journals. Huckin and Olsen (1983) state that, in general, choosing between a
full clause and a reduced form depends on how much emphasis a writer wants to give the
information expressed in a relative clause, with a full clause demanding more attention.
Other researchers have more closely examined the pragmatic goal of emphasis and
attention in text analyses. VandeKopple (1998) identified distinct differences in the ways that
Chapter 29: More on Relative Clauses: Nonrestrictive and Relative Adverb Clauses
639
relative clauses were used to modify concepts in physics research reports in the 20th century,
as compared to ones written in the late 19th century. While he cautioned that his findings
could not be generalized to all science writing, let alone writing in general, VandeKopple
found striking differences in usage patterns in the 262 relative clauses he examined. For
example, the earlier 19th century articles used full relative clauses in describing instruments
and procedures as in this example from his data (p. 180):
At the back of the prism a small pocket was constructed, one side of which was
formed by the wall of the prism itself. (Nichols, 1895)
In contrast, the articles published in the late 20th century often condensed such
descriptions to postmodifying phrases such as participle or prepositional phrases:
...a Perkin-Elmer PS-18 photoelectron spectrometer modified for digital counting
and high temperature studies. (Rosenberg, Lee, & Shirley, 1980, p. 133)
VandeKopple (1998) explains this difference in forms for similar functions by pointing
out that the 19th century researchers needed to use full forms with verb tenses to describe
how new instruments were created, unlike in the later studies, in which the instruments were
known information to readers and could be generalized for many applications. He notes
that more recent articles often used full relative clauses to make use of modal verbs in these
clauses for commenting on processes that did or did not occur, as in this example he gave:
We note the absence of a peak corresponding to the transition, which should appear
at 19.08 eV. (Rosenberg et al., 1980, p. 136)
Master (2002) explored motivations for relative pronoun + be deletion in 18 technical
articles in nine science disciplines; for comparison, he also analyzed several articles in
TESOL Quarterly. Of 832 relative clauses that could undergo relative pronoun + be deletion,
most of them restrictive clauses, almost two thirds were reduced. To account for the use of
reduced forms versus full relative clauses, Master considered the syntactic environment of
each clause and also asked expert technical writers to account for use of full forms rather
than the optional reductions. Although his data included relative clauses that allow only
relative pronoun deletion (i.e., object relative pronouns), the great majority, 91 percent,
were of the type allowing deletion of be. His analysis found clauses tended more often to be
reduced when they were embedded in other subordinate forms, such as complement clauses
(see Chapter 31) or adverb clauses.
Eliciting feedback from two expert technical writers on 5 5 full relative clauses that could
have been reduced, Master (2002) identified several additional constraints on clause reduction.
One important reason he gave was that the writer wanted to emphasize the uniqueness or
particularity of a head noun. As an example, Master offers the unacceptable reduction to
a participle phrase in the sentence *The scientist discovering DNA was Frederich Meischer
(rather than the full clause icho discovered DNA) since the scientist refers to a particular person.
He compares this to the acceptable reduction in this generalization: The rings surrounding
Saturn contain small particles of ice, in which the participle phrase surrounding Saturn refers
to all of the planet’s rings, not one in particular (p. 218).
Another reason technical writers gave for not reducing relative clauses was to achieve
parallelism, for clarity, with another full relative clause (Master, 2002, p. 219):
These decisions have been based on studies that were sometimes poorly controlled
and that often gave conflicting results. (Hansotia & Broste, 1991)
One other possible reason for not reducing relative clauses involved the need to highlight
new information for readers, often presented at the end of the sentence (p. 221):
The temperature of 1 degree c was selected because it is the temperature threshold
that is used for predicting the development of winter wheat. (Howard & Dixon, 1990)
640
The Grammar Book
Close analyses of relative clause types in written texts, such as those analyzed by VandeKopple
(1998) and Master (2002), can provide a better understanding of how writers make choices
between full relative clauses and reduced forms and identify what discourse constraints may
either prevent or discourage reductions to prepositional, participle, or other phrases. Instructors
can help advanced level ESL/EFL academic writers consider motivations for these variations in
research reports in their field and to check their own writing in progress for appropriate usage.
Head Noun Repetition with Restrictive Relative Clauses
A variation of restrictive relative clause structures found in both spoken and written English
is one in which the speaker or writer repeats the head noun following a pause or comma and
then continues with a restrictive relative clause. The following are examples from COCA:
It was an entirely different love, a love that was true and sincere, and that
she was discovering on her own! (CBS 48 Hours, 2003)
For percussionist Donald Knaack, this is also the sound of joy, a iov which anyone,
from novice to virtuoso, can experience. (CBS Sunday Morning, 1998)
He was living a story, a story which didn't need to be rewritten... (Chicago Review, Winter 1997)
As the examples here illustrate, this pattern tends to follow a head noun that functions in the
main clause as either a predicate noun or direct object. The repetition of the head noun with
an indefinite article as a stylistic device serves to set off the description or elaboration that
follows.
USE OF N 0 NB ESTRICTÍVEREíÃtÍvÍCíÃÍÍSÍS~	■
Nonrestrictive Relative Clauses in spoken English
Analyzing non-restrictive ■zrZwÃ-clauses in British and American spoken English, Tao and
McCarthy (2001) discuss some of the problems identifying these clauses in interactional
data. For example, they observe that, unlike commas in written English, which distinguish
nonrestrictive clauses from restrictive ones, the pause in spoken English is not an absolute
marker of nonrestrictive clauses. Further supporting the observations of both Taglicht (1977)
and Fox and Thompson (1990) about the ambiguity of relative clause types in spoken English,
Tao and McCarthy found that some of the which-clauses they examined might be interpreted
either as a restrictive clause modifying a head noun or a nonrestrictive clause referring to an
entire event described in the main clause. The following is one of the examples they offer as
a “borderline” case (Tao & McCarthy, 2001, p. 657):
[Participants talking about whether the บ.ร. government has the right to restrain its citizens
with regard to special countries they could not travel to]
That changed again, a few years later they passed some laws, or something like that,
which did enable the government to.... to do ... urn.... visa res-restrictions.
In discussing this example, the authors state that the which-clause could be interpreted as a
restrictive clause modifying some laws or, alternatively, a nonrestrictive clause referring to the
event of passing some laws. In the end, they suggest that for communicative purposes, it may
not matter whether one can distinguish the clause as one of the two types.
Added to the difficulty of establishing the restrictive or nonrestrictive character of some
wZtic^-clauses in their spoken data, Tao and McCarthy (2001) observe that, in contrast to written
English, nonrestrictive which-clauses in spoken English often appear far from the head nouns,
indeed sometimes a number of interactional turns from the noun referent. In one of their
Chapter 29: More on Relative Clauses: Nonrestrictive and Relative Adverb Clauses
641
examples, the distance between the head noun phrase and the occurrence of the modifying
which-clause was eight speaker turns, and there were a number of intervening clauses.
Despite the challenges of identifying nonrestrictive which-clauses in spoken English,
Tao and McCarthy (2001) were able to analyze the functions of 692 of these clauses,
revealing that the great majority (87.4 percent) were syntactically of the continuative type
(that is, added after the main clause and functioning like additional sentences), in contrast to
appositive which-clauses, which are embedded in the main clause and cannot be extraposed.
The following are examples from their data (p. 654):
Continuative: Hi, we were just passing and we just noticed you were open which is
nice (Br.)
Appositive: ...right now we are looking at April fifteenth which is a Friday and ... April
sixteenth as the uh date for the public presentation) (Am.)
In addition to establishing continuatives as the preferred form of nonrestrictive which-
clauses in their corpora of spoken English, Tao and McCarthy found that the majority of all
nonrestrictive whic^-clauses (62 percent) served a single communicative function, which they
term “evaluation.” The function of evaluation, along with another very frequent use, which
they term “expansion,” account for almost all (93 percent) of the analyzed clauses in their data.
Nonrestrictive evaluation clauses were defined as “giving the speaker’s attitude, opinion,
or stance towards the message of the immediately preceding utterance(s)” (Tao & McCarthy,
2001, p. 663). A British English example is the following:
[Speaker is complaining about the materialism that dominates Christmas]
(Speaker 1) I know my brother goes into debt for the kids each Christmas you know
like if they don't spend two hundred pound on them you know it's not enough
(Speaker 2) Mm which I think is silly but that's the way of things today (Br.)
The other frequent function of nonrestrictive which-clauses, expansion,“refers to the addition
of information offered by the speaker as topically relevant, i.e., about the same person or
object, or as a projection of the informational needs of the listener,” as in this example (p. 664):
[Speaker 2 is on the phone checking seat allocations with Speaker 1, an airline employee,
for a forthcoming plane trip]
(Speaker ใ) What we've got is E and G, which is aisle and next to it
(Speaker 2) [Yeah]
Tao and McCarthy comment that clauses within the broad category of expansion are not
necessarily lacking some degree of evaluation but that they are not “overtly marked” as evaluative.
In summary, this large-scale study showed both a preferred syntactic type (continuative)
and a preferred function (evaluation) for nonrestrictive which-clauses in spoken English. This
information could be especially helpful for ESL/EFL learners in understanding their use in
English conversation contexts. Many ESL grammar books, with attention to written English
forms, put greater focus on appositive clauses embedded in main clauses, typically shown in
opposition to restrictive clauses in the same position but without punctuation.
Nonrestrictive Relative Clauses in Writing: Genres and Disciplines
It is in written registers that researchers and language teachers have given most attention
to the use of nonrestrictive relative clauses. From a range of corpus studies, it is clear that
these relative clauses are much less frequent than restrictive clauses. Biber, Johannson,
Leech, Conrad, and Finegan (1999, p. 603) found some variation across the written registers,
noting that nonrestrictive relative clauses account for approximately 30 percent of all
relative clauses in news, but only 15 percent of all relative clauses in fiction and academic
The Grammar Book
prose. Several corpus-based studies of written texts in science and technology found higher
frequencies of nonrestrictive clauses than identified in Biber et al.’s more general academic
corpus. In Master’s (2002) study of research articles across 10 disciplines, discussed earlier
in this chapter, about 23 percent of all relative clauses, including reduced forms, were
nonrestrictive. Likewise, Frodesen (1986) found that full nonrestrictive clauses accounted
for 23 percent of all full relative clauses in a corpus of written Chemical Engineering texts.
A study of nonrestrictive clauses in writing that included academic and news genres as well
as office memos was conducted by Eyring (1988). Interestingly, the rank frequency ordering of
nonrestrictive relative clause types in Eyring’s data matched that in Stauble’s (1978) study of
restrictive clauses in spoken and written data, which is discussed in Chapter 28. Eyring found
one additional type: the commentary relative clause (e.g ,,John didn’t come, which was unfortunate).
A COMPARISON OF FREQUENCY OF RESTRICTIVE AND NONRESTRICTIVE
RELATIVE CLAUSE TYPES
Frequency of RRCs (informal speech, spontaneous writing, and published writing) (Stauble, 1978)			Frequency of NRRCs (office memos, popular magazines, and journals) (Eyring, 1988)		
Type	Instances	Percent*	Type	Instances	Percent*
OS	234	55	OS	189	57
00	108	25	00	59	18
SS	52	12	SS	33	10
SO	30	7	SO Clause + comment on clause (cf.Tao and McCarthy's "evaluation")	8 41	2 12
Total	424	99	Total	330	99
*Percentages do not add upto 100 percent because the numbers have been rounded off.
Furthermore, Eyring found that the prototypical nonrestrictive relative clause in her database had a
head noun that was an identifiable inanimate common noun occurring in object position, followed
by the relative pronoun which functioning as subject of the nonrestrictive relative clause (p. 33):
Very high-level languages... allow people to... leave the cletails to the machine, which
must then search its database of domain-specific knowledge to complete the task.
Eyring’s findings thus argue against the traditional presentation of nonrestrictive relative
clauses as being prototypically center-embedded ss appositive constructions (e.g., The
computer, which had become obsolete, was recycled). Although such appositive constructions do
occur, the most frequent and typical nonrestrictive relative clause (and restrictive relative
clause as well) is the OS type, where the relative clause functions to add new information or
a comment to what has already been written or said about the head noun or the main clause.
Also interesting are some of the relative clause tokens in Eyring’s (1988) most informal
data: the interoffice memos. A few of these were similar to the intermediate cases that Taglicht
(1977) had found in oral data, ones that fall somewhere between a prototypical restrictive and
a prototypical nonrestrictive relative clause (p. 8):
I have hit a couple of minor glitches, that are probably pilot error...
Chapter 29: More on Relative Clauses: Nonrestrictive and Relative Adverb Clauses
643
We note here the use of that, a relative pronoun generally considered not acceptable in
standard written English for nonrestrictive relative clauses. We might expect these informal,
somewhat oral types to appear in e-mail correspondence as well.
Nonrestrictive Relative Clauses in Writing: Discourse Functions
Loock (2007), noting that studies of nonrestrictive clauses have tended to focus on their
syntactic distinctions, focuses instead on their discourse functions. In a written corpus
including news, academic writing, and fiction, Loock identified three discursive functions of
nonrestrictive relative clauses:
1.	The Relevance Nonrestrictive Clause
The most common of the three types that Loock (2007) identified, relevance nonrestrictive
clauses, are used to address the problem that writers often experience in not being certain
what information may already be known to their readers. These clauses provide what might
be new information for the uniformed reader, while at the same time signaling the content
as possible background information for the informed reader. As Loock puts it, it provides
“supplementary information in order to compensate for the discrepancies in the amount of
knowledge shared by the participants” (p. 346). Here are a few examples, with who- and which-
clauses, from his corpus:
It is hard to square his action with the Energy Policy and Conservation Act,
which authorizes the president to tap the reserve.
When Steven Soderbergh, who has already directed Clooney in Out of Sight,
phoned to tell me he was planning to remake the film, I jumped for joy.
Regarding the second of these examples, Loock comments that the nonrestrictive clause was
actually added by an editor of Metropolitan Eurostar Magazine (a fact noted explicitly in a
French version of the article), thus further supporting its status as additional information
needed for at least some of the readers in order to understand more fully the information in
the main clause.
2.	The Subjectivity Nonrestrictive Clause
Loock (2007) defines the discourse function of the subjectivity nonrestrictive relative clause
as one intended to express “an opinion, a judgment, or a comment from the speaker” (p. 353).
The following is an example:
The men's 4 X 100 m team, who might not have qualified anyway,
went out in the heats when they bungled a change-over...
Loock points out that explicit markers of opinion or judgments, such as I think or in my
opinion could be added to subjectivity nonrestrictive clauses. He adds that this type can also
provide a correction of what has already been said, as in this example he presents from Quirk,
Greenbaum, Leech, and Svartvik (1985-, p. 1246):
He imagined himself to be an artist, which he was not.
An observation that Loock makes regarding punctuation of nonrestrictive clauses in his data
is that those separated from the main clause by dashes (6 percent of the corpus) or parentheses
(3 percent) instead of commas are mainly the subjectivity type.
Loock (2007) also notes that the categories of relevance and subjectivity are not mutually
exclusive, with some cases lying somewhere between the two.
644
The Grammar Book
3.	The Continuative Nonrestrictive Clause4
The third, and least common, of the three types in Loock’s (2007) corpus, continuative
nonrestrictive clauses, serve to move events through narrative time, a function that he notes
is typically restricted to independent clauses. Here is an example from his data (p. 340):
Robinson College asks candidates to complete a questionnaire on their education
background, which is then used to help decide whether they are offered a place.
As in the example above, adverbs such as then, now, or later often appear in this type
of clause as explicit markers of an event subsequent to the one in the main clause. Although
the relative clause is syntactically subordinated to the main clause, the informational content
in this type is at much the same level as the main clause, a fact that Loock (2007) states has
previously been pointed out by Huddleston and Pullum (2002): “The continuative relative
has equality of informational status, presenting a further event in a narrative chain” (p. 1064).
As further support for the somewhat independent status of continuative clauses, Loock states
that coordinators such as and can sometimes replace the relative pronoun (e.g., and is then used
to help decide whether they are offered a place).
_______
In considering the uses of relative adverb clauses, the following questions are relevant to
language teaching: (1) What are their functions in discourse? (2) Which semantic types (i.e.
place, time, reason, manner) are most frequent across spoken and written registers? (3) How
do the structural variants of relative adverb clauses differ across registers?
Discourse Functions
The functions of relative adverbs have not, it seems, received the same research attention as
relative pronouns have. Snow (1978) observed that relative adverbs often occur in sentences
that refer to a previously mentioned idea. A look at examples of relative adverbs when, where,
and why following generic head nouns such as time, place, and reason in COCA supports Snow’s
observation. In the following examples, the italicized demonstrative pronouns this and that
and the personal pronoun it all refer to previously mentioned topics:
This represents the time when we all grew UP. (Atlanta Constitution, 2010 [100307])
I mean, it was just the time when nobody knew what was going to happen. (NPR Talk of the
Nation, 2010 [100414])
This would seem to be the place where he would do well. (PBS NewsHour, January 10,2012
[120110])
Then the government stepped in and created the laws against these methods. That is
the reason why all of our butchers are gone! (Mother Earth News, Apr/May 2012)
We also see this type of reference to a previous idea with the relative adverb how (which does
not allow a head noun) and the head noun the way (which does not allow the relative adverb
how) preceding a clause:
This is how the business works now. (American Primetime, 2012)
Whether authorized or unauthorized a good biography is nuanced and complex,
because that is the wav most people are. (American Scholar, Winter 2011,80.1)
In referring to previously mentioned ideas, relative adverbs may introduce additional
information such as comparisons to other times, places, reasons, or ways of doing something:
That is very different from a place where people come up with new ideas, where
students know how to think, not what to think. (Christian Science Monitor, 2011 [1104426])
Chapter 29: More on Relative Clauses: Nonrestrictive and Relative Adverb Clauses
645
While our examination of numerous examples of relative adverbs in the COCA does not
represent a formal analysis, it is worthwhile noting for teaching purposes that there is lexical
patterning of relative adverb clauses with particular constructions, ones that may have specific
discourse functions. These are patterns that an English speaker (or at least a language teacher!)
might come up with in brainstorming examples of relative adverbs with generic head nouns.
For example, the co-occurrence of there’s with a reason why is common, and as you might
expect, introduces the speaker or writer’s reason and highlights or emphasizes it:
There's a reason why engagements exist: so that a couple can get to know one
another in this heightened state of commitment. (Redbook, October 2011)
There's a reason why bond yields are so low. The economy is stuck in low gear,
unemployment is 8.2% and the rest of the world isn't in better shape. (Money,
2012 [120623])
Another example would be the lexical bundle that’s the way we + VP which sometimes
functions as a summary statement:
That's the way we do things. (Analog Science Fiction & Fact, Jan/Feb 2012)
That's the way we look at it. (Chicago รนท Times, 2007 [20070313])
Introducing patterns of usage such as these can help ESL/EFL learners acquire common
ways that relative adverbs are used in both speaking and writing.
Distribution of Semantic Types Across Registers
In the registers of conversation, fiction, news, and academic prose, Biber et al. (1999)
found that where was by far the most frequent relative adverb in all registers, though
it was less common in conversation than in the written registers. An analysis of the head
nouns that preceded where revealed differences across registers: whereas the head nouns in
conversation, fiction, and news usually referred to physical locations, in academic prose, head
nouns preceding where frequently referred to “logical locations” (p. 625). Here are examples
of the latter that we found in the COCA:
Figure 12 shows a case where artists chose to draw lines on locally weak ridge and valley
features... (Communications of the ACM, January 2012, 55.1)
We have come to a point where our thinking has to change... (Technology & Engineering
Teacher, 2012, 71.7)
Relative adverb clauses with the form [preposition + which] were also found to be
common in academic prose but not so frequent in other registers; in particular, in which was as
commonly used as where in academic prose, with to which the next most common. Of course,
both in which and to which can refer to time as well as place, accounting to some degree for
their high frequency. Also, as noted in Biber et al. (1999), in academic prose, a great variety of
lexical items appear as head nouns preceding [preposition + which] (e.g., a statey an apparatus,
the context) (p. 630).
STRuciuRüEVüRIÜ ^TSücRossREGISTERS
Accounting for the uses of the structural variants across registers is a challenge for language
researchers, considering that we have as many as six variants5 that could exist in a sentence in
which a relative adverb may occur:
646
The Grammar Book
Type
1.	Relative pronoun fronted without preposition
2.	Relative pronoun deletion
3.	Preposition is fronted with relative pronoun
4.	Relative adverb substitution
5.	Head noun deletion
6.	Relative adverb deletion
Example
1980 was the year (which/that) I was born in.
1980 was the year I was born in.
1980 was the year in which I was born.
1980 was the year when I was born.
1980 was when I was born.
1980 was the year I was born.
In Snow (1978), a comparison of the last three of these types found that the full form
exemplified in 4 (head noun + relative adverb) occurred most often in written or formal
contexts. Biber et al. (1999) add to this observation that the generic head nouns place, time,
and reason, in particular, are quite commonly followed by their corresponding relative adverbs
where, when, and why (p. 626), a tendency that we have also noted in examining many examples
from COCA.
Sentences with head noun deletion, such as in type 5 above, occurred most frequently in
Snow’s (1978) data in spoken and informal contexts. Here is an interview example illustrating
this type from COCA:
That was where he had his best times. (NPR Fresh Air, 2006 [2006130])
Informal spoken English also seems to be the register in which the types shown in 1 and 2
most typically occurred in Biber et al.’s (1999) corpus, though not with high frequency. As for
sentences with the head noun alone, as in 6, Snow found this to be the least frequent type in
both written and spoken data for relative adverbs of time, place, and reason. However, when
the relative adverb was how, there was a strong preference for use of the head noun alone (e.g.,
the way), as in the examples that we presented earlier in our discussion of lexical patterning.
SOME COM-	—
The line between use of a relative adverb and use of a regular relative pronoun is sometimes
rather fuzzy. In certain environments either form seems possible without obvious differences
in meaning. Also, we could delete either overt relativized element and still have a grammatical
sentence:
Four in the afternoon is the time (when/that/0) he always swims.
However, if we delete the head noun, only the relative adverb remains a grammatical option:
Four in the afternoon is (when/ "that/ *0) he always swims.
When the head noun occurs as the object of a preposition, there seems to be a strong
preference for that, or no pronoun at all, over the use of a relative adverb, which seems
unacceptable here:
My father will have arrived by the time ("when/ that/0) the train gets to town.
Why these preferences emerge is not completely clear. We do know that relative adverbs work
best if they replace a [preposition + which] in the relative clause. This is why the following
sentence is odd:
?The school where I attended is going to be demolished.
Here, the proposition underlying the relative clause is simply I attended the school, not I attended
at/in the school·, that is, there is no locative prepositional phrase with a relativized which as its
object that where can replace. Therefore we have to say instead:
The school (that) I attended is going to be demolished.
Chapter 29: More on Relative Clauses: Nonrestrictive and Relative Adverb Clauses
647
The relativized object is, of course, optional in this sentence.
Finally, the fact that the way that but not the way how can occur in modern English
Can you show me the way (that/*how) this corkscrew works?
suggests that some relative adverb clauses that were previously only adverbial may be shifting
to NP ร adjectival-type relative clauses, so perhaps we should add a seventh pattern to the
preceding six to allow for this possibility. It would be useful to have a unified treatment of
these residual issues; for now, they remain topics for further research.
Conclusion
In this chapter, we further explored relative clauses to account for nonrestrictive as well as
restrictive relative clauses. The formal differences between restrictive and nonrestrictive relative
clauses reflect differences in meaning that are often unclear to learners. (We should note,
however, that this distinction is often confusing for many English speakers as well.) Also, many
learners have never before been introduced to the largely oral commentary-type nonrestrictive
relative clause that modifies or makes a comment on the entire preceding main clause. A final
challenge involves the use of commas in writing; many writers omit commas when the meaning
is clearly nonrestrictive. Especially at the advanced levels, students may be familiar with many
of the forms and meanings of these constructions but less so with their uses in real contexts.
We have shown that for both restrictive and nonrestrictive relative clauses the proto-
typical form in naturalistic data is OS. This is something that needs to be addressed in language
pedagogy, where there has long been a traditional preference for presenting and teaching ss
type relative clauses (both restrictive and nonrestrictive) over other more frequently occurring
combinations of head nouns and relative pronouns.
Once the various possible patterns for relative adverb clauses have been made clear to
learners, the variants discussed in this chapter present challenges primarily in use. When should
one substitute a relative adverb for [preposition + which], and when should the head noun or the
relative adverb be deleted? We admit that our own answers to these questions are not complete
and that more research is needed. This also applies to deciding when one should retain the head
noun and relative pronoun (the person who/that; the thing which/thaf) or substitute a free relative
pronoun: who or what. We look forward to seeing further research that will elucidate the use
of all the various types of relative clauses along the lines of the research on restrictive relative
clauses by Fox and Thompson (1990) that we reported in the previous chapter.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Meaning. One way of presenting the difference between restrictive and nonrestrictive
relative clauses was suggested by พ. Goodwin (personal communication). There are
three steps in all:
a.	The teacher says, “If you do not speak Japanese, stand up.” With the help of the
other students and the teacher, one student writes a sentence on the board about
the students who speak Japanese, such as:
The students who speak Japanese are seated.
b.	The teacher then tells the class, “If you speak some English, remain seated.” One
student, with the help of the others, writes the following on the board about the
students who speak English:
The Japanese-speaking students, who also speak English, are seated.
648	The Grammar Book
c.	The teacher now asks the students to make an explicit comparison between
the two sentences. After doing this, students in small groups create sentences
using each type of relative clause to express information about the class or about
class member(s).
2.	Form. To practice reduced forms of relative clauses, bring lots of “action” pictures to class—
pictures of people doing things like skiing, surfing, hiking, and swimming.
a.	First, elicit sentences with restrictive relative clauses reduced to prepositional phrases
by asking students to make observations about where the people are performing the
actions, using a prompt beginning with “I see...”:
I see a woman in a swimming pool.
I see the climber on top of the mountain.
I see the man on the ski slope.
b.	Next, have the students pair up and practice producing statements using present
participles about who (in the pictures) they would like to be and why, such as:
I'd like to be the woman swimming in the pool because ...
I'd like to be the boy surfing in Hawaii because...
I'd like to be one of those people hiking in the mountains because...
3.	Form. To practice reductions of nonrestrictive relative clauses, distribute small maps of the
United States (or any country/region) or display a large map that everyone can see. Have
students make statements containing appositives, such as:
Rhode Island, the smallest state, is located in the Northeast.
Lake Superior, one of the Great Lakes, is the largest of the group.
Florida, the southeastern-most state, is a popular vacation spot.
4.	Form. Ask students to work in pairs interviewing each other about their backgrounds,
hobbies, favorite places to go, or whatever categories seem appropriate. Have each student
introduce his or her classmate using a relative clause in the first introductory sentence,
followed by other information. Prior to the activity, give students a few examples such as the
following:
I'd like to introduce Rav, who likes to play video games.
This is Sonia, who moved to Chicago in October.
For high intermediate or advanced level students, this activity could also be used for
practice with whose relative clauses. However, since this type of relative clause is seldom
used in conversational English, it would be appropriate to use for a writing activity in
which students summarize an oral interview. A few examples such as these could suggest
topics within such clauses that students could use for their reports:
I interviewed Rodrigo, whose family came here from Honduras.
Petra, whose first language is Dutch, started learning English when she was 12.
I had the opportunity to talk with Felice, whose major is computer science.
5.	Meaning. Frodesen and Eyring (2007) suggest that students be given a worksheet of
sentences with relative clauses but no punctuation. They would have to decide whether the
relative clause was restrictive or nonrestrictive and why. Then they would have to explain
their decision to a partner and add punctuation as needed. For example:
a.	the teacher who got married in June will not be returning next year
b.	in New York I’m going shopping at Saks Fifth Avenue which is located in downtown
Manhattan
Chapter 29: More on Relative Clauses: Nonrestrictive and Relative Adverb Clauses
649
6.	Form. Frodesen and Eyring (2007) suggest giving the students a list of evaluative adjectives,
such as annoying·, disappointing, exasperating, expensive, frightening, surprising, boring, and stressful,
and asking students to use one of these adjectives in a nonrestrictive clause in order to make
a comment on the main clause. The students should be told to comment on something that
has happened to them; for example:
I had to wait in line for 30 minutes at the post office, which was very annoying.
My nephew broke my favorite vase, which was very disappointing.
7.	Meaning. As an additional review of the distinctions between restrictive and nonrestrictive
relative clauses, find a passage that has examples of both. Ask students to underline each
restrictive clause and put brackets around each nonrestrictive clause, including reduced
relative adverb clauses. Then discuss the functions of each type. The following are excerpts
from a news article with the clauses identified:
Linda B. Buck,[who shared the 2004 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for decipher-
ing the workings of the sense of smell], has retracted two scientific papers after she and
her colleagues were unable to repeat the findings.
The retractions, [which did not concern the work for which Dr. Buck won the Nobel], were
published Thursday on the Web sites of the journals where the papers appeared. One had
been published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences in 2005, the other
in the journal Science in 2006.
The retractions follow a separate one, two years ago, of a paper by Dr. Buck that was
published in the journal Nature in 2001.
For all three papers, [which looked at the olfactory system in mice], the first author was
Zhihua Zou, a postdoctoral researcher who conducted the experiments.
(Nobel Laureate Retracts Two Papers Unrelated to Her Prize, by Kenneth Chang, The New
York Times, September 23, 2010)
8.	Form. Frodesen and Eyring (2007) suggest that students first practice relative adverbs by
completing sentences such as these:
rd like to know the date (day, year, century) when ...
I'd like to know the place (city, country, etc.) where...
I wish I knew the reason(s) why...
I'm interested in finding out how...
9.	Form. As Tao and McCarthy (2001) revealed, in spoken English, nonrestrictive relative
clauses most frequently occur after a main clause, not within it, and often express some
kind of evaluation (attitude, opinion) of the speaker toward an event or situation previously
described. To provide listening and speaking practice with this type of nonrestrictive
clause, the teacher can tell students some of the things that she did or that happened to
her during the past week, including an evaluation which-clause for each. After saying each,
the teacher can write it on the board or a slide so students will have a model for their own
practice. For example:
Last week I got a message on Facebook from an old high school friend, which was such a
nice surprise.
On Friday my car broke down on the freeway, which really upset me!
This weekend I read all of the stories you wrote about your families, which I certainly enjoyed.
The teacher can then ask students in small groups or pairs to tell each other things that
they did or that happened to them, using a which-dause at the end to comment on it.
Students can be called on afterward to share some of their statements with the class as a
650
The Grammar Book
whole. If the teacher thinks that students might need more guided practice before working
in groups, she could ask a few students to volunteer information about something they
did, following with a question such as “How did you feel about that?” or “How did you
like it?” The students’ responses could then be transformed into statements with which-
clauses. For example:
Teacher·. Silvia, tell us something that you did this past weekend.
Silvia·. Well, on Sunday afternoon I went skating at the indoor ice rink.
Teacher: How did you like it?
Silvia: Oh, it was a lot of fun!
Teacher writes on the board: I went skating at the indoor ice rink, which was a lot of fun.
10.	Form: For practice using relative adverb clauses, ask students in small groups to brainstorm
three or more reasons why they (or someone else) should do something and to write each
reason as a complete sentence. Examples:
What are some reasons why you should get a college education?
What are some reasons why everyone should learn to play a sport?
What are some reasons why one should learn a second language?
Prior to group work, provide a few sample answers as models:
One reason why you should learn a second language is that you can better communicate with
more people worldwide.
Another reason why you should learn a second language is that it exercises your brain!
11.	Form. As an Internet-based writing activity, Frodesen and Eyring (2007) suggest that
students research the year when they were born and find four or five interesting facts that
took place during that year. Each student should write down his or her findings in sentences
using relative adverb clauses, as in this example:
October 17,1989 was the day when a 7.1 magnitude earthquake struck San Francisco.
Students can share one or more of their responses either in small groups or as a class.
Where appropriate, the instructor can ask them to express variant forms, e.g., deleting
the head noun in the example above to produce: “October 17, 1989 was when ...’’.This
can be followed by discussion of when it might be best to include head nouns with
relative adverbs.
12.	Use. Using concordancers to find authentic examples is one of the best ways to help
advanced students become more familiar with the more formal variants of relative adverbs,
e.g., those forms with [preposition + which] following a head noun. Students can be asked
to find and write down several examples of these constructions from COCA by entering
phrases such as the following in the search box:
the day on which
a time in which
the point at which
a situation in which
Our last two examples reflect the fact, discussed in this chapter, that head nouns for
place relative adverbs in formal registers tend to be logical rather than spatial. Also,
while the form the reason for which is grammatical, we omit it since it is extremely rare
even in this large corpus. (It is always a good idea to check frequencies first to make sure
that ample examples exist!)
Chapter 29: More on Relative Clauses: Nonrestrictive and Relative Adverb Clauses
651
In discussing their corpus findings, students can consider the following: (1) to what
extent the relative adverb when or where could replace the full forms (head noun +
preposition + which); (2) what the stylistic effect would be if the preposition + which
were replaced by when or where.
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.	
1. Give an example sentence to illustrate each of the following terms. Underline the pertinent word(s) in your examples.	
a. relative adverb substitution	f. appositive
b. free relative substitution	g. nonrestrictive relative clause
c. relative pronoun + be deletion	(i.) appositive type
d.	head noun deletion e.	relative adverb deletion	(ii.) evaluative type
2.	Draw tree diagrams for the following sentences:
a.	The place where he lived is unknown.
b.	The boys running in the marathon were very athletic.
c.	This is the time we will do it.
3.	Why are the following sentences ungrammatical?
a.	*Christmas is the time at which when he’s busiest.
b.	*Any teacher, who is dedicated, must work hard.
c.	*This is the office I work.
d.	*Engineers, many of which have never met Kilbey, are very proud of his work.
e.	*Burt will have raised $20,000 by the time when the fund-raising drive ends.
Test your ability to apply what you know.
4.	The following were produced by learners of English. What would you say to the learners?
a.	*1 took that course with Mr. Hall, which is an excellent teacher.
b.	*That is the way how he drives.
c.	*Cooking is the thing what he enjoys.
5.	One of your students asks you to"explain the difference in meaning between the
following two sentences. How,will you respond?
My sister, who lives in Chicago, has two children.
My sister who lives in Chicago has two children.
652
The Grammar Book
6.	Try to order the following sentences along a formality/register continuum according to
what has been discussed in this chapter as well as using your own intuitions. How could
you make your students aware of the register differences among these sentence types?
Do you recall why he resigned?
Do you recall the reason why he resigned?
Do you recall the reason he resigned?
Do you recall the reason for which he resigned?
Bibliography
REFERENCES
Biber, D., Johannson, ร., Leech, G., Conrad, ร., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and
written English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ltd.
Davies, M. (2008). The corpus of contemporary American English: 450 million words, 1990-present. Retrieved
from http://corpus.byn.edu/coca/
Eyring, J. (1988). Nonrestrictive relative clauses in scientific discourse (Unpublished Ph.D. qualifying paper).
University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Fox, B. A., & Thompson, ร. A. (1990). A discourse explanation of the grammar of relative clauses in
English conversation. Language, 66(2), 297-316.
Frodesen, J. (1986)· Rhetorical and grammatical structures in chemical engineering texts (Unpublished Applied
Linguistics paper). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form., meaning, and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Huckin, Έ, & Olsen, L. (1983). English for science and technology: A handbook for nonnative speakers. New York,
NY: McGraw-Hill.
Huddleston, R., & Pullurn, G. K. (2002). The Cambridge grammar of the English language. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Johansson, ร., & Hofland, K. (1989). Frequency analysis of English vocabulary and grammar: Based on the LOB
corpus. Oxford, England: Clarendon Press.
Loock, R. (2007). Appositive relative clauses and their functions in discourse. Journal of Pragmatics, 19(3),
336-362.
Master, p. (2002). Relative clause reductions in technical research articles. In E. Hinkel & ร. Fotos
(Eds.), New perspectives on grammar teaching in second language classrooms (pp. 201-232). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, ร., Leech, G, & Svartvik,J. (1985). ๔4 comprehensive grammar of the English language.
London, England: Longman.
Simpson, R. c., Briggs, ร. L., Ovens, J., & Swales, J. M. (2002). The Michigan corpus of academic spoken
àg/à Ann Arbor, MI: The Regents of the University of Michigan.
Snow, M. A. (1978). The where, when, why, and how of relative clauses (Unpublished English 215 paper).
University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Stauble, A. (1978). A frequency study of restrictive relative clause types and relative pronoun usage in English
(Unpublished English 215 paper). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Stockwell, R., Schachter, p., & Partee, B. (1973). The major syntactic structures of English. New York, NY:
Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Swan, M. (2001). German speakers. In M, Swan & B. Smith (Eds.), Learner English: A teacher’s guide to
interference and other problems (2nd ed., pp. 37-51). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Chapter 29: More on Relative Clauses: Nonrestrictive and Relative Adverb Clauses
653
Taglicht, J. (1977). Relative clauses as postmodifiers: Meaning, syntax, and intonation. In พ-D. Bald &
R. Uson (Eds.), Studies in English usage: The resources of a present-day English corpus for linguistic analysis
(pp. 73-108). Frankfurt, Germany: Peter Lang.
Tao, H., & McCarthy, M. (2001). Understanding non-restrictive ๗^-clauses in spoken English, which
is not an easy thing. Language Sciences, 25, 651-677.
VandeKopple, พ J. (1998). Relative clauses in spectroscopic articles in the Physical Review, beginning and
1980: Some changes in patterns of modification and a connection to a possible shift in style. Written
Communication, 15, 170-182.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
For a good reference on the analysis of nonrestrictive relative clauses that supplements Stockwell, Schachter,
and Partee (1973), see:
Thompson, ร. A. (1971). The deep structure of relative clauses. In C.J. Fillmore & D. T. Langendoen
(Eds.), Studies in linguistic semantics. New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
For an alternative analysis of relative clauses that accounts for the usual data, as well as idioms like "the
headway that John made," refer to:
Schachter, p. (1973). Focus and relativization. Language, 49(f), 14-46.
For suggestions regarding the teaching of nonrestrictive relative clauses, see:
Bland, ร. K. (with Savage, A., & Mayer, P). (2008). Grammar sense: Advanced g-ammar and writing 4. New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Cake, c. D. (2009). Grammar connection: Structure though content 5. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning
Porter, p., & van Dommelen, D. (2005). Read, write, edit: Grammar for college writers. Boston, MA: Houghton
Mifflin.
For suggestions on how to teach relative adverb clauses, see:
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Endnotes
1.	The bits of information are, of course related to one another, but the meaning of one clause is not
dependent upon the other as is the case with sentences containing restrictive relative clauses.
2.	It is possible for a restrictive relative clause to modify a proper noun if there is more than one person or
thing that could be referred to by the name, e.g.Tm talking about the Marsha who's in our class, not the
one who works at the store." เท such cases, the so-called proper noun is functioning as a common noun.
3.	Other verbs may also be involved in this reduction, but be is far and away the most frequent.
4.	It should be noted that the term contiauative, as Loock uses it here to describe a type of clause referring
to a noun phrase, is not how Tao and McCarthy use continuative, which they use to refer to a preceding
clause or clauses.
5.	We have already noted several times above that not all six variants are possible for all relative adverbs;
for example, sentences like type 4 would not be possible if the relative adverb were how in the phrase
the wa'yhow. Also, our use of the term "variants" refers to their syntax; it does not mean that they are
interchangeable. For instance, register can make a difference. Johansson and Hofland (ใ 989) found that
the relative pronoun that was more frequent in imaginative texts in the LOB corpus, whereas which
dominated informational texts.
654
The Grammar Book
Focus and
Emphasis
Introduction
In communicative settings, speakers and writers of English are able to draw attention to
particular parts of a message in a variety of linguistic ways. They do so to emphasize or to
make prominent new or contrastive information. Consider the following underlined words
and phrases in sentences from the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA):
a.	I have always loved the arts. I mvself have no talent.
b.	Add your favorite recipes to vour very own Recipe Book...
c.	A number of mushrooms are poisonous or even lethal. Under no circumstances
should you gather fungi without expert guidance.
d.	Sitting at the otherwise empty curb was a black SUV...
e.	It is the Congress that has the responsibility to act.
f.	What we need is tax cuts for the middle class who are struggling.
All of these examples reflect special focus or emphasis on information created either by changing
what is considered unmarked (usual) ordering of sentence constituents or by adding emphatic
words. These examples illustrate some of the linguistic devices discussed in this chapter.
In English, focus and emphasis are related notions; however, the constructions used
for focus center primarily on issues of use, whereas the words and structures used to express
emphasis are primarily concerned with meaning. Focus and emphasis can be expressed in
three different ways: (1) phonologically (through special stress and intonation), (2) lexically
(through special words and phrases), and (3) syntactically (through marked word order or
special focus constructions). We will present the form, meaning, and use of these devices
in this chapter, giving particular emphasis to the syntactic means for conveying focus and
emphasis in English.
Many other languages use phonological, lexical, and syntactic means to guide
listeners’ and readers’ interpretations of elements receiving focus and emphasis. Some
may use forms similar to English. French speakers, for example, can focus on sentence
elements through what we call cleft structures, as illustrated in English in example (e): It
is the Congress...). Other languages, such as German, Brazilian Portuguese, and Spanish
have focusing constructions similar to the V)h- construction, called a pseudocleft, as in
example (f). However, some forms of emphasis and focus that appear similar to English
constructions, for example, Modern Greek, Italian, Finnish, Bulgarian, and Polish’s
pseudocleft constructions, cannot be interpreted in the same ways (latridou & Varlokosta,
1998). Then, too, many languages use shifts in word order for focus. In English, we may
move elements for focus to a sentence-initial or final position, as in examples (c) and (d),
655
respectively; in other languages, such as Hungarian, the focus position is immediately
before the verb of a sentence. And unlike English, some languages use particles to mark
contrastive focus, such as some uses of the particle τοα in Japanese.
We should also mention that some linguists have challenged the notion of focus as
a pragmatic feature that can be defined in a uniform way cross-linguistically. Matic and
Wedgwood (2013) argue that the meanings of focus must be interpreted in reference to
individual languages and contextual variables. Consequently, though English learners may
have ways of indicating focus and emphasis in their Lis that appear similar to those in
English, they may need to learn the ways in which listeners and readers should interpret the
English constructions.
The Forms That Focus
and Emphasis Can Take
PHONOLOGIC	_____
Consider the following sentence:
John cooked the dinner.
When produced in a normal, unmarked style, the speaker stresses the accented syllable of the
last content word and uses this syllable as a pivot for the rising-falling intonation contour that
normally accompanies a declarative English sentence what is referred to as a 2-3-1 pattern:
John cooked theldin|ner.
However, a nonemphatic sentence such as this one may contain an emphatic constituent if
the speaker assigns special stress or prominence to one of the constituents (see also our earlier
discussion of focused yes/no questions in Chapter 11):
JÒHN cooked the dinner, (not someone else)
JohnicOQKED the dinner, (as opposed to doing something else with respect to the dinner)
John cooked thelolNner. (not something else)
In these cases, the stressed (or prominent) syllable also serves as the pivot for a marked
intonation contour.
LEXICAL DEVICES  >1-
English also has lexical means for expressing special emphasis.
Emphatic Do
An entire sentence receives greater emphasis if the auxiliary is stressed. Do is introduced when
no auxiliary verb is present to carry emphatic stress:
That would be nice!1 It does taste nice!
656
The Grammar Book
Do occurs as a marker of emphasis in affirmative declarative sentences (like the one on the
right) that have no be copula or auxiliary verb to serve as the stress-bearing operator. It also
occurs in the two following constructions:
• Affirmative ^-questions that ask about the subject (other auxiliary verbs may occur
with stress here too)
What did hàppen?
Who
does
can
earn that kind of money?
What was happening?
• Emphatic affirmative imperatives (even for those imperatives with the copula, do is the
only auxiliary used here)
DÓ come in!	DÓ be civil this time.
Emphatic Reflexive Pronouns
Emphatic reflexive pronouns generally follow the nouns they refer to, as in these examples
from COCA:
The president himself has insisted that he is in good health... (International News, 2012)
No doubt the mssionaries had been assured that I was a conservative, well-brought-up
girl. I myself could not dispute that. (Miss Timmins'School for Girls, Harper, 2011)
The artists themselves rarely saved their work. (Smithsonian, August 2004)
However, it is also possible to postpose the reflexive pronoun emphasizing the subject and put
it at the end of a clause or sentence:
He called me himself and told me he wasn't coming... (Sports News, 2012)
This use of reflexives is different from their referential use, which was discussed in Chapter 16
(e.g.,John cut himself), in that they do not replace a preferential noun phrase but occur after
a noun phrase and refer back to it to make it more emphatic. They are also different from
the adverbial use of reflexives that means “all alone; without assistance.” When used with the
latter meaning, the reflexive pronoun is often preceded by the preposition by.
Mike built several Earthships [by] himself, but soon he was coaching an army of
Earthship builders. (Mother Earth News, Feb/March 2012)
Emphatic Own
Possessive determiners (and sometimes nouns with a possessive inflection) that modify a head
noun can be made emphatic by the addition of own, which in turn can be intensified by the
addition of very, illustrated by the following examples from COCA:
It takes a real effort to remind myself of my own priorities, to remember that life is not
always about accomplishment. (Good Housekeeping, January 2012)
At the end of the day, nothing's better, it's said, than falling asleep in your very own bed.
(The Saturday Evening Post, May/June 2011)
Emphatic Adjectives and Adverbs
Certain adjectives and adverbs can be used for emphasis, too, emphatic adjectives that are
reference adjectives, occur only in attributive position (see Chapter 20):
a pure delight	* That delight is pure,
an outright lie * This lie is outright,
a mere child	* The child is mere.
Chapter 30: Focus and Emphasis
657
There are also totality and amplifying adjectives, which may occur in both attributive and
predicative positions:
a complete victory	The victory was complete,
their extreme condemnation Their condemnation was extreme,
his great folly	His folly was great.
Totality and amplifying emphatic adverbs intensify adjectives and verbs:
That is totally untrue.
I utterly regret having done that.
I really hope you come.
Emphatic Logical Connectors
Halliday and Hasan (1976) suggest that some logical connectors are more emphatic than
others. Thus, for expressing addition, and is a nonemphatic connector, whereas furthermore)
moreover, and some others are emphatic and thus not appropriate unless the discourse context
merits special emphasis with respect to the logic of the connection (see Chapter 26 for more
discussion on when to use furthermore and moreover)ะ
John went to the store, and he bought some bread.
he bought some bread.
I______. . ..___-___I furthermore,
?John went to the store; J
[ moreover,
John talked us into going out for dinner; moreover, he insisted on paying the bill.
_____________________________________________________
SYNTACTIC MEANS
Marked -word order can be defined as the movement of a constituent into a position in the
sentence where we would not ordinarily expect to find it (i.e., it would not be generated by
the phrase structure rules in that position). Sometimes other syntactic elements present in
the sentence must be moved around to produce a grammatical sentence. The reasons for
employing word-order focus that have most frequently been identified and described are
discourse constraints (e.g., the management of given and new information) and the expression
of counterexpectancy, contrast, or emphasis.
Next, we outline several different types of marked word order.
Object-Subject-Verb Word Order
Fronting the object to first position in a sentence tends to be a stylistic feature of spoken
rather than written English. The following examples from COCA include speech from
fiction, television news, and an oral interview:
"I'll tell the grocer. Him I see every day." (City of Many Days, Mercury House, 1993)
"Her I would have thrown out of the courtroom... " (CNN Crossfire, 1993)
"Such people I know only เท the most casual way, yet with them 1 can be more myself."
(■Christian Century, Sept. 2002)
Fronted objects can appear in contexts where a strong contrast is being made:
Him I like; her I don't. (I like him but I don't [like] her.)
John I can comprehend; the others speak gibberish. (I can comprehend John—but the
others speak gibberish.)
658
The Grammar Book
In other cases, a speaker may echo part of a previous sentence that has unmarked word order.
In this following speech example from COCA, the first two clauses are normal word order,
but in the third clause, the same phrase, some things, is a fronted object, keeping the focus on
the topic:
Some things worked, some things didn't. Some things I'd change. (Fox Baier12011)
In general, if a contrast is not explicitly stated, the contrastive meaning is either recoverable
from previous linguistic context, or it can be inferred from the larger discourse context, if not
shared knowledge.
Predicate Adjective/Noun Fronting
Fronting a predicate adjective or noun to initial position is also a possibility in certain written
genres, such as fiction:
Ambitious she must have been, or she wouldn't have come.
A professor he was, but in name only.
In addition to an appropriate discourse context explicitly or implicitly mentioning the fronted
item, most orderings seem to require a clause or phrase that follows the sentence with the
inversion. The following clause or phrase is needed to make explicit the counter-expectation
or contrast implied by the inversion.
Biber, Johannson, Leech, Conrad, and Finegan (1999) note that initial predicate
adjectives in dependent clauses followed by as or though may also occur, as in this example
from the Longman Spoken and Written English corpus (LSWE) (p. 908):
Astounded though she was. Francesca was thrilled and excited.
There are also a few common expressions with fronted predicate adjectives, such as the
following, which use this emphatic pattern with reference to preceding discourse:
"Right you are. I'm from... Vancouver. Canada. (Analog Science Fiction and Fact, Jan/Feb 2011)
"Right he is. you'll agree..." (Chicago รนท Times, 1994)
Teaching fronted expressions such as these as lexical bundles can be particularly useful for
ESL/EFL students in developing their comprehension of informal English.
Fronting with Subject-Operator Inversion
In some instances, fronting a negative adverbial constituent (e.g., never, not, in no -way) or an
adverbial constituent expressing extent, degree, or comparison (e.g., [ro + ADJ]) gives a more
emphatic or exclamatory reading to the sentence as a whole. In such cases, subject-operator
inversion is required. The following are examples from COCA:
Negative fronting:
...never have I felt so honored and humbled by an experience. (USA Today, Jan 2011)
Under no circumstances should you hit'Reply All' in response to a company-wide
message unless every single person needs to read what you have to say. (PC World,
Sept. 2011)
Extent/degree/comparison fronting:
So absurd was the request, he felt like laughing. (Ransom, Pocket Books, 1999)
Even more shocking were the identities of the two men behind [the diabolical plan.]
(ABC20/20 March 27, 2009)
Chapter 30: Focus and Emphasis
659
Several constituents other than noun phrases, adjectives, and adverbiais regularly get fronted
in a similar manner; in these cases, subject-operator inversion also occurs:
Present participle fronting:
Lying on the bench before him was ล row of metal instruments. (Analog Science Fiction
&Fact, Dec. 2007)
Past participle fronting:
Hidden behind the wall was a brick fireplace. (Walk Two Moons, HarperTrophy, ใ 996)
However, as Bresnan (1994) correctly points out, the locative element in such participle
fronting examples is often quite strong (on the bench before him; behind the wall) and if the
locative adverbial is deleted, the sentence becomes less grammatical:
?Lying was a row of metal instruments.
?Hidden was a brick fireplace.
But if there is no participle, the sentences seem fine; they are simply cases of an initial adverbial
prepositional phrase with required inversion of the subject and operator:
On the bench before him was a row of metal instruments.
(*On the bench before him a row of metal instruments was.)
Behind the wall was a brick fireplace.
("Behind the wall a brick fireplace was.)
Fronting with or without Subject-Verb Inversion
Two other instances of fronting occur that seem somewhere between these two categories;
i.e., they involve fronted adverbiais and are grammatical whether or not the subject and main
verb (not the operator, but the verb) are also inverted. Thus, for these two following instances
of adverbial fronting, two types of adverbial fronting are possible:
Adverbiais of direction:
John ran into the house.
a.	Into the house John ran.
b.	Into the house ran John.
Adverbiais of position:
a.	เท the garden an elm tree
An elm tree stands in the garden.
b. เท the garden I stanc^s
an elm tree.
In both of these cases the (a) seems to signal discourse emphasis or contrast of the initial
adverbial element, whereas the (b) version of the two sentences appears to give focus to the
delayed subject of the sentence. It is the inverted (b) versions that are of particular interest to
us here and will be discussed againTater in the use section.
SPECIAL FOCUS CONSTRUCTIONS
The two most important focus constructions in English are passive voice and existential there,
which have already been discussed in Chapters 18 and 23, respectively. Two other important
focus constructions, which we discuss here, are zi-clefts and w^-clefts. A cleft sentence divides
660
The Grammar Book
a proposition into two parts. As a consequence, speakers can put into focus either part, i.e.,
the topic or the comment (Hedberg, 2013).
It-Clefts
An zi-cleft is a specially marked construction that puts some constituent, typically an NP, into
focus. In some cases, such as in fiction, this construction is used to put focus on settings of
time and place such as the following examples:
It was on the eighth morning that I saw the distant sail... ("Journey into the Kingdom,"
M. Rickert, Fantasy & Science Fiction, May, 2006)
It was at the dean's annual holiday party that David met Deborah. (A Man in Thrall,
John J. Clayton, Vol. 128, Iss. 4,2009)
It was in Room 311 that doctors and scientists had the courage to criticize one
another. (Monday Mornings: A Novel, Sanjay Gupta, Grand Central Publishing, 2012)
In other contexts, the construction implies contrast, especially when the constituent is an NP
and the verb tense of the sentence is present, expressing a current or habitual fact.
Unmarked: John wants a car.
Cleft: It's a car that John wants (not a house).
Unmarked: The manager mows the lawn.
Cleft: It's the manager who mows the lawn (not a gardener).
It is difficult to formulate a rule that would generate all zi-clefts since many different
constituents such as Subject NPs, object NPs, and even prepositional phrases and adverbial
clauses can be put into the focus position that follows it + be:
It's the teacher who corrects the papers (not the aide).
It's power that the president wants (not money).
It's in the kitchen that I study (not in the den).
It was because he was jealous that Bobby lied about his sister's prize (not for some
other reason).
In each case, not only can the negative presupposition be expressed overtly, but if it is, it can
be moved forward; for example, It’ร the teacher, not the aide, who corrects the papers. Note that
a negated version of this construction yields sentences like the following (i.e., if the focus
is negative, the affirmative presupposition is contrastive and is often expressed in a phrase
marked by but):
It's not the gardener who mows the lawn (but the manager).
Again, the contrastive presupposition may be moved forward if it is expressed overtly:
It's not the gardener, but the manager, who mows the lawn.
The following formula is, therefore, an approximation for describing an zi-cleft:
ร-» it + AUX + be + (not) + /	+	who that	- +s
focused		(minus focused
constituent		constituent)
It has been argued (e.g., Hedberg, 2000) that the it in the cleft sentence is referential. It refers
to the topic of the sentence. In addition, our use of the “AUX” symbol in the cleft formula
is a gross approximation. It has been suggested to US that only the “tense” constituent of the
auxiliary should be used in the it + be segment of the rule, rather than the entire auxiliary. The
logic behind this suggestion is that in Standard North American English, the it + be segment
of the cleft can never take a phrasal modal, a have ...-en (perfective), or a be ...-ing (progressive):
Chapter 30: Focus and Emphasis
661
It's in the kitchen that I am able to study.
*lt is able to study that I am in the kitchen.
It's these books that Peter has written.
*lt's have written these books that Peter has done.
It's the teacher who was correcting the papers.
?lt's correcting the papers that the teacher was (doing).
(In some dialects of English, these sentences are possible, especially the last one.).
It is, however, possible for the it + be segment of a cleft to contain a modal auxiliary
(logical use) in Standard North American English:
It might be Marty who stole the money.
It must be the butler who killed Mr. Smith.
Also, it has been claimed that the tense of the it + be segment is merely a copy of the tense
used in the main sentence. This claim is not always true, however, because clefts such as the
following occur where different tenses are used in the it + be segment and the main sentence:
So, it's the butler who killed Mr. Smith (not his wife),
pres	past
Note that who may come between the focused constituent and the ร only if the former refers
to a person. Otherwise, that is used to refer to objects and prepositional phrases as well as to
persons when the register is informal:
It must have been Paula that left this book for you.
Except for the presence of contrastive stress in cleft sentences, they sometimes resemble
relative clauses. For example, note the ambiguity of the following sentence, a type that
Schachter (1973) identified in his discussion of cleft sentences as focus constructions that
sometimes resemble relative clauses:
It's the teaching assistant 1 that I supervises the physics lab.
[who]
(answer to "Who's that?" = relative clause)
(answer to "Who supervises the physics lab—the teaching assistant or the
professor?" — it- cleft)
When spoken, however, the sentence would have different stress patterns since the zt-cleft
reading would give special stress to teaching assistant and the relative clause reading would not.
Wh -Clefts
Wh-clefts (also referred to as pseudoclefts) are the other important focus construction in
English that we discuss in this chapter. Consider the following examples:
What he is is a complete fool.
Where we found the key was in the flowerpot.
What I said was that we shouldn't go there.
What he does is get himself in trouble.3
Now compare these wZ?-clefts with their neutral counterparts:
He is a complete fool.
We found the key in the flowerpot.
I said that we shouldn't go there.
He gets himself in trouble.
662
The Grammar Book
The wh-cleft sentences give special emphasis to the constituent(s) following some form of
the copula be:
What he is [ไริ] a complete fool.
(presumed shared knowledge: "he is something") (element receiving focus, emphasis)
As these examples demonstrate, the constituent receiving special focus can be a noun phrase,
a prepositional phrase, an embedded noun clause (see Chapters 31 and 32) or a verb phrase.
If there are two forms of the verb be present, the second one is the pivotal be structure.
Wh-Clefts versus Free Relatives
Wh-clefts should not be confused with the less emphatic free relative clause construction
discussed in the preceding chapter.
l/l/h-cleft:
What I said was that we shouldn't go there.
Free relative:
What he said doesn't concern me.
In the free relative, the what = the thing that, and there is no pivotal form of be. Also, in the
free relative, V)hat he said functions as the subject of the sentence. In the wh-cleft, there is a
pivotal form of be (i.e., was), and the initial wh-clause, what I said, gets elaborated and put into
focus in the material that comes after the pivot, that we shouldn’t go there.
Free relatives can occur wherever NPs normally occur, so they can occur as objects of
verbs or prepositions as easily as they can occur as subjects:
I'm not interested in what he said, (free relative)
JEZr-clefts can be reversed, although they occur primarily in initial position, as our examples
above have shown:
We shouldn't go there was what I said.
A complete fool is what he is.
Demonstrative Wh -Clefts
It has been claimed that a type of cleft appears commonly, especially in spoken English, and
has a demonstrative pronoun as its highlighted, or focused, element in reference to extended
previous discourse, as in the following brief interview excerpt from COCA, spoken by a
female politician:
I bring the experiences of women. As a daughter, as a mother, as a wife, as a sister.
That is who I am. (Meet the Press, 2006)
Collins (2006), found that the overwhelming majority of what look to be wZr-clefts in the 500,000
London-Lund Corpus of Spoken English were of this type (98.9 percent of 262 tokens), with
demonstrative pronouns that (about 67 percent) and this (about 23 percent) accounting for most
of the highlighted elements (p. 1717). Similarly, Biber et al. (1999) identified many reversed
W^-clefts with demonstrative pronouns as the focused element in the Longman Spoken and
Written English corpus, primarily in conversational and fiction registers. They refer to these
types as demonstrative w^-elefts (p. 961). We will discuss their uses further in a later section of
this chapter.
Chapter 30: Focus and Emphasis
663
Meaning and Use of Sonne
Emphatic Forms
EMPHATIC USEOFPO	_
Emphatic do is used in at least five contexts, according to Frank (1993, p. 94)ะ4
1.	Affirmative contradictions of negative statements (often used with but) ะ
My teacher claims that I didn't turn in my paper but I did turn it in.
2.	Emphasis of a verb used with a preverbal adverb (see Chapter 25):
The horse he bet on always did win.
The guest we were waiting for never did arrive.
3.	Emphasis of a positive outcome after some initial doubt.
I'm relieved to know that he does like beef Stroganoff, (because that's what we're
having for dinner)
4.	Strong concession bordering on contrast:
Even though I dislike most nondassical music, I do find myself drawn to Dixieland jazz.
5.	Emphasis of a whole sentence (do often occurs with an intensifying adverb such as
certainly, really, definitely)·.
I certainly do like that color on you.
They definitely did win the game.
When sentences contain auxiliary verbs that can be used as operators, the auxiliary verbs can
be stressed in the same contexts as those identified above for emphatic use of do:
You predict we won't win the match, but we will win. You wait and see!
Aaron never can figure out problems like that.
I'm happy to hear you are planning to be there.
Although he hasn't made a donation this year, he has contributed generously in the past.
MEANING ANIHII^
In nonemphatic sentences, the possessive (or genitive) case can be used to express an agent
(e.g., Holbein’s portrait of Henry VIII), a possessor (e.g.,Al’s house), kinship (e.g., Chad’s brother),
and so on (see Chapter 16). In contrast, the use of emphatic own with a possessive determiner
or noun usually signals the meaning of ownership or special interest rather than other possible
meanings of the possessive. The use of own to emphasize an agent is appropriate only when
the person referred to in the possessive form is both the agent and the possessor of the head
noun. There is a special construction in English for expressing this double relationship:
head noun + of+ possessive form + own + gerund
That's a problem of his own making.
You will have an escort of your own choosing.
In another observation concerning own, Jespersen (1961) notes that emphatic reflexives and
emphatic own often function as paraphrases of each other:5
He cooks his own meals.	He cooks his meals himself.
664
The Grammar Book
COLLOQUIAL USE OF EMPHATIC HERE AND THERE ]Ν\ΊΗ DEMONSTRATIVES
The English language also has many colloquial and dialectal markers of emphasis, such
as the use of here and there to emphasize the demonstratives this/these and that/those,
respectively:
This
a.	here cow
b.	cow here
has always given a lot of milk.
What do you think of that
a.	there house
b.	house there
All these sequences occur only in somewhat nonstandard colloquial usage; however, the (b)
sentences represent a more acceptable variant than the (a) ones do.
USE OF MARKED WORD ORDER
What is the motivation for fronting adverbiais of direction or position in sentences where
subject-verb inversion also occurs?
Into the house ran John.
เท the garden stands an elm tree.
A pilot study by Gary (1974) suggests that the speaker/writer has selected the subject NP—
now in final position—to surprise the speaker/reader, create suspense, and specifically to
go counter to die expectations of the listener/reader. For example, using texts such as the
following, Gary claims that the counter-to-expectation function of the (b) version of the text-
final sentence carries a special presupposition of counterexpectancy and that this contrasts
with the neutral, noninverted (a) version, which has no special presuppositions:
Keith Sebastian had given me detailed instructions on how to find his house; he was
to meet me there with the money. I drove up the driveway and got out of my car. Just
as the car door closed, I heard the main door to the house open.
Keith Sebastian
Dan Carlyle
The sheriff
stepped out of the house.
b. Out of the house stepped
#Keith Sebastian
Dan Carlyle
The sheriff
(Note: # = not acceptable given the discourse context)
In the (b) version, Keith Sebastian is not acceptable as the postposed subject, according to
Gary (1974), because there is no counterexpectancy; that is, the reader would normally expect
Keith Sebastian to be the subject, just as he is in the first option of the (a) version, but given
the use of the (b) construction, which signals counterexpectancy, the reader is invited to be
surprised when someone else is the postposed subject.
Gary (1974) convincingly demonstrates that concepts such as definiteness versus
indefiniteness or given information versus new information do not adequately explain
this example—and the other examples he cites—as effectively as does the notion of
counterexpectancy.
Chapter 30: Focus and Emphasis
665
Gary (1974) provides evidence that use of present and past participle fronting may also
signal surprise or counterexpectancy to the listener/reader in the same way that fronting of
adverbiais of direction and position do:6
Sitting in the front seat of the car was my cousin Joe.
Hidden at the back of my father's wine cellar was an old bottle of Chateau d'Yquem.
On the other hand, Gary does not feel that the fronting of negative or of degree or extent
constituents accomplishes the same discourse function:
Never have I seen such a mess!
So absurd was his proposition that no one believed him.
We agree with Gary. Use of negative or degree/extent/comparison fronting reflects
exclamatory speaker/writer stance rather than signaling the possibility of surprise or
counterexpectation on the part of the listener/reader.
Gary (1974) used fiction as his source for examples. Yang (1989) used a larger and more
diversified database that included transcribed speech, short stories, academic writing, and
journalism. One interesting finding she made is that marked word order with inversion did
not occur at all in her oral corpus (about 24,500 words), which had only one instance of direct
object fronting: John I like. In her written corpus (about 70,000 words drawn from fiction,
journalism, and academic writing), Yang found 29 instances of inverted word order, only 5
of which (17 percent) expressed contrast or counterexpectation. However, she found 16 cases
(55 percent) where the marked word order with inversion served to maintain thematic
continuity, and 8 cases (28 percent) where it established or resumed a topic.7
In the following example, thematic continuity is maintained through use of marked
word order and inversion:
(A short LA. Times article describes Mother Teresa's visit to South Africa. Having reported
what Mother Teresa said upon arrival at the airport, the writer continues:)
Accompanying her (Mother Teresa) were four nuns who will run the new mission...
(Yang, 1989, p. 23)
Here, the present participle fronting and inversion serve to keep Mother Teresa as the initial
noun phrase in the clause. The same goal could have been achieved, of course, by using
passive voice (a focus construction we have discussed previously in Chapter 18).
She was accompanied by four nuns who...
The following text begins a paragraph and is an example of using marked word order
with inversion to introduce or present a character or participant:
Across the aisle was an elderly woman, dressed resolutely in black—dress, scarf,
stockings, shoes, (paragraph continues to describe the old woman) (Yang, 1989, p.15)
Since the preceding paragraph had described another character in the short story, one might
say that this construction is being used to express contrast in addition to introducing a
new participant or topic. In fact, Yang acknowledges that the three discourse functions she
identified can overlap and that often two occur in any one instance of marked and inverted
word order.
There was at least one clear case of contrast (or counterexpectation) that Yang found in
academic writing dealing with language acquisition:
These clause types are followed by relative clauses modifying common nouns in object
position. Still missing at age 4 are relative clauses built on sentence subjects. (Yang, 1989, p. 20)
Birner (1994) also looked at a large number of naturally occurring tokens of sentences
with inversion-type marked word order, and she proposes that “inversion serves an
666
The Grammar Book
information-packaging function: that of presenting information which is more familiar in the
discourse before information which is less familiar” (p. 255). She also felt it was significant
that information inferable from context was treated just as if it were given information (for
purposes of inversion). Birner’s account, however, does not fully explain those cases where
a sense of emphasis or contrast seems to be achieved through the use of inversion, which
several of the examples from Gary (1974) and Yang (1989) have illustrated.
DIFFERENCES IN THE MEANING, USE, AND DISTRIBUTION
OF /T-CLEFTS AND MW CLEFTS	___________________________
“W[z^-clefts and zr-clefts have long been claimed to be interchangeable.” This opening to
Prince’s pragmatic analysis of cleft structures in spoken and written English (Prince, 1978,
p. 883) expressed a commonly held belief among linguists prior to her study, which showed that
zr-clefts and 'พ]ว-clefts were not at all synonymous in terms of presupposition and function and
that neither one should be derived from the other. Prince pointed out that the presupposed part of
wZ-clefts contains given information that the speaker assumes the hearer is thinking about (e.g.,
What John lost in the sentence What John lost was his keys), while the presupposed part of zr-clefts
contains information that the reader either knows or can deduce but is not thinking about (e.g.,
that John lost in the sentence It was his keys that John lost). She found that in zr-clefts, the average
length of the presupposed part is greater than the focused part, while the reverse is true for
wh-clefts. She noted that the relative brevity of presupposed information in the WZ-clefts reflects
the pragmatic principle that for something known, speakers should use as few words as possible.
Zr-clefts, however, turned out to be more complicated. In further analyzing the uses
of these structures in spoken and written texts, Prince distinguished two types of z'r-cleft
sentences in English—stressed focus (SF) and informative-presupposition (IP). The former
contains known information in its presupposed part and is used for emphasis, while the latter
contains new information in its presupposed part and introduces this new information at the
end of the sentence for rhetorical effect:
presupposed
Stressed focus: It isn't higher prices but changed expectations [that have caused
people to buy more at the present time].
presupposed
Informative-presupposition: It was in 1979 [that Piet Kornhof rather boldly announced,
"Apartheid is dead."]
In other words, in the first example, the listener is assumed to know that something has caused
people to buy more; the contrastive new information is that it is something other than what
people may have thought triggered the event. In the second example, the listener is presented
with new, and not assumed to be known, information about Kornhof in the rZzzr-clause.
Distribution of It-Clefts and Wh-Clefts
Since Prince’ร pioneering work, several corpus-based studies have provided more information
about uses of zr-clefts, basic ช^-clefts and reverse wZ-clefts, both within and across registers.
We will first look at distribution of these constructions, followed by discussion of specific uses
within spoken and written registers.
Kim (1988) examined a database of over 500,000 words (about 2 3 0,000 spoken and 290,000
written), identifying a total of 297 cleft constructions; ΏζΖ-clefts occurred twice as frequently as
zr-clefts in the data overall. Comparing the distributions between the spoken and the written
databases, Kim found a strong preference for ช^-clefts in the spoken data—147 versus only
Chapter 30: Focus and Emphasis
667
32 z'r-clefts—and a preference (through less marked) for z'i-clefts in the written data—68 versus
50 ๗-clefts. Kim also found that definite NPs are frequently the focused element in z’r-clefts,
which tend to have a contrastive function and to occur in planned discourse, whereas indefinite
NPs are frequently the focused element in ๗-clefts, which often function to present the
speaker’s perspective to the listener and tend to occur in unplanned discourse.
Collins (2006) analyzed cleft structures in the 500,000 word London-Lund Corpus of
Spoken English (LLC), roughly twice as large as Kim’s (1988) spoken corpus. The difference
in the distribution of basic ๗-clefts and z’r-clefts in this corpus of English conversation was not
as striking as the spoken data Kim examined: Of a total of 294 cleft constructions, 168 were
basic ๗-clefts (57 percent) and 126 were z’r-clefts (43 percent). However, Collins also identified
a large number of reverse ๗-clefts: 262. If the numbers of basic and reversed ๗-clefts are
combined, they account for 77 percent of all the cleft constructions in the LLC corpus.
As in Kim’s (1988) study, the findings of Biber et al. (1999) in the LSWE reveal that
ordinary (basic) ๗-clefts are most frequent in conversation in comparison to the registers of
fiction, news and academic prose. Ir-clefts, while most frequent in academic writing, were not
more frequent in the news register than either conversation or fiction (p. 961). Comparisons of
๗-cleft distributions across studies are somewhat complicated by the fact that Biber et al. treat
demonstrative ๗-clefts (e.g., That’s 'พhat I thought·, That’s why we asked.) as a category separate
from reversed ๗-clefts, whereas these types are included in Collins’ reversed cleft examples
and discussion. Biber et al.’s analysis finds that demonstrative ๗-clefts represent by far the
most frequent cleft structure in conversation, about triple the number of ordinary ๗-clefts
and, in fact, they occur more often than all the other types of cleft constructions combined.8 In
terms of frequencies, then, these studies suggest that for pedagogical focus, the meanings and
uses of z'r-clefts deserve a place in academic writing instruction, while ๗-clefts in general and
demonstrative ๗-clefts in particular should be given attention especially for speaking contexts.
Biber et al. note that for demonstrative ๗-clefts, the two most commonly occurring patterns
are (I) that is/was/etc. what... and (2) that is/was/etc. why..., as shown in examples above.
This would be as good a time as any to acknowledge that the frequency data we report
in this book can be helpful, but they are also limited. What we mean is that frequency data
are attested, i.e., they tell US what the linguistic record is; they don’t tell US about the potential
for change. They are also decontextualized and often monologic. Calude and Miller (2009)
illustrate these points in their study of cleft use by New Zealand English speakers. Their study
shows that when one speaker in a conversation uses a it-cleft or ๗-cleft, the other conversation
partner is likely to do so also. Or, in other words, as they say, “clefting is contagious!” (p. 127).
Use oflt-Clefts in Writing
We have previously discussed the contrastive function of z’r-clefts in general. This contrast
may be explicit, with a negative statement alongside the element of focus as illustrated earlier:
It's not the gardener, but the manager, who mows the lawn.
In academic prose, where z^clefts are most frequent, the contrastive element for an z'r-
cleft is frequently implicit rather than explicit, and the focus element often links to information
given in the previous context, as in this example from COCA:
Scientists estimate that there are 70 sextillion stars... that's more stars than the total
grains of sand on every beach and desert on Earth. Many of these stars have planets
orbiting ... them. It is those planets that astrobiologists... are paying particular
attention to. (Scholastic Scope, 2011, Vol. 59.8)
In this example, the contrastive element of those planets inferable from the earlier context is
“not the planets of our own solar system.”
668
The Grammar Book
Biber et al. (1999) note that the focused elements of zi-clefts are often pronouns or
another form expressing given information (p. 962). In examples from academic writing in
COCA, we note that such clefts often have a demonstrative determiner (this, that, these, those)
and a classifier noun—that is, one that serves to categorize other nouns (e.g., concept, issue,
solution), as the focus element; these noun phrases refer to previous information, creating
cohesion.
A few other examples that we found of focus elements with this pattern in the academic
corpus of COCA included it is this voyage of discovery and it is these two dimensions. While
demonstrative pronouns alone may appear as focus elements in this manner, the demonstrative
determiner + classifier noun pattern offers a clearer reference to the presupposed information.
In many cases, the implicit contrastive element is quite general, with a meaning such as “not
some other”/“not others” as in the following example from COCA in which the contrast
might be “not other attitudes”:
This study focused on the attitudes and beliefs of future and current teachers.
It is these attitudes that will determine the success of students with disabilities
in regular classes... (Education, 2004, Vol. 125.2)
Kim’s (1988) corpus of a variety of written genres revealed that the majority of zt-clefts
(about three-fourths) were of the stressed focus variety—that is, they were used to express
the author’s emphasis or focus rather than to provide a backdrop for new information. Our
examples from the academic texts appear to serve this function also. The sentences containing
zi-clefts with cohesive noun phrases that refer to previous text, such as these attitudes, tend to
offer a summary or conclusion for previous discussion; the presupposed information in the
relative clause appears to be inferable from the context.
Use ofWh-Clefts in Conversation
Kim (1995) carried out one of the most comprehensive studies of basic ๗-clefts in English
conversation. He identified 76 instances of ๗-clefts in naturally occurring conversations and
found that all but seven of the tokens had four types of verbs in the ๗-clause (p. 251):
1.	Verbs expressing a speaker-internal state (29 tokens): realize, want, feel, think, enjoy,
know, object to, etc.
2.	Verbs expressing a metalinguistic dimension (22 tokens): mean, say, ask, etc.
3.	Verbs marking meta-events (12 tokens): happen [e.g., What does happen is (that) there's a
tendency to forget this.]
4.	Verbs marking meta-actions (6 tokens): do (e.g., What I'm doing right now is the
vacuuming.)
This suggests that the types of verbs used in conversational ๗-clefts are highly constrained
and give US a good general sense of the interactional functions of ๗-clefts in informal spoken
English, which according to Kim (1995, p. 253) are:
1.	Discourse-organization uses, such as marking a topic shift or expressing the gist of
prior talk:
Context: The therapist, Dan, marks the gist of exchanges between two teenagers, Ken and
Louise, about how parents never get over treating offspring as children.
K·. My father's 45 or 43, an' he'll go over to my grandmother's house, and insteada my
grandmother offering him a drink of beer, she'll say
L: Wanna glassa milk?
Chapter 30: Focus and Emphasis
669
K: Wouldja like a peanut butter an'jelly sandwich?
D: So, in a way, what you're saying is you'll never get through that.
(adapted from Kim, 1995, p. 256)
2.	Interactional management uses such as expressing or dealing with disagreement or
initiating repair (see Schegloff, 1979):
Context: A is Brad Crandall, a talk show host, and B is the caller. They are having a disagreement
about the caller's Medicaid eligibility.
A: They won't be taking you off Medicaid.
B: They will!
A: So you would still be eligible. It wouldn't change your eligibility.
B: Well, what I know is they gave me a letter and they never sent me my Medicaid card.
(adapted from Kim, 1995, pp. 258-259)
3.	Display of speaker affect:
Context: Louise is telling a story, and she self-interrupts and reformulates with a พ/?-cleft as
an aside to add her affective stance.
...or like you come and they're talking—what Hove is when they're talking about
something—you know,"You had radio when you were a little girl?" (adapted from Kim,
1995, p. 266)
Kim (1995) concludes that “these various interactional uses cannot be explained from the
informational perspective alone in terms of presupposition/focus or given/new, because what
is consciously involved in them is the speaker’s interactional exploitation of the grammatical
form and the function of the ๗-cleft as a stance marker” (p. 268). HT-clefts are used by
speakers to accomplish interactional tasks in ways that serve to convey their attitude toward
their interlocutor(s) and towards the topic.
Collins’s (2006) analysis of basic ๗-clefts in conversation also identifies the topic
summary function of these structures, the first of Kim’s interactional uses. Collins points
out that the length of ๗-clauses is typically quite short, as we see in all of Kim’s examples
(i.e., 'พhat you’re saying, what I know, what I love), indicating that the information that follows
within the ๗-clause is not new but can be inferred. In the few cases where the speaker is
presenting new or partially new information (that is, not inferable), this is signaled by a
longer '๗-clause:
...but what THEY were THINKING OF um—what they ARE thinking of and what they will
probably come UP... (adapted from Collins, 2006, p. 1715)
We noted earlier that the LLC had a very high frequency of reverse '๗-clefts, almost
half of the 556 cleft structures that Collins (2006) identified in this corpus. The focus
element of many of these reverse wh-clefts is a demonstrative pronoun (e.g., that’s what
I said), a structure also very frequently found in conversation in the LSWE (Biber et al,
1999). Collins states-that these demonstratives typically have extended anaphoric reference
to the previous text. The information presented by the speaker is thus “old” in some way;
even if it is not directly stated previously, the listener can infer it from the broader context.
So this common type of reverse ๗-cleft also serves as a summary or comment on the
discourse rather than presenting new information, as in the following example in which a
doctor explains why he stayed in the United States to serve patients rather than going to a
developing country:
And when people nowadays, young medical students or nurses, say they need to -
want to go to Africa or Dominican Republic - and God bless them for going and doing
that - we have great places in this country that need young doctors and nurses to go
670
The Grammar Book
to, like our public hospitals, where the same problems you're going to see in third
world countries are right there, right in our inner cities. We drive past them every day.
And that was why I went to County (Hospital). (NPR Fresh Air, 201 ใ, COCA)
In ESL/EFL instructional contexts, teachers can help learners become aware of these uses
of reverse clefts, especially as ways to signal and highlight reference to information
previously discussed.
Conclusion
There are problems from the outset in trying to define focus and emphasis in English because
they overlap with other topics, such as exclamation and intensification. In addition, emphasis
and focus inhabit different linguistic domains. Emphasis is essentially a semantic notion, and
we have shown that it may be signaled in many ways, including by the use of special stress
and intonation patterns, choice of words, and so on. Focus, on the other hand, seems to be
a discourse-functional notion, related to what the speaker/writer wants to draw the listener/
reader’s attention to in the ongoing discourse or text or making a comment on a previous
discourse excerpt. As we have tried to point out, such attention can be activated through
the use of marked word order and special focus constructions. We make no claim to having
provided an exhaustive treatment of focus and emphasis in English, but we hope to have
drawn attention to this important area.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Meaning. For teaching it-cleft sentences, the teacher can give several examples showing
how zi-clefts embody certain presuppositions and differ from their normal affirmative
and negative statement counterparts. For example:
Sam studies physics.	John doesn't drive a Ford.
(Cue: He doesn't study chemistry.)	(Cue: He drives a Buick.)
It's physics that รam studies, not chemistry.	It's not a Ford that John drives, but a Buick.
-or-	-or-
it's physics, not chemistry, that	It's not a Ford, but a Buick, that
Sam studies.	John drives.
In groups of three, students should be given one 3x5 card, each with a false affirmative
or negative statement as a cue. The statements will be about their fellow students. Provide
an example of a mini-dialogue that makes natural use of an it-cleft construction. Then ask
the students to write a similar dialogue based on information on the card.
Example cue card: Kim comes from Hong Kong. (It's a false statement.)9
Sample student-generated dialogue:
Student ไ: Is anyone in this class from Hong Kong?
Student2: Yes, Kim comes from Hong Kong.
students: No, he doesn't.
it's Lee who comes from Hong Kong, not Kim.
It's Korea that Kim comes from, not Hong Kong.
These dialogues can then be presented to the class as a whole for evaluation and correction.
Chapter 30: Focus and Emphasis
671
2.	Meaning. You might want to try the following sequence of activities for teaching subject
emphatic reflexives.
a.	Show the class sentences with subject emphatic reflexives:
1.	The owner himself built the house.
2.	Did you yourself have a good time?
b.	Read these sentences and have the class repeat. Ask them to paraphrase the sentences
and to describe the function of the reflexive pronoun.
c.	Show the class several picture cards with sentences and have students supply correct
reflexive pronouns to emphasize the subjects. For example:
Cue: Mary made the dress.
Student 1: Mary herself made the dress.
d.	Then a student selects a card, and someone else in the class asks a yes/no question
based on the card. The student who selected the card should give a meaningful
response. For example:
Student 1: Did you yourself make that dress?
Student2: Yes, I did. / No, I didn't. My mother did.
3.	Meaning. Emphatic do might be introduced using the following context:
a.	The teacher can give the class practice in using emphatic do to contradict negative
statements by giving some false negative statements as a cue and then putting an
edited version of the dialogue on the board. For example:
Teacher·. All, you didn't turn in your homework.
All·. But I did turn in my homework. I gave it to you a few minutes ago.
b.	The class should discuss the function of do in such a dialogue.
c.	The students are divided into small groups and asked to write a dialogue that
incorporates use of emphatic do to contradict a false negative statement.
d.	The dialogues are performed in front of the class, evaluated, and corrected.
4.	Use. Fronting directional adverbs. Read a short paragraph or anecdote to your class. For
example:
Everyone but Harry had arrived on time for the meeting. We waited 15 minutes. There still
was no sign of Harry. We had just decided to proceed without him, when into the confer-
ence room dashed Harry!
Ask them about the word order of the last clause of the last sentence. Why does the
adverb clause come first? See if they can explain the fact that the others had decided
Harry wouldn’t come, and when he did, they were surprised because their expectation
that Harry would not come turned out to be false.
'Divide the class into small groups and give each group a sentence involving some
class member(s) with the directional adverb fronted (e.g., Out of the house came Maria
and Rosa.). Have each group write a paragraph that uses the inverted cue sentence as the
672
The Grammar Book
last sentence. Groups will then exchange paragraphs so that each group can evaluate the
appropriateness of the inverted sentence to the rest of the story.
5.	Form/Use. For practice using wh-clefts to highlight information, divide students into
groups of three or four and tell them they are to imagine they are planning a sightseeing
trip together to a city or an area of the country. After deciding on a location (perhaps from
a list of suggestions), the group members should research the location on the Internet and
make a list of five or six things they would like to do, see, go to, and so on. The list can
include things that the entire group would like to do as well as ones that individuals would
particularly want to include. Ask them to write each travel “wish list” item beginning with
a wh-cleft, providing some examples based on a location, such as the following.
Our group is planning a trip to Boston.
What we'd all like to do is tour Paul Revere's house and walk the Freedom Trail.
What Lila and Ramon want to do is go to a Celtics game.
What Viva would like to eat is Boston cream pie.
Where Yunjie wants to go is the famous Museum of Science.
When they are finished with their lists, ask each group to tell the class where they are
planning to go and what they would like to do, see, etc.
6.	Form/Use. To practice the use of demonstrative reverse W^-clefts as summary
statements in contexts where learners have some planning time, the teacher can model
a brief informal, oral presentation or written paragraph that closes a topic with a reverse
cleft (e.g.,'after explaining her career choice: So that is why I decided to become an English
teacher, after an explanation for a Microsoft PowerPoint procedure: So that is how you
insert a video clip into a PowerPoint slide). Students can then be asked to write a script for an
oral presentation or written paragraph on topics that would prompt such use as a closing
sentence. Possible topics could be the following:
Why you chose your major field of study
Why you chose to come to school
Why someone should visit your hometown or native country
How to do something (procedure for a sport, hobby, experiment, computer application, etc.)
What you hope to accomplish in the next five years
7.	Use. To help advanced level students gain an understanding of how z’t-clefts are used in
writing to point back to previous information and emphasize a topic for further discussion,
show them an authentic excerpt such as the following, accessed from COCA using the
search [. It is these] (Note: The period must be included and separated by a space to avoid
thousands of irrelevant examples of it is.).
Preventing groundwater pollution requires looking not merely at individual factories,
gas stations, cornfields, and dry cleaning plants, but at the entire social, industrial, and
agricultural systems these businesses are a part of. It is these ecologically untenable systems
that are poisoning the world's water. The predominant system of high-input agriculture
not only shrinks biodiversity with its vast monocultures, it overwhelms the land—and
the underlying water—with its massive applications of agricultural chemicals. The system
of cardominated, geographically expanding cities generates unsustainable amounts of
climate—disrupting greenhouse gases and acid rain—causing air pollutants. Moreover,
it floods aquifers and soils with petrochemicals, heavy metals, and sewage. An adequate
response will require a thoughtful overhaul of each of these systems. ("The Hidden Threat of
Groundwater Pollution," USA Today Magazine, 2001, Vol. 130, Issue 2674, p. 28)
Chapter 30: Focus and Emphasis
673
Ask students to identify the previous information that the focus element of the clause
refers to and to discuss how what follows relates to the information in the zi-cleft clause.
(In this example, the relative clause in the it-cleft introduces the topic of the following
discussion, which elaborates how the three massive systems are poisoning the water supply.)
Students could be asked to find other examples of this type of zi-cleft if they are familiar
with using COCA or other concordancers. If this kind of focus might be appropriate for
writing topics students are currently working on, they could review their drafts to see if
an ζί-cleft construction might help to focus reader attention on a topic. Or they could be
reminded of this focusing strategy for later use in extended writing assignments.
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1.	Provide example sentences that illustrate the following terms. Underline the pertinent
word(s) in your examples.
a.	พh-cleft	e.	emphatic	do
b.	reverse wh-cleft	f.	emphatic	reflexive
c.	ft-cleft	g.	emphatic	possessive
d.	fronting of a directional adverbial
2.	Why are the following sentences ungrammatical (or at best awkward)?
a.	*On his car a bumper sticker is: Have you hugged your kid today?
b.	"What we meant to say we are sorry.
c.	*He is Robert who wrote the letter, (not someone else)
3.	Explain the ambiguity in the following sentences:
a.	It’s the graduate student who corrects the papers in our class.
b.	Our chairman criticized the dean himself.
4.	Do the following sentences illustrate wh-clefts or free relatives? Give reasons to
support your choice of construction:
a.	I forgot what he said.
b.	A big lie is what he told.
c.	What he said is of little concern to US.
d.	What he said is that you are a good friend.
Test your ability to apply what you know.
5.	The following were produced by ESL/EFL students. What would you tell them?
a.	"Never I have tasted such a delicious sandwich!
b.	*Who you mean is that Oscar did it.
c.	"Lifting on the front porch my long-lost brother was.
6.	Develop a mini-lesson for teaching the appropriate use of sentence-initial negative
constituents (e.g., Under no circumstances will we tolerate that!) to an advanced
ESL/EFL class.
574
The Grammar Book
7.	Describe differences in use or meaning, if any, in the following pairs of sentences:
a.	(1) What he said is that he wasn’t coming.
(2) He said that he wasn’t coming.
b.	(1) The misbehaving child was standing in the corner.
(2) Standing in the corner was the misbehaving child.
c.	(1) Come back again.
(2) Do come back again.
d.	(1) Why doesn’t Jim use his book?
(2) Why doesn’t Jim use his own book?
Bibliography
REFERE NCES
Biber, D., Johannson, ร., Leech, G., Conrad, ร., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and
written English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ltd.
Bimer, B. J. (1994). Information status and word order: An analysis of English inversion. Language, 70(2),
232-259.
Bresnan, J. (1994). Locative inversion and the architecture of universal grammar. Language, 70(1), 71-131.
Calude, A., & Miller, ร. (2009). Are clefts contagious in conversation? English Language and Linguistics,
15(1), 127-132.
Collins, p. (2006). Λ-clefts and wh-clefts: Prosody and pragmatics. Journal of Pragmatics, 38,1706-1720.
Davies, M. (2008). The corpus of contemporary American English: 450 million words, 1990-present. Retrieved
from http://corpus.hyu.edu/coca/
Frank, M. (1993). Modem English'. A practical reference guide (2nd ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall
Regents.
Gary, N. (1974). A discourse analysis of certain root transformations in English (Unpublished Linguistics paper).
University of California, Los Angeles, GA. (Reproduced and distributed by the Indiana University
Linguistics Club.)
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion in English. London, England: Longman.
Hedberg, N. (2000). The referential status of clefts. Language, 76, 891-920.
Hedberg, N. (2013). Multiple focus and cleft sentences. In K. Hartmann & T. Veenstra (Eds.), Cleft
structures (pp. 227-250). Amsterdam, Netherlands/Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
latridou, ร., & Varlokosta, ร. (1998) Psuedoclefts crosslinguistically. Natural Language Semantics, 6, 3-28.
Jacobs, R. (1995). English syntaxะ A grammar for English language professionals. Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press.
Jespersen, o. (1961). A modem English grammar on historical principles: Part VIL N. Haislund, Ed. London,
England: Allen & Unwin.
Kim, K-H. (1988). A discourse analysis of cleft and pseudocleft constructions in American English. Unpublished
master’s thesis. University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Kim, K-H. (1995). Wh-clefts and left-dislocation in English conversation. In p. Downing & M. Noonan
(Eds.), Word order in discourse (pp. 245-296). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins.
Matic, D., & Wedgwood, D. (2013). The meanings of focus: The significance of an interpretation-based
category in cross-linguistic analysis .Journal of Linguistics, 49,127-163.
Prince, E. (1978). A comparison of ๗-clefts and zt-clefts in discourse. Language, 54(A), 883-906.
Chapter 30: Focus and Emphasis
675
Rutherford, พ. (1974). Pragmatic syntax in the classroom. TESOL Quarterly, <5(2), 177-184.
Schachter, p. (1973). Focus and relativization. Language, 49(1), 19-46.
Schegloff, E. (1979). The relevance of repair to syntax for conversation. In T. Givon (Ed.), Syntax and
semantics (Vol. 12, pp. 261-286). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Yang [He], A. พ. (1989). Marked word order in clause-initial position (Unpublished Ph.D. qualifying paper).
University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
For a discussion of /t-cleft sentences, relative clauses, and their similarities and differences, see:
Schachter, p. (1973). Focus and relativization. Language, 49(1), 19-46.
The relationship between it-cleft and pseudocleft (i.e., พ/!-cleft) sentences is explored in the following
sources:
Gundel, J. K. (1977). Where do cleft sentences come from? Language, 55(3), 343-359.
Jacobs, R. (1995). English syntaxะ A grammar for English language professionals. Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press, 171-183.
Prince, E. (1978). A comparison of wh-clefts and /i-clefts in discourse. Language, 54(4), 883-906.
The discourse significance of several adverbial fronting and participle fronting rules is explored in the
following source:
Gary, N. (1974). A discourse analysis of certain root transformations in English (Unpublished Linguistics paper).
University of California, Los Angeles, CA. (Reproduced and distributed by the Indiana University
Linguistics Club.)
For an excellent description of the use of wh-clefts in English conversation, see:
Kim, K-H. (1995). Wh-Clefts and left-dislocation in English conversation. In p. Downing & M. Noonan
(Eds.), Word order in discourse (pp. 245-296). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins.
For a discussion of the role of prosody in cleft structures, including /t-clefts, wh-clefts, and reverse พ/1-clefts
in English conversation, see:
Collins, p. (2006). /t-clefts and w/-clefts: Prosody and pragmatics. Journal of Pragmatics, 38, 1706-1720.
For a discussion of (ใ) emphatic do, (2) emphatic adjectives and/or adverbs, and (3) emphatic use of
reflexives, see the following sources:
Frank, M. (1993). Modem English·. A practical reference guide (2nd ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall
Regents.
Quirk, R., & Greenbaum, ร. (1973). A concise grammar of contemporary English. New York, NY: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich.
For a discussion of emphatic logical connectors, see:
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion in English. London, England: Longman.
For some useful information about focus and emphasis in general, see:
Leech, G., & Svartvik, J/(1975).T communicative grammar of English. London, England: Longman.
For useful discussions of the inverted sentences discussed in this chapter, see:
Birner, B. J. (1994). Information status and word order: An analysis of English inversion. Language, 70(2),
232-259.
Emonds, J. (1976). A transformational approach to English syntax·. Root, structure preserving, and local
transformations. New York, NY: Academic Press.
For a discussion of the diversity in the meanings of focus cross-linguistically, see:
Matic, D., & Wedgewood, D. (2012). The meanings of focus: The significance of an interpretation-based
category in cross-linguistic analysis. Journal of Linguistics, 49, 127-163.
676
The Grammar Book
For cross-linguistic discussions of focus in the areas of semantics and intonation, see:
Lee, c., Gordon, M., & Büring, D. (Eds.). (2007). Topic and foots: Cross-linguistic perspectives on meaning and
intonation: Studies in linguistics and philosophy (Vol. 82). Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer.
Teaching materials for the topics covered in this chapter are rare. For some exercises for teaching emphatic
reflexives, see:
Frank, M. (1975). Modern English: Exercises for nonnative speakers. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
For a suggestion on teaching emphatic own, see:
Rutherford, พ. (1977). Modem English (2nd ed., Vol. 2). New York, NY: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
For a general overview of emphasis and focus with exercises, see:
Danielson, D., & Porter, p. (with Hayden, R.). (1990). Using English'. Your second language (2nd ed.).
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall Regents.
For a unit covering forms, meanings, and uses of fronted structures, see:
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning.1 and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
For a unit treating it-clefts and พ/}-clefts, see:
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meanings and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
For coverage of it-clefts using a content-based approach, see:
Cake, c. D. (2005). Grammar connection: Structure through content 5. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
End notes
1.	The accent marks used in these examples and some of those that follow refer to primary sentence stress (0
and secondary sentence stress C).
2.	Note that in such cases, the copula be is not grammatical in final position because be is not a full lexical
verb, and therefore, subject-verb inversion or subject-auxiliary inversion must occur if adverbial fronting
or sentence initial generation occurs with be as the verb. Note that the lexical verbs in such sentences
must be intransitive.
3.	As Jacobs (1995) points out, when the constituent in focus is a verb phrase, the พ/?-clause ends with a
form of do instead of another verb if there is no auxiliary verb. His example is (p.178):
What Henry has done is develop a better mousetrap.
Jacobs also points out that if a noun phrase referring to a person is the focused item, the พ/?-clause is often
embedded เท a noun phrase beginning with the person who, theone who, etc. (p.179):
The one who advocated stronger action was Palmerston.
4.	As Frank (1993) notes, Elizabethan English also used do in nonemphatic affirmative sentences in
variation with the simple present tp. 94):
Thus conscience doth make cowards of US all. (Shakespeare in Hamlet, Act 3, Scene 1)
5.	Jespersen (1961) goes so far as to suggest that own is the genitive form of -self.
6.	As Bresnan (1994) points out, the locative prepositional phrase in such participles is critical; the words
sitting and hidden could be deleted.
7.	Bresnan (1994) also discusses presentation or resumption of participants as a motivation for using such a
construction.
8.	Biber et al. (1999) included "related expressions" such as alii did was, all it takes is in their counts of
ordinary พ/?-clefts.
9.	This type of exercise is a version of Rutherford's (1974) false presupposition drill.
Chapter 30: Focus and Emphasis
677
Complementation
Introduction
We have seen in Chapters 28 and 29 how relative constructions can place one clause within
another larger clause of which it forms a part. However, as will become clear in this and the
next two chapters, relative constructions are not the only possible type of clause-within-
clause construction in English.
This chapter is concerned with English clausal complementation. Complements, which
are constituents needed to complete the meaning of a verb, an adjective, or sometimes a noun,
are often distinguished from adjuncts, which are not central to the propositional meaning of
the sentence and which are never required to occur with a verb or adjective. Consider these
two examples:
John believed that Jill was coming.
complement
John almost believed the report.
adjunct
The verb believe must take some sort of object. This object may be an NP, the report, as
in the second example; or it may be an embedded complement clause, that Jill was coming, as
in the first example. The that-clause in the first sentence is a complement. By contrast, the
adverbial almost in the second example is not a structurally obligatory constituent; it is an
optional adjunct.
This chapter and the following one will demonstrate that there are many clausal
complementation options for English verbs and adjectives (and sometimes nouns). This area
is the source of numerous learning challenges for ESL/EFL students. The students learn
the various complement forms, but they often use the wrong complement with a given
verb. Sometimes this is due to cross-linguistic influence from the learner’s native language.
Compare the following examples, which all mean the same thing:
English: I want you to come.
German: Ich will, dass du kommst.
French: Je veux que tu viennes.
We can see that what is expressed with an infinitive complement in English is expressed
via the equivalent of a that (class') complement in German (the comma signals subordination)
and a that (que) complement with a subjunctive verb (viennes) in French. Thus, it is not
679
surprising when learners, whose native languages have complement constructions like those in
German or French, produce sentences like the following when they speak or write in English:
*1 want that you (should) come.
Another factor is that English has more complement types than most other languages.
English distinguishes between àr-clauses, infinitive complements, and gerund complements
(all of which have subtypes), whereas most languages have only the equivalent of rZwi-clauses
and infinitive complements:
Thaf-clause: I believe that!have extra time this weekend.
Infinitive: I would like to go to the movies.
Gerund: I enjoy going to the movies.
That-dause and infinitive complements are more universal and unmarked than are
gerunds. Since they are also much more frequent than gerunds, it is not surprising that many
learners produce ungrammatical sentences like the following:
*1 enjoy to go to the movies.
Therefore, we might expect ESL/EFL learners to experience the greatest difficulty
acquiring gerund complements. Research by Anderson (1976) and Butoyi (1978) indicate
that this is in fact the case for English learners from several diverse language backgrounds
(namely, Spanish, Japanese, and Persian). However, infinitive complements pose a learning
challenge, too. Chan (2010) examined the written errors of Hong Kong Cantonese English
learners and reported that the students wrote sentences such as:
*My mother usually cooks something nice eat to me.
Here the eat to me should be for me to eat. Chan points out that the English words are a
translation equivalent of the individual words in Cantonese. They are, therefore, semantically
matched, but not syntactically so.
Another reason for learners’ errors may simply be that they are induced by a different
kind of meaning-analogy, whereby students overgeneralize from a known complement
construction and produce a similar but erroneous form by following the known pattern:
The general commanded him to leave.	—»	*My father demanded me to study.
I like to study math.	—>	*1 dislike to study history.
My sister advised me to study abroad.	—»	*My friend recommended me to
stay home.
The teacher allowed US to leave class early. -»	*My parents let US to stay up late.
In this chapter, we discuss verbs that take clausal complements. These complements
consist of five types:1
1.	Full clausal khat-complements with tensed verbs
2.	Tenseless subjunctive t/iak-complements
3.	Infinitive complements
4.	Gerund complements
5.	Noun-participle constructions
These five types of clausal complements are associated with the occurrence of certain
verbs. Because there are many types of clausal complements, and because the relation between
verb and complement type often seems arbitrary, the grammar of clausal complementation
is somewhat complex to learn. While this chapter deals with postverbal complements, the
following chapter will cover other issues and constructions, including adjectives and nouns
that take complement clauses.
680
The Grammar Book
The Form of Complements
ORDINARY YHaFcOMPLEMENTS
Tensed rfwi-clauses are one of the most frequent types of clausal complement, especially in
conversation and fiction (Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad, & Finegan, 1999):
Scientists claim [that the earth is getting warmer].
We expected [that nothing worthwhile would come from our efforts].
Most people know [that bears don't make good pets].
Notice that the material inside the brackets looks exactly like an ordinary clause except
that it is prefaced by that. In each bracketed clause, there is a subject and a verb, and there
may be various types of additional information, such as what one would find in an ordinary
sentence. What is different is that these bracketed clauses cannot stand by themselves as
acceptable sequences so long as they begin with that·.
*That the earth is getting warmer.
*That nothing worthwhile would come from our efforts.
*That bears don't make good pets.
As with the adverbial clauses discussed in Chapter 25, such clauses are called dependent
clauses because they depend on, or require the presence of, another clause to which they are
attached in some way. Moreover, in each full sentence given here, the dependent that-clause
seems to stand in a position in which an NP might ordinarily stand. The verbs claim, expect,
and know may take simple NPs as objects under other circumstances:
Scientists often claim [great discoveries].
We expected [nothing else].
Most people know [the answer].
This suggests that we should regard these dependent clauses as nounlike in nature
and say that they are embedded into larger, independent clauses, forming an integral part of
them—in these cases, as direct objects. Additional evidence to support the belief that the
embedded clauses are nounlike is the fact that they behave like the corresponding NPs: in all
such cases, the bracketed material can appear in a passive sentence as the subject—that is, in
another position where NPs occur:
[Great discoveries] are often claimed by scientists.
[That the earth is getting warmer] is claimed by scientists.
[Nothing else] was expected by US.
[That nothing worthwhile would come from our efforts] was long expected by US.
[The answer] is known by most people.
[That bears don't make good pets] is known by most people.2
At this point, we can argue that these embedded clauses are indeed behaving like noun
phrases. A third piece of evidence for the NP status of these clauses is that each that-clause
here answers the typical nounlike question what? just as each case of a simple NP object does:
Question: What do scientists often claim? —> Answer: Great discoveries.
Question: What do scientists often claim? -> Answer: That the earth is getting warmer.
One way to incorporate this new possibility into our grammar is to add ร to the phrase-
structure rule for the expansion of NPs:
Chapter 31: Complementation
681
NP ->
(det3) {AP") N (-pD(PrepP)
pro
NP ร
ร
In other words, it is possible for an ร to function as an NP.
What sort of word is that, and where do we place it in the tree? It should be clear that
this use of that is not the same as the word that in relative clauses (see Chapters 28 and 29).
It does not replace a full NP in the same way as the relative pronoun that does:
This is the shop that I told you about, (that - shop)
Scientists claim that the earth is getting warmer. (that -?)
Nor is that in these complement clauses identical to the demonstrative determiner that
(see Chapter 16); not only does it not replace an NP, but it also cannot receive emphatic or
contrastive stress in the same way that a demonstrative can:
That's the type of bird I was telling you about.
We should pay attention to this sign, not that one.
scientists claim that the earth is getting warmer.
Indeed, it is hard to see what sort of contrast could possibly be intended in the last
example. Thus, in the case of complement clauses, it seems that we have a third type of that,
one we shall call a “ complementizer'' a signal of a complement clause. This complementizer is
neither of the noun/pronoun category nor of any other grammatical category that we have
introduced so far in this book. We will abbreviate it in the tree as “comp,” and we will place it
under ร, in a position adjacent to (and to the left of) the embedded ร:
Scientists claim that the earth is getting warmer.
ร
SUBJ
PRED
AUX
VP
NP
NP
scientist -pl
-pres
claim
V
ร
ร
comp
that SUBJ
PRED
NP
AUX
N
det
prog cop AP
the
earth -pres be get -ing ADJ
warmer
We also have to expand the options for rewriting the rule for ร to include an optional
complementizer as follows:3
ร -> (comp) (sm") ร
682
The Grammar Book
We must leave the complementizer optional both because simple, single-clause sentences
do not require them and because it is possible for complement clauses like those given here to
appear without that in informal speech:
Scientists claim the earth is getting warmer.
Most people know bears don't make good pets.
Later in this chapter, we will discuss some reasons why that might be included or omitted in
such clauses.
There are many verbs that permit or require tensed àr-complements as objects. Besides
believe, claim, expect, and know, among the more common are assume, conclude, decide, discover,
explain, feel, find, find out, guess, hear, hope, imagine, learn, mean, notice, perceive, point out, promise,
prove, realize, recognize, say, see, show, suggest, suppose, think, understand, and wish. For example:
The lecturer explained that the source of the error was human.
The dealer promised that my car would be fixed for free.
New evidence shows that broccoli sprouts are more healthful than broccoli.
SUBJUNCTIVE COMPLEMENTS
An additional type of ràr-clause is superficially similar to the type discussed previously, but
different in that the form of the verb in the embedded clause does not vary, regardless of
whether the subject is first, second, or third person or singular/plural, and regardless of time
reference. Such clauses are called subjunctive complements, as in the cases shown here:
They insist [that all the students sign up for counselors].
They insist [that this student sign up for a counselor].
The third person singular present tense -s is absent from the that-clause, and past-tense
forms are also ungrammatical as the following examples show:
"They insist that this student signs up for a counselor.
"The customer demanded that the store returned his money.
The fact that the embedded verb is never inflected or altered in any way suggests that
in forming a subjunctive, one uses only the base form of the verb; the resulting clauses are
then without any sort of tense at all. Further evidence for this claim is that where the verb in
the embedded clause is the copula be or the auxiliary be (in a passive, progressive, or phrasal
modal), only the base form is employed after insist and demand·.
We insist that he be the one to make the call.
The customer demanded that his money be returned.
Further evidence comes from negative sentences. In subjunctive clauses, a negative element
is always placed directly before the main verb, and no do operator is possible:
We insist that he not make the telephone call.
"We insist that he
do
does
not make the telephone call.
Without present or past tense in the clause, it should be clear that our expansion rule for
AUX will have to allow for the possibility of a tenseless AUX node. Although we could do this
by using the [-imper] (imperative mood) option, there is no obvious semantic correspondence
between imperative mood and subjunctive mood. Thus, we prefer to add a new option to our
phrase structure rule for the auxiliary to account for sentences with subjunctive complements:
AUX
(pm) (perf) (prog) (pass)
-imper
-subjunc
Chapter 31: Complementation
683
The tree for a subjunctive sentence, then, would look like the one here:
The customer demanded that the store return his money.
SUBJ
NP
det N
the customer
AUX
PRED
-past
NP
the store
AUX
-subjunc
his money
According to the PS rules, modal auxiliaries will not appear in subjunctive clauses; in
general, this holds true, although many people do accept should or had to after insist, perhaps
employing a modal or phrasal modal to express the increasingly archaic subjunctive mood:
We insisted that he (shouid/had to) take the test again.
Besides occurring after insist and demand, the subjunctive appears in embedded clauses
after main-clause verbs of urging and advice such as ask (meaning “request”), prefer, propose,
recommend, request, require, and suggest. Such sentences are highly formal and occur infrequently
in current English.
INFINITIVE COMPONENTS	'
We have now expanded our notion of “clause” somewhat to include subject-verb sequences
without tenses. Infinitives (so called because they are not finite or tensed) are an additional,
and far more common, type of tenseless clause than subjunctive rZwr-clauses. They also exhibit
considerable syntactic variation since they have five subtypes (even within the subtypes, there
is variation), each of which we discussún turn:
1.	believe type: The students believe their professor to be amazing.
2.	advise type: We advised them to play baseball in the park.
3.	attempt type: I attempted to avoid the ice on the road.
4.	want type: I want to clean the house.
(fpr/to infinitive): I want (for) him to clean the house.
5.	let type: The teacher let the students go home early, (bare stem)
We will not be presenting trees and phrase structure rules for the remainder of this chapter
because we have found such representations to be needlessly complex for pedagogical purposes.
684
The Grammar Book
Believe-Type Infinitives
The first type of infinitive follows main-clause verbs like believe and imagine, which also
co-occurred with iZwr-complements. However, in this case, the bracketed parts of the
sentences here show no evidence of tense:
a.	The students believed [their professor to be amazing].
b.	The citizens imagined [the politician to have led an honest life].
If these past-tense main verbs are changed to indicate future time or present-habitual
time, for example, nothing inside the brackets will change:
c.	The students will no doubt believe [their professor to be amazing].
d.	The citizens imagine [the politician to have led an honest life].
In what sense, then, can infinitives be considered clauses? Like other clauses that we have
considered, they seem to possess both subjects and verbs. While there may be no marking of
tense, there does seem to be a marker—the infinitive to—which marks infinitive complements
as part of the embedded verb phrase (VP).
We cannot have infinitive to co-occurring with a modal verb, but we can have phrasal
modal, perfect, progressive, and perfect progressive infinitives (we treat passive infinitives in
Chapter 32):
*The students believe [their professor to can do almost anything].
The students believe [their professor to be able to do good research].
The students believe [their professor to have received her Ph.D.].
The students believe [their professor to be correcting their homework].
The students believe [their professor to have been lecturing too much lately].
The next question to answer is what position these infinitives occupy in the structure
of the whole sentence. Are they direct object NPs as we argued for rZwi-clauses? The answer
seems doubtful since if these infinitival clauses are NPs, we might expect them to appear in
other NP positions, such as subject position. Yet they cannot appear as subjects of passive
verbs in the way that ràt-complement clauses can:
*[Their professor to be amazing] was believed by all the students.
*[The politician to have led an honest life] was imagined by the citizens.
This type of believe infinitive also has a peculiar characteristic: although we have argued
that infinitives have subjects, this “subject” has some of the characteristics of a direct object
within the main clause VP. When the subject of the infinitive is a pronoun, it will take object
form, not subject form, perhaps due to the influence of the preceding main verb or due to the
absence of subject-verb agreement:
The students believe [her to be amazing].
*The students believe [she to be amazing].
The citizens imagine [him to have led an honest life].
*The citizens imagine [he to have led an honest life].
At the same time, we cannot really view these pronouns (or the NPs for which they
substitute) as true direct objects of the verbs believe and imagine, in spite of the fact that the
pronouns occur in the objective case. We cannot ask the question,
Who(m) do the students believe?
and get as our answer, *Her.; to be amazing. Nor can we ask the question,
Who do the citizens imagine?
and receive the answer, *Him, to have led an honest life. The fact that verbs like believe take
complements that may have object-pronoun subjects has made the analysis of this type of
infinitive an ongoing challenge for linguists.4 Some other mental cognition verbs that take
Chapter 31: Complementation
685
this type of infinitive complement include assume, find, know, perceive, prove, show, think, and
understandะ
The players assumed their opponents to have practiced more.
They found the box to contain more money than they had expected.
The geologists knew the hills to contain gold deposits.
We perceived them to be uninterested in our proposal.
Advise-Type Infinitives
There is a second, similar, though not exactly identical, class of verbs followed by infinitive
complements. Consider the following sentences:
We advised the children to play baseball in the park.
The police officer ordered my friend to move his car.
In these cases, we get better results when we ask who-Xypt questions:
Question: Who(m) did we advise?
Answer: The children/them. (We advised them to play baseball in the park.)
Question: Who(m) did the police officer order?
Answer: My friend/him. (He ordered him to move his car.)
As in the case of the first type of infinitive (i.e., the believe type), we can substitute an
object pronoun for the NP following the advise-type verbs:
We advised them to play baseball in the park.
The police officer ordered him to move his car.
However, the main clauses here seem to have real objects, i.e., them and him (whereas
the believe- and expect-clauses did not). Thus, we must ask what the status of the rest of
the infinitive is. We could analyze the remainder of the infinitive as a complement to this
object. Yet if we wish to say that all infinitives are clauses, and since we have presented all
clauses in the past as bearing subjects, then we must ask what occupies the subject position of
these infinitives. Our solution is to say that there is an empty subject slot (<subj>), which is
understood to signify the same NP as the object of the higher sentence. Thus, for We advised
the children [<subj> to play baseball in the park}, the understood subject of the infinitive is "the
children.” Other verbs that fit this infinitive construction are manipulative verbs like allow,
cause, enable, force, get, help, permit, persuade, tell, and urge-.
Our parents allowed นร to stay up late.
The wind caused the canopy to fall down.
I told my sister to wash the dishes.
Attempt-Type Infinitives
A third type of infinitive also involves an understood subject. In this case, however, the
identical NP is not the object of the main clause, but its subject. Two main-clause verbs that
belong to this infinitive, type are attempt and tend'.
The driver attempted to avoid the ice on the road.
Bears tend to eat voraciously in the spring.
As before, the infinitive is tenseless, and to is present; in this case, there is clearly no
object at all. Infinitives following the verbs attempt5 and tend certainly cannot be construed as
direct objects:
Question: What did the driver attempt? Answer: ?To avoid the ice on the road.
Question: *What do bears tend? —> Answer: *To eat voraciously in the spring.
It is not possible that the agents who avoid or eat in these sentences could be anyone
other than the main-clause subjects. Following our solution for the advise-type infinitives, we
>86
The Grammar Book
say that in these cases, the main-clause subject provides US with the identity of the missing
infinitival subject (<subj>):
The driver attempted [<subj> to avoid the ice on the road].
Bears tend [<subj> to eat voraciously in the spring].
This class of verbs also includes begin, continue, decide, fail, forget, hope, manage, offer,
proceed, promise, refuse, regret, remember, start, try, and vow. Some example sentences are:
That radio station continues to play horrible music.
We proceeded to sell off most of our furniture.
She forgot to buy her books.
I promised (him) to work harder next time.
They are nearly all intransitive verbs when they appear with infinitives following them;
however, the verb promise is an exception for many speakers.6
Want -Type Infinitives (For/To Infinitives)
A fourth class of main-clause verbs taking infinitive complements permits the option of either
the subject or object of the main clause providing the infinitive with a logical subject. In the
latter case, the object is overtly expressed, and in some cases, the subjects of the infinitives
may be introduced withyòr:
1.	a. I want to refinish the furniture.
b. I want (for) him to refinish the furniture.
2.	a. She intends to clean the house.
b. She intends (for) him to clean the house.
In the (a) sentences in each pair, it is I and She who are doing the refinishing and
cleaning; in these cases, we simply assign the same analysis as we did with the subject-control
verbs like attempt.
The (b) sentences, which optionally introduced their infinitives with for, are clearly
somehow different. Let US apply the same tests that we did earlier. We can attempt to ask the
usual Who/What question that is normally associated with NP objects:
?Him to refinish the furniture.
For him to refinish the furniture.
Question: What do you want? -> Answer:
Question: What does she intend? -> Answer:
?Him to clean the house.
For him to clean the house.
English speakers tend to find the /or-infinitive somewhat more acceptable here,
suggesting that at least the jfor-infinitive may be seen as providing a prepositional object
for the main-clause verb. At the same time, if we ask the Aà-question, we come up with
unfavorable results, suggesting that the pronoun him is not by itself the direct object of the
verbs want and intend·.
Question: Who(m) do you want? -»Answer: ?Him (to refinish the furniture).
Question: Who(m) do you intend? -> Answer: ?Him (to clean the house).
In fact, if the infinitives appear in the passive voice, the sentences are equally grammatical
and convey the same general idea:
I want (for) the furniture to be refinished by him.
She intends (for) the house to be cleaned by him.
This suggests that these verbs are much like believe when they do not co-occur with the
same subject interpretation (i.e. the (a) versions given previously):
I want [(for) him to refinish the furniture].
She intends [(for) him to clean the house].
Chapter 31: Complementation
687
With some verbs such as want) expect) and hope, some speakers find theyòr preposition
either overly colloquial, characteristic of some บ.ร. dialects, or both, and simply use other
ways to express the same meaning. Other future-oriented and affective verbs in this class that
occur more readily with for include arrange, desire, expect) hatC) hope) intend, like) love)plaU) and
prefer; for example:
The travel agent arranged (for นร) to take another trip.
I would hate (for you) to be stranded in the cabin this winter.
The doctor would like (for me) to try some new pills.
I would love (for you) to visit Paris next year.
With this class of verbs, the subject of the infinitive will vary, of course, depending on the
presence or absence of a noun phrase or a /õr-prepositional phrase after the main verb.
When either of these is present, the noun phrase or prepositional object is the subject of the
infinitive; when there is no noun phrase or/or-prepositional phrase after the verb, the subject
of the main clause represents the subject of the infinitive. Adopting a cognitive linguistics
perspective, Hamawand (2003) distinguishes ordinary ^-infinitives from/o-Vto-infinitives. He
observes that speakers use ^-infinitives when they want to indicate the speaker’s involvement
in the event and interest in its realization, whereas /òr/ío-infinitives reflect the speaker’s
distance from the event and its realization.
Let-Type (Bare Stem) Infinitives
There is one more important type of infinitive complement that must be distinguished,
although the main-clause verbs with which it occurs are quite limited. This type is often
called the hare-stem infinitive, where the usual to is either optionally (e.g., Grace helped US (to)
prepare the meal) or obligatorily absent:
The teacher let the students go home early.
We saw our friend leave the station.
Applying the usual test to determine whether bare-stern infinitives are objects of the
main-clause verb, we get unacceptable results:
Question: *What did the teacher let? —»Answer: *The students go home early.
Question: What did we see? —»Answer: ?Our friend leave the station.
Applying the test to see if the NPs the students and our fidend are direct objects of the
main-clause verb, we again get odd results:
Question: *Who(m) did the teacher let? —> Answer: *The students (go home early).
Question: Who(m) did you see? -> Answer: ?Our friend (leave the station).
As with infinitives that follow instances of verbs of the let/see class, we cannot say
that bare-stern infinitives are NP objects; we will assume that they are simply bare clausal
complements to the main-clause verb with no expressed to:
The teacher let [the students go home early].
We saw [our friend leave the station].
As with several of the previous patterns, the subject of the bare-stern infinitive takes the
object form if it is a pronoun:
The teacher let them go home early.
We saw him leave the station.
Verbs in this class other than let and see include feel) have) hear) help) make) and watch:
We felt the door close behind US.
The teacher had US repeat the exercise.
Please help US (to) move our furniture.
88
The Grammar Book
GERUND COMPLEMENTS
While that-c\mses and infinitives are the most frequent complement types and cover a large
range of postverbal constructions in English, there is an additional type of complement,
sometimes called the -ing complement or gerund, which, although less frequent, also must be
explained. Consider, then, an additional pair of sentences:
Ben disliked making phone calls to Collin.
Chris preferred doing other things with her time.
The italicized parts of these two sentences have some of the earmarks of other clauses
we have seen—specifically, postverbal infinitives like those that follow attempt, where the
understood subject of the complement is identical to the subject of the main clause:
Ben disliked [<subj> making phone calls to Collin]. -> Ben made phone calls to Collin.
Chris preferred [<subj> doing other things with her time]. —> Chris did other things with
her time.
Although the -ing of a gerund is not the -ing of the progressive, it is an affix that attaches
itself to a verb stem. Just as there were with infinitives, there does not seem to be any tense
present. If we change the tense of dislike and prefer in these sentences, the complement does
not change at all:
Ben will dislike making phone calls to Collin.
Chris prefers doing other things with her time.
In contrast to infinitives, however, the verbal elements in the sequences—making and
doing—seem to have the characteristics of nouns. With the addition of -ing, verbs can regularly
be made into nouns that can serve as subjects and objects of sentences:
What is most enjoyable for you? —> Hiking is most enjoyable for me.
What do you enjoy? —> I enjoy swimming.
The “'พhat-ness” of these verbal nouns, or gerunds, extends to gerund clauses as well:
What did Ben dislike? —> Making phone calls to Collin.
What did Chris prefer? —> Doing other things with her time.
We conclude that these gerund clauses are NP objects that happen also to have the status of
a clause.
Different from the understood identical subjects in these sentences, it is also possible to
have a gerund clause with something that looks like an expressed subject:
Ben disliked Susan's making phone calls to Collin.
Chris prefers his doing other things with his time.
In each pair, we have what looks like an NP + possessive morpheme (Susan’s) or a
possessive determiner before the gerund noun. In both cases, we have the basic structure of
NPs functioning as clauses; i.e., the possessive NP or possessive determiner fills the subject
slot, and the gerund noun and what follows functions as the predicate:
Ben disliked [Susan's making phone calls to Collin] (Susan made phone calls to Collin.)
Chris prefers [his doing other things with his time] (He does/should do other things with his time.)
Other verbs that take gerund complements include admit, appreciate, avoid, begin,
continue, defend, deny, enjoy, feel, finish, forget, hate, hear, like, love, prefer, quit, recall, regret,
remember, resume, risk, see, smell, start, stop, and try. Some occur only with the identical
subject pattern (e.g., begin, continue),
Lucia began walking at an early age.
Chapter 31: Complementation
689
some require possessive NP subjects that are different from the subject of the main clause
(e.g., appreciate),
Her parents appreciated her early walking.
and some may occur in either construction (e.g., enjoyy remember).
They enjoyed watching her.
They enjoyed her taking her first steps.
Just as the that complementizer was optional in informal speech, so is the Ϊ complementizer
that accompanies the subjects of gerunds. When this is the case, a pronominal subject takes
object form. In fact, Biber et al. (1999) found that the objectform, illustrated here, is much more
frequent than the possessive form (p. 750):
Ben disliked Susan making phone calls to Collin.
We shall return to this topic later in this chapter.
THE รUBJECTPARTICIPIicoivIPLEI^^
There is one additional complement type in which -ing appears, one that is superficially
similar to the possessive gerund complement but that always has an NP or object pronoun
in place of the possessive form. While the first three sentences shown here can be viewed as
colloquial simplifications of the possessive gerund construction, the last three cannot; so we
have a new structure here (i.e., the subject-participle complement):
Ben disliked [Susan making phone calls to Collin].
Chris prefers [him doing other things with his time].
I didn't like [them coming in here like that].
He doesn't want [the employees sitting around with nothing to do].
I watched [the ice melting in the รนท].
The teacher had [the students drawing trees].
Once again, we have what looks like the general structure of a clause without a tense. In
this case, it seems that we have a stable element to place in subject position, and it is plausible
to say that the entire bracketed clause functions as a noun object. Often this type of participial
clause occurs as the object of the preposition withy in which case it functions as an adverbial
clause (see Chapter 25):
With [the employees sitting around with nothing to do], the firm won't survive.
With [the ice melting in the รนท], there won't be any cold drinks left.
With [the students drawing trees], the teacher could relax.
Other verbs taking this sort of complement include discovery feely hatCy havey heary likey lovey
observCy prefery recally remembery seey and watch. For example:
The authorities discovered the dog hiding behind the bushes.
We could feel the weather turning cold.
The tour leaders had US visiting_museums day and night.
We observed the doves making their nest.
I remember John telling me the same story last year.
As with infinitive complements after believe-xyppz verbs, the subjects of these complements
appear as object forms if they are pronouns, as in the third and fifth sentences.
690
The Grammar Book
The Meaning of Verbs and Their
Complement Clauses
As the previous discussion clearly shows, there are many clausal complementation options for
English verbs. Much does seem idiosyncratic about [verb + complement] combinations, and
it would be false to claim that no arbitrariness exists in this area of grammar. However, there
is some regularity within this seemingly complex array of possibilities, and teachers who are
aware of these regularities can draw students’ attention to them.
Up to now, we have said that certain verbs take certain types of complements exclusively,
while other verbs may occur with more than one type. We have said little about whether any
sense can be made of the fact that claim takes a tensed Vwt-complement, insist a subjunctive
complement, believe either a àt-complement or an infinitival one, try either an infinitival
or a gerund complement, and make a bare infinitive. In fact, a loose correlation does seem to
exist between the semantics of the main-clause verb and the type of complement it takes. The
correlation has been sketched by Givón (1980; 1990).
VERBSTAKING โผโ-COMPLEMENTS
The main verbs that take ordinary tensed àr-complements tend mostly to denote mental
states or attitudes regarding the truth of the proposition in the complement clause. Thus, to say
think
assume
imagine
1 know
understand
say
that it will rain today.
is to state something about the nature of the particular belief—its relative strength, among
other things (a topic that we will return to in the next chapter). Givón (1980; 1990) places
such verbs in the cognition-utterance category and says that a sentence with such a verb is
more loosely connected syntactically with the complement clause and not necessarily well
integrated semantically with the complement clause. The first quality means that it is easy to
detach a àt-complement from its main clause, omit the complementizer, and be left with a
perfectly well formed sentence; the second quality means that it is not at all necessary for the
subject of the complement clause to be identical to any noun in the main clause.
VERBS TAKINgInF^^	7".....
We can contrast cognition-utterance verbs with verbs that Givón (1980; 1990) calls
manipulative·, typically, these verbs take infinitival complements. Manipulative here means
that an agent named in the main clause is in some way related to, or has some interest in, the
real or hypothetical occurrence of the event that is depicted in the complement clause.
Thus, in the sentences Mary wanted John to return sooner and The teacher allowed the students
to leave, Mary and the teacher have an interest in John’ร returning and the students’ leaving,
respectively. According to Givón, such infinitives tend to be more integrated syntactically
with their main clauses in that an infinitive cannot stand by itself as a sentence; it is more
dependent syntactically on its main clause. The main clause and infinitive clause are also
Chapter 31: Complementation
691
much more likely than a main clause and a that-clause to share an NP referent—as in those
cases where the subject of the infinitive is identical to an NP in the main clause:
Mary wanted [<subj> to go], (embedded subject = Mary)
Mary told John [<subj> to go], (embedded subject — John)
In the case of bare-stern infinitives (Mary made John stay; John had the thief arrested),
there is even greater integration since there is no infinitive to present and a stronger sort of
control or involvement is depicted: indeed, verbs like let, make, and have, together with their
complements, are often called causative verbs or constructions since one agent (to one degree
or another) is causing another to act. We return to causatives later in this chapter.
Givón’ร (1980; 1990) correlations are rough—there are many exceptions—and they may
have limited pedagogical value for language teachers who seek to present English complement
options systematically to their students. However, his description is of some value to teachers
who wish to understand why English complement options pattern as they do. In a few cases,
Givon’s framework does make predictions where options exist in use, and here, ESL/EFL
learners might benefit from some explanation. Consider the following sentences:
She helped them to pick cherries.
She helped them pick cherries.
In the first case, the woman mentioned may have provided a ladder to the cherry pickers,
while in the second case, we are more likely to believe that she was actually picking the
fruit together with the others. Her greater involvement is reflected in the use of a bare-stern
infinitive. It thus makes sense that a corpus study like that of Lind (1983) finds bare-stern
infinitives appearing six times more frequently with animate subjects than inanimate subjects
when compared with io-infinitives.8
THE MEANING OF VERBS TAKING SUBJUNCTIVE TH/IT-COMPLEMENTS
As pointed out in Chapter 2, the subjunctive is one of the five moods of English—one of
the five sentence types that systematically exhibits the speaker’s/writer’s attitude toward
the proposition expressed in a sentence. Just as the interrogative involves the questioning
of a proposition and the imperative marks a command, so the subjunctive exhibits the
speaker’s/writer’s orientation toward bringing a certain state of affairs into being. Verbs that
take subjunctive that-clauses are highly manipulative in a semantic sense. They co-occur with
a relatively restricted set of verbs, which includes advise, ask, demand, insist, recommend, and
request, and such subjunctives have no tense forms. This construction will be particularly
difficult for ESL/EFL students since they have most likely been told or have assumed that
every rto-clause in English contains a tense. Yet the verbs that take subjunctive complements
fit a special frame in which an agent, expressed or implied, in the main clause attempts to
exert some control over the occurrence of the event in the embedded clause, usually through
the action of a different agent that is the subject of the subjunctive clause. The verbs may
express “weak” control (suggest, recommend), “strong” control suggesting the existence of one
individual’s authority over the other (insist, demand, require), or control of an in-between sort
(ask, request)? Thus, we get:
[from weaker to stronger control]
We suggest that you stay one more day.
The committee recommended that the plan be reconsidered. .
We ask that you not smoke near this building.
He requested that they give him an extra week to finish the project.
The college requires that first-year students live in dormitories.
The auditor demanded that he be given all the records.
692
The Grammar Book
Verbs that simply express a desire for some event to occur—that is, without any evidence
of influence or control at all—tend not to take subjunctive complements. Thus, we do not get
a subjunctive complement with hope·.
*She hoped that her husband get a better job.
The relevant semantic feature of control also shows up when the subjunctive mood is
used in complement clauses following certain main-clause adjectives like important, imperative,
and vital, but not following other adjectives such as understandable (we will return to this
construction in the following chapter):
It is important that she be given another chance.
It was imperative that we act immediately.
What is vital is that we not become overly anxious.
*lt is understandable that she be given another chance.
VERBS TAKING 6ERUN ocoMPLEM ENT5VE R	VERBSTAKING
INFINITIVE COMPLEMENTS; THE BOLINGER PRINCIPLE
Verbs that require gerunds, such as enjoy, risk, deny, avoid, appreciate, defend, quit, and stop,
among others, encode actions in the complement that are vivid, real, ongoing in the present,
or completed in the past. They represent the success of the subject of the main verb—or the
gerund—in accomplishing some outcome, which may be positive or negative (Bolinger, 1968):
Bob enjoys going to the movies. (= Bob succeeds in having a good time when he goes to movies.)
Sue avoided talking to Barry. (= Sue succeeded in not talking to Barry.)
This is very different from those main verbs taking infinitives that encode future or unfulfilled
projections, rather than past or present accomplishments in the complement (Bolinger, 1968).
Mary wanted to see the play, (implies Mary did not see the play)
There is considerable overlap across the class of verbs that permit subj ect-control infinitive
complements and those that permit subject-control gerund -ing complements. The overlap is
illustrated in the italicized forms in the lists shown here:
Verbs taking infinitives: begin, choose, continue, dare, expect, fail, forget, hate, hope,
intend, like, love, manage, prefer, proceed, promise, refuse, regret,
remember, start, tend, try, want, vow
Verbs taking gerund-ing: admit, appreciate, avoid, begin, continue, defend, deny, dislike,
enjoy, finish, forget, hate, like, love, prefer, quit, recall, regret,
remember, resume, risk, start, stop, try
In many cases of overlap, a distinct meaning difference is implied. This difference is
worth focusing on and pointing out to learners. In some cases, the difference in meaning is
substantial. Consider the options with forget:
He forgot to buy the books.
He forgot buying the books.
In the sentence with the infinitive, no books were bought (because of forgetfulness),
while the action described with the gerund in the second sentence actually happened (but was
subsequently forgotten). The situation is similar with remember.
She remembered to do her homework.
She remembered doing her homework.
In the first case, the meaning may be paraphrased as “She recalled that she had to do her
homework, and then she did it,” while the second sentence means “She did her homework,
and then later she recalled that she had done it.”
Chapter 31: Complementation
693
Some degree of correlation exists between the choice of infinitives with events that are
hypothetical, future, unfulfilled and the choice of gerunds with events that are real, vivid, and/
or fulfilled, as pointed out by Bolinger (1968). In the case of these sentence pairs, this principle
is substantiated. It is also supported in the case of the verb try. Compare the next two sentences:
Peter tried to go to Oxford University.
Peter tried going to Oxford University.
In the first instance, English speakers tend to interpret the sentence to mean that Peter
wanted to go to Oxford but was not in fact able to attend the university; in the second, the
preferred interpretation is that Peter did attend Oxford but did not stay. Compare also these
two sentences:
I tried to call you, but I had left my phone at home.
I tried calling you, but your line was busy.
In the first instance, no calling took place; in the second, at least one (unsuccessful) call
was made. Three other verbs for which So (1973) found that the majority of native speakers
that he consulted perceived a difference in meaning between infinitives and gerunds, following
Bolinger’s (1968) principle, are regret, prefer, and sense.
It is also worthwhile to look at how Bolinger’s (1968) principle holds up with a frequently
occurring verb such as like. When someone expresses a desire to do something that he/she has
not done before, it is common to use the modal construction would like and follow it with an
infinitive. A gerund is much less acceptable if would precedes like:
I would like to go bungee jumping someday.
?l would like going bungee jumping someday.
On the other hand, if someone has already done bungee jumping and wishes to express
an affection for that activity, the gerund form is strongly preferred:
I like going bungee jumping. (I just did it last week.)
While the Bolinger principle does not yield such clear distinctions for all the verbs that occur
with both infinitives and gerunds, it does provide teachers with a partial explanation for students
who want to understand those meaning differences that exist with verbs taking both infinitive
and gerund complements. It also helps explain why certain verbs such as enjoy and avoid take only
gerunds, and why others such as hope and want take only infinitives, and it reduces the learning
burden for students in that they do not have to rely on their memory for which verbs take which
complements. This is what we mean by teaching reasons, not only rules, where this is possible.
ASPECTUAL OPTIONS IN INFINITIVES AND GERUNDS
We have argued that infinitives have no tense markings and therefore do not by themselves
express past versus non-past time. However, infinitives do express aspectual relationships of
the sort discussed in Chapters 7 and-9. These include the full range of aspectual categories
with the exception that the distinction between habitual (i.e., durative) and punctual (i.e.,
“one time”) is lost in the simple form of the verb, as in the case of drink·.
I want to drink espresso (regularly).
I want to drink espresso (tonight).
The sense of a specific ongoing activity is expressible with the progressive form:
I would prefer to be drinking espresso (right now).
The sense of the completion of one event prior to the occurrence of another may be
expressed with the perfect form:
I would prefer not to have drunk so much espresso this evening.
694
The Grammar Book
In the immediately preceding example, the “drinking” occurs prior to the “preferring.”
Perfect and progressive may be combined, just as they may in ordinary main clauses:
The local team proved to have been making progress.
In this case, the ongoing condition, the “making of progress,” is (at least to some extent)
temporally prior to the “proving.”
Gerund forms are likewise not marked for tense, but they too may express aspectual
distinctions. When a simple gerund is used, the distinction between perfective, habitual, and
progressive is lost:10
She remembered drinking espresso (that night).
She remembered drinking espresso (during her three years in Italy).
She remembered drinking espresso (while the music was playing).
Where the gerund is in the perfect form, however, one may distinguish the progressive
from the perfect through the presence or absence of -ing on the verb in the complement:
She remembers having been listening to a Grieg concerto (all evening)."
She remembers having listened to a Grieg concerto (at least once in her life).
Once again, actual use may blur the distinction here, just as the distinction between
I have lived here for ten years and I have been living here for ten years lies more in what is implied
than what is necessarily expressed by the forms themselves.
It may be said with certainty that if tense and aspect in English is difficult for ESL/EFL
students to master in simple clauses, the juxtaposition of tense and aspect in complement
clauses is even more difficult to accomplish if nativelike performance is the objective. And, as
we have seen* even native speakers exhibit considerable variation in their own production in
this area, often rephrasing something that has already been said to make a relationship more
precise. We therefore recommend focusing on these relationships in complement clauses
only when learners have attained advanced proficiency.
ORDINARY INFINITIVES VERSUS PURPOSE INFINITIVES
In our discussion of various infinitive clauses, we have not yet mentioned one additional type
of infinitive. This type is not regularly associated with any main-clause verb and hence is not a
complement infinitive; it is called the purpose infinitive, illustrated in the following sentences:
They covered the porch to shield out the รนท.
This drill bit is used to drill holes in metal.
It is easy to distinguish purpose infinitives from other infinitives by attempting to
substitute in order to (or so as to) for to. If the substitution results in a good paraphrase, the form
is a purpose infinitive. We can also try to move the infinitive to first position in the sentence
and see if an acceptable sentence results:
We used a wrench to fix the sink. -> To fix the sink, we used a wrench.
We hope to take our vacation soon. -> *To take our vacation soon, we hope.
Purpose infinitives, which are adverbial constructions, may be readily moved, while ordinary
infinitive complements may not.
One of the most confusing alternations for learners concerns the verb stop, which takes a
gerund complement in one context (a) but also often appears with a purpose infinitive(b). Note
the difference in meaning:
a. The man should stop drinking. (His drinking should cease.)
b. The man should stop to drink. (He should stop
walking
driving
to drink some water.)
etc.
Chapter 31: Complementation
695
We have said that gerund complements are not well represented in the world’s
languages, while infinitive complements are common. This fact undoubtedly contributes to
the frequency of errors where the (b) sentence pattern is used when the meaning requires
the (a) pattern. Teachers should expect frequent errors of this type and perhaps address them
directly during class time.
THE BARE-INFINITIVE COMPLEMENT VERSUS
THE SUBJECT-PARTICIPLE CONSTRUCTION
There is considerable overlap in the class of verbs that take bare-infinitive complements and
those that take subject-participle complements. The overlap is illustrated in the following
italicized forms:
Verbs taking bare infinitives: feel, have, hear, help, let, make, see, watch
Verbs taking subject + participle: dislike, enjoy, feel, hate, have, hear, like, love, observe,
prefer, recall, remember, see, watch
Most of the overlap concerns sensory perception verbs. Kirsner and Thompson (1976)
present an analysis of the difference between the following pairs:
1 a. I saw him break the branch.
1b. I saw him breaking the branch.
2a.They heard the door close.
2b. They heard the door closing.
3a. They watched the boat disappear over the horizon.
3b. They watched the boat disappearing over the horizon.
Kirsner and Thompson (1976) propose that the bare infinitive (i.e., the a. form) marks an
event seen as punctual, limited, and bounded or perfective; in contrast, the subject-participle
(i.e., the b. form) marks an imperfective event that is represented as durative, ongoing, or
iterative, without focus on its beginning or end. This account explains why a main verb in the
simple present tense occurs freely with an -ing form but is much less acceptable with a bare
infinitive:
Look! I see him leaving the building.
?Look! I see him leave the building.
Since the simple present is not normally used to mark discrete, punctual events (but
instead marks states, ongoing actions, or repeated actions), it makes sense that this tense would
not take a bare infinitive. The account also explains why a perception verb like observe can
appear with a subject-participle complement but not a bare-infinitive complement, even in
the simple past tense. Part of the inherent meaning of observing involves the visual perception
of something over an extended period of time without focusing on the event as a completed
whole; one observes an action in progress. We can observe the painting of a picture as it
progresses, but we would not normally speak of “observing” a sudden, momentary event, such
as the switching on of a light. Thus,-we are likely to hear sentences like:
We observed them eating dinner at Spago.
but are unlikely to hear ones like:
?We observed them sit down.
Likewise, the capacity for independent action on the part of the subject was also noted
by Kirsner and Thompson (1976) to account for pairs such as these:
I saw the sunglasses J
[*lie
by the side of the road.
The Grammar Book
Since “sunglasses” cannot act independently, the bare infinitive is not possible.
We can also extend Kirsner and Thompson’s (1976) proposal to a nonperception
verb, the causative verb have·.
The boss had me turn off the light (a moment ago).
?The boss had me turning off the light (a moment ago).
The boss had me turning off the light (as part of my daily routine).
The second sentence, in order to be fully acceptable, would have to mean that the speaker’s
task—in itself a momentary, punctual event—was repeated over an unspecified period of
time, as in the more normal-sounding third sentence.
____________________________________________________________________
POSSESSIVE GERUND VERSUS SUBJECT PARTICIPLE COMPLEMENTS
For some speakers of English, there is a subtle contrast for verbs taking both the possessive
gerund complement and the subject-participle construction:
I appreciate his taking care of the dog.
I appreciate him taking care of the dog.
Such speakers report a greater focus on the entire event in the possessive gerund
complement and a greater focus on the agent NP in the subject-participle construction.
It should be noted that Biber et al. (1999) point out that in their extensive corpora, the
simpler subject-participle construction is used much more frequently with these verbs than
the possessive-gerund alternative (p. 750). Whether the frequency difference is due to the
contrast between the two or to speakers opting for a simpler form is unclear.
CAUSATIVE CONSTRUCTIONS ~	~	________
We have already spoken of causative constructions as those that depict one agent successfully
causing another agent to perform an action. Some verbs which enter into these constructions
(cause, force, get) fall syntactically into the infinitive complements pattern for advise-type verbs.
Others (make, have) take bare-infinitive complements. In both cases, the object of the main
clause is the understood subject of the complement. How do they differ in meaning? Here,
we will address have, get, and make, drawing on the work of Martin (1981).
Have. The verb have suggests a routine hiring or selecting in which a relation of authority is
implied, as between customer-businessperson or creditor-debtor:
We had Ray mow the lawn. (He does it every week.)
I had the barber trim my hair. (It is his profession.)
Fred had John give him back five dollars, (part of a debt that John owed Fred)
?He had a stranger on the street give him directions.
The last example appears inappropriate since it suggests a relation of authority that does
not exist between two strangers in a chance meeting. The action performed must also relate
to the specific area of authority.
Get. The verb get is often used to convey the sense that some difficulty was involved; perhaps
the subject of the main clause used persuasion or coercion on the subject of the embedded
clause:
I got Ray to give me five dollars. (He had refused earlier.)
Make. The verb make suggests that the subject of the main clause has coercive power (though
not necessarily authority in any conventional sense) over the subject of the infinitive:
He made a stranger on the street give him five dollars. (Threat was involved.)
Chapter 31: Complementation
697
Have and get, but not make, may also take complements in which these meanings carry
over well:
I finally had the lawn mowed.
I finally got the lawn mowed.
*1 finally made the lawn mowed.
However, the get-sentence is now ambiguous as to whether the lawn was mowed by the
speaker or by someone else who was persuaded or forced to do so by the speaker.
Martin’s (1981) usage analysis of causative constructions provides support for the distinctions
made in this section. In his native-speaker questionnaire, 20 of 23 respondents chose get in
cases where it was clear that some difficulty was involved:
I had a lot of trouble finding someone to do it, but I finally
a.	had the lawn mowed. (= 3)
b.	got the lawn mowed. (= 20)
He also found speakers favoring get for some fairly routine activities such as “cashing a check,”
when they may have involved some unexpected difficulties, (e.g., I finally got the check cashed.)
The Use of Complements
and Related Forms
THE PRESEN”771 _rz~______
A question that ESL/EFL teachers will hear asked again and again by students concerns the
environments where that is or is not required in rZwr-complement clauses.12 We can answer
this partially in syntactic terms and partially in terms of discourse conditions. Bolinger (1972)
suggests that one determining factor is the relative formality of the discourse: the more
formal the register, the more likely it is for that to be expressed. This is supported by Biber
(1998), who reported findings from corpus data showing that that is omitted most frequently
in conversation and least frequently in academic prose, with deletion rates in fiction and news
reports falling between the two extremes.
Another factor that Bolinger (1972) mentioned concerns specific verbs: the greater
the relative frequency of the main verb in discourse, the more likely it is that the that-
complementizer will be absent:
He said he wasn't interested.
He told us he wasn't interested.
?He snarled he wasn't interested.
While say and tell are very frequent reporting verbs, snarl is not and would seem to
strongly prefer the retention of that. This is also supported by Biber et al. (1999).
A third factor that Bolinger (1972) observed is the presence of intervening material
between the verb and the complement; this tends to increase the likelihood of that being
present, another observation that Biber et al. (1999) support (p. 682):
He said he wasn't interested.
?He said in a recent report he wasn't interested.
??He said in a report released yesterday by UPI he wasn't interested.
In the second and third case here, the occurrence of that before he wasn't interested would
resolve any processing problems and thus would be preferred.
698
The Grammar Book
Biber et al. (1999) further state that the use of coordinated that-clauses favors the
retention of that:
Professor Johnson agreed that our observations were accurate and that we should try
to publish our findings.
They also report that in their corpora the use of passive voice in the main clause favored
the retention of that:
The political leaders were convinced that elections would take place as planned.
Other than verb frequency, informality of register, and the above mentioned syntactic
factors, are there any other contextual factors that favor the deletion of that? In fact, there are
some additional factors that Biber et al. (1999) have identified. One is having the same subject
in the main clause and the that-clause, and another is having a pronoun as the subject of the
that-clause. Consider the following example:
I think I'll buy a new computer.
In this sentence, four factors (verb frequency, informality, same subject in the main
clause and the complement clause, and a pronoun subject in the complement clause) all
conspire to favor the deletion of that.
Finally, Biber (1998) reports that the most frequent verbs controlling àt-complements
in both conversation and news reports are think, say, know, see, believe, show, find, and feel.
These are verbs of cognition, perception, and speech often related to the speaker’s or writer’s
stance. Such corpus-based information can be of great use to language teachers because it
indicates the verbs. to emphasize when initially introducing tto-complements to learners, as
well as the verbs most likely to favor that deletion.
COMPLEMENT-TAKING PREDICATES IN CONVERSATION
According to Thompson (2002), the description of complementation that we have given so far
does not apply to conversation. Working with a corpus of conversational English, she argues
that viewing what we have called “complement clauses” as subordinate (or embedded) does
not work for spoken data. What we have called “subject NP + main verb” (e.g., I think...') are
what she calls “complement-taking predicates (CTPs)” in conversation, formulaic fragments
that express stance toward the content of a following complement. Some of the most frequent
“predicates” occurring in the CTPs in her data (p. 129) are think (by far the most frequent),
realize, decide, figure, be possible, be too bad, be afraid, can tell, doesn’t matter, hope, wish, and be sure. The
subjects of these predicates are typically pronouns (e.g., I, you, they, everybody). Using data like
the following, Thompson analyzes “I think” as a CTP followed by the juxtaposed complement
“it’s cool”; for Thompson, the CTP does the same work as a modal auxiliary or a sentential
adverb expressing an epistemic, or evidential, stance (p. 132). Further, the complement is the
main carrier of information, while the CTP simply marks stance:
Terry: I think it's cool.
Abbie: It is cool.
Maureen: It is great.
All but a few instances in Thompson’s (2002) conversational data (i.e., 425 tensed
complements preceded by CTPs) were amenable to Thompson’s functional analysis. If
Thompson’s analysis is correct, it gives credence to McCarthy and O’Keeffe’s (2014) claim,
which is that informal spoken English is structurally different in many ways from formal
written grammar.13
Chapter 31: Complementation
699
Conclusion
In this chapter, we have presented what we believe to be the best possible analyses of most
of the English clausal complement types controlled by verbs, especially in written discourse.
In the following chapters, we will carry the discussion further. It should be clear by now
that much of what is required of a learner in mastering complementation is similar to what
is involved in learning noun gender in most Indo-European languages or noun classes in
Chinese or Bantu languages: a certain amount of feel for the logic of semantic regularities
and a certain amount of exposure. It would be unrealistic for an ESL/EFL teacher to expect
students to master all of the verb-complement pairs that exist in English in the course of a
term, but with systematic teacher attention, over time, students can be brought to the point
where they are conscious of the many options before them.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form. Students who want to learn the information in this chapter simply through a form
of rote memorization should be advised that the most effective way to do this is probably
not to make lists of which verbs take which complements and then to memorize the lists.
Rather, a more effective self-study method would be for students to make up their own
[verb + complement] sentences on a verb-class-by-verb-class basis and—after verifying
the grammaticality and idiomaticity of these sentences—to reread or, better, recite their
sentences orally at home, attending to their meaning.
2.	Form. At lower class levels, and for review at higher class levels, a useful teaching technique
that will cue students to proper forms and give them practice in using verbs meaningfully
is for the teacher to model questions that incorporate the complement type in the question
itself, and then for the students to practice these forms with verb + verb forms. What follows
is an outline of four lesson plans in the spirit of suggestions made by Rosenzweig (1973).
Lesson 1. Attempt-type infinitives (attempt, tend, fail, proceed, manage, refuse, promise,
offer, decide, try)
The teacher asks questions that elicit model sentences, such as:
Teacher: What will you try to do this weekend?
Student: I will try to finish my term paper.
Teacher: Where have you decided to go on your vacation next year?
Student: I have decided to go to Mallorca.
The teacher then prompts students to generate sentences based on pairs of verbs provided
by the teacher, such as refuse/accept:
Student: I refuse to accept your offer.
Students can then work in small groups with pairings such as manage/finish, fail/do,
offer/help, refuse/eat, and so on.
Lesson 2. Want-type infinitives (want, intend, expect, prefer, hate, like, love, hope, desire, love)
The want-class of verbs, which may or may not have noun phrases or for prepositional
phrases as nonidentical complement subjects, make a good focus for students interviewing
other students. Most of these verbs give students ample opportunity to express their
feelings on topics that concern them directly. The teacher may begin with:
What do you hate/love most to do?
What do you hate/love most for someone else to do?
The Grammar Book
An exercise follows based on pairs provided, such as intend/study:
Teacher: What do you intend to study?
Student: I intend to study engineering.
Teacher: What does your family intend (for) you to study?
Student: My family intends (for) me to study engineering, too.
Student-to-student questioning follows with additional pairs: prefer/eat, hope/spend
the coming vacation, and so on, adding noun phrases or for prepositional phrases where
reasonable, as discussed previously.
Lesson 3. Verbs taking only gerund objects (stop, quit, recall, dislike, enjoy, avoid, admit,
deny, defend)
The lesson continues to follow essentially the same pattern as discussed previously.
Lesson 4. Verbs taking both gerunds and infinitives forget, remember, try, like, start,
begin, continue, love)
At this stage, the teacher may find it useful to present Bolinger’s (1968) principle
distinguishing gerunds from infinitives, supplying verbs where the distinction is most
clearly exhibited:
Teacher: What do you remember doing yesterday?
What did you remember to do yesterday?
With each student answer, the teacher should make sure to confirm that the student
intended to convey that he or she actually did or did not do the activity. The lesson then
continues to follow the same pattern as before, but with student questioners cued to elicit
alternating pairs, such as forget + gerund, forget + infinitive, would like + infinitive, like +
gerund or infinitive, and so on.
Lesson 5. Encourage integration and transfer of rules learned in the preceding
lessons.
At this point, teachers should mix different types of [verb + complement] pairs and
either continue an activity like the ones above or have students write compositions
or carry out role-plays in which various [verb-verb] pairs suggested by the teacher
are used.
3.	Form. Frodesen and Eyring (2007) suggest that students role-play the solving of
a problem to practice the use of subjunctive tbat-clauses. Two or more students take
opposite sides of an issue. For example:
A young woman would like to attend an all-male college. The president of the college
wants to maintain the 100-year tradition of an all-male campus. Students then use the
following frames to make their arguments:
I propose that...
I suggest that...
We recommend that...
4.	Meaning. For verbs that take both infinitives and gerunds, but with a difference in
meaning, B. Gaskill (personal communication) has suggested that explicit time sequences
be used to teach the differences between infinitives and gerunds with main verbs such as
remember and forget. The teacher introduces these verbs along with a number of situations
that can appropriately serve as complements:
call my parents	lock the door
tell you the news	do my homework
Chapter 31: Complementation
701
Then the notion of time sequence is introduced and an example provided to show that if
the action in the main verb precedes the action in the complement, the infinitive is used:
This happened earlier	This happened later
I remembered.	I called my parents
(main clause)	(complement clause)
—> I remembered to call my parents.
The teacher must also show the reverse. That is, if the action in the main clause follows
the action in the complement, the gerund is used:
This happened earlier	This happened later
I called my parents.	I remembered.
(complement)	(main clause)
—»I remembered calling my parents.
After practicing a number of situations with remember using Gaskill’ร time frames, students
then can generalize this activity to similar situations for the verb forget.
5.	Meaning. The distinction in use between verbs that alternate between taking bare
infinitives and [subject + participle] complements (see, hear, watch, feel, have) can be
modeled to some extent in the classroom by the teacher or by other students. Someone
can close the door slowly and incompletely while asking,
What do you see? (Answer: I see you closing the door.)
Someone can then close the door quickly and completely and ask,
What did you see? (Answer: I saw you close the door.)
Teachers can use their imaginations in coming up with ideas for other verbs. This sort
of activity, incidentally, can be done in conjunction with a review contrasting the simple
present/present progressive and simple past/past progressive in main clauses (What am I
doing? What did I do? What was I doing? and so on).
6.	Form. A good role-play situation for practicing the causative have is to role-play
a beauty salon/barbershop scene. A role-play for three will include two customers
and a stylist/barber. The stylist/barber will ask one customer, “What do you want
to have done today?” The customer can then answer in a variety of ways using have:
“I want to have my hair cut,” “I want to have my sideburns trimmed,” and so on.
This customer can then ask the other customer what he or she wants to have done,
and so on. It has even been suggested (by Jill Rosenheim and Sue Weingarten) that
students actually visit a salon or barbershop as a type of field experience and make
an inventory of services available at the business (i.e., the things that people can have
done there).
7.	Use. Find a news article containing many examples of rZwt-complements with
several clauses having the that-complementizer present and several others having it
absent. Ask your students to work in groups and underline all the àt-complements
and circle all the iZwi-complementizers. Ask them to come up with generalizations
about why that appears before some of the complement clauses but not others. If
they have difficulties, give them a list of the observations made by Bolinger (1972),
Biber (1998), and Biber et al. (1999) so they can see if the observations apply to
their texts.
702
The Grammar Book
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1.	Write sentences that illustrate the following terms:
a.	complement
b.	complementizer
c.	tensed that-clause complement
d.	subjunctive complement
e.	infinitive complement
f.	gerund complement
g.	subject + participle construction
h.	purpose infinitive
Ϊ. the Bolinger principle (for gerunds
vs. infinitives)
2.	Draw tree diagrams for the following sentences:
a.	John thinks that Bob will buy a car.
b.	We suggested that he turn on the radio.
3.	Account for the ungrammaticality of the following sentences:
a.	*1 want that my brother will come home for New Year’s.
b.	*My friends insisted me to come with them.
c.	*The teacher forced US drink hot chocolate.
d.	*1 understood for me to be the winner.
e.	*They disagreed over to go to that movie.
4.	Based on the various types of complement that we have outlined in the chapter, which
category or categories of complement types would the following verbs appear with? Some
may occur with more than one complement construction. Use your intuition (or consult a
dictionary) about the use of the verbs in ordinary English sentences, together with your
knowledge of the categories of verb complementation, and provide example sentences.
agree	beg	notice
argue	dare	resist
assist	keep	suspect
Test your ability to apply what you know.
8.	How would you teach ESL/EFL students to use infinitives and gerunds correctly with
the verb try? Suggest a context and a teaching strategy.
6.	In our discussion of get, we did not contrast this verb in the following two frames:
The teacher got the students to draw pictures.
The teacher got the students drawing pictures.
A student asks which of the two forms is correct. You say that both are correct, but
how would you explain the difference between them?
ๆ. Another student asks you to explain the difference between the two sentences below:
I expect to leave by 4:15.
I expect to have left by 4:15.
How would you respond to the question?
8.	One ESL teacher said that he had his students memorize the verbs that take gerund
complements and told them to use infinitives everywhere else. Do you think that this
is a good teaching strategy? Why or why not?
Chapter 31: Complementation
703
9.	Suppose that you are presented with the following sentences in a setofESL compositions
and wish to give explicit oral feedback on them. What would you tell the students?
a.	*The kindergarten teacher made them to lie down.
b.	*She told US that where the restaurant was located.
c.	*We will go overseas for visiting our parents.
d.	*The officer demanded that I had to show him my license.
Bibliography
REFERENCES _________________________________________________
Anderson, J. I. (1976). ๔4 comparison of the order of difficulty of English sentential complements between native
speakers of Spanish and native speakers of Persian. Paper presented at the Los Angeles Second Language
Research Forum, University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Biber, D. (1998, March). Teaching actual use in conversation and writing. Paper presented at the TESOL
Convention, Seattle, WA.
Biber, D., Johansson, ร., Leech, G., Conrad, ร., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and
written English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ltd.
Bolinger, D. (1968). Entailment and the meaning of structures. Glossa, 2(2), 119-127.
Bolinger, D. (1972). That's that. The Hague, Netherlands: Mouton.
Butoyi, c. (1978). The accuracy order of sentential complements by ESL learners (Unpublished master’s thesis).
University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Chan, A. Y. พ. (2010). Toward a taxonomy of written errors: Investigation into the written errors of
Hong Kong Cantonese ESL learners. TESOL Quarterly, 44 (2), 295-319.
Duffley, p. (1992). The English infinitive. London, England: Longman.
Egan, T. (2008). Non-finite complementation: A usage-based study of infinitive and -ing clauses in English.
Amsterdam, Netherlands: Rodopi.
Frodesen, J., & EyringJ. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Givón, T. (1980). The binding hierarchy and the typology of complements. Studies in Language, 4(3),
333-377.
Givón, T (1990). Syntax: A functional-typological introduction (Vol. 2). Amsterdam, Netherlands:
John Benjamins.
Hamawand, z. (2003). For-to complement clauses in English: A cognitive grammar analysis. Studia
Linguística, 57(3), 171-192.
Kirsner, R., & Thompson, ร. (1976). The role of pragmatic inference in semantics: A study of sensory verb
complements in English. Glossa, 10(2), 200-240.
Lind, A. (1983). The variant forms help to/help 0. English Studies, 64(3), 263-273.
Martin, พ. (1981). Causative verbs in English (Unpublished independent professional project). School for
International Training, Brattleboro, VT.
McCarthy, M., & O’Keeffe, A. (2014). spoken grammar. In M. Celce-Murcia, D. Brinton, & M. A. Snow,
(Eds.), Teaching English as a second or foreign language (4th ed.). Boston, MA: National Geographic
Learning, Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Rosenzweig, E (1973). A strategy for teaching gerunds and infinitives to advanced ESL students (Unpublished
English 215 paper). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
So, N. V (1973). The semantic interpretation of infinitives and gerunds as sentential complements (Unpublished
master’s thesis). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
704
The Grammar Book
Thompson, ร. A. (2002). “Object complements” and conversation: Towards a realistic account. Studies in
Language, 26(1), 125-163.
Van Bogaert, J. (2010). A constructional taxonomy of I think and related expressions: Accounting for the
variability of complement-taking mental predicates. English Language and Linguistics, 14, 399^-27.
A very clear treatment of complements in an older generative framework may be found in:
Akmajian, A., & Heny, F. (1975).An introduction to the principles of transformational syntax. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Traditional nongenerative treatments may be found in:
Joos, M. (1964). The English verb: Form and meaning. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.
Poutsma, H. (1923). The infinitive, the gerund, and the participles of the English verb. Groningen, Netherlands:
Noordhoff.
For a good recent descriptive account of English complementation, see:
Carter, R., & McCarthy, M. (2006). Cambridge grammar of English. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
For an extensive corpus-based description of English complementation, see:
Biber, D., Johansson, ร., Leech, G., Conrad, ร., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and
written English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ltd.
For a fairly complete inventory of English verbs and their complement options, see:
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, ร., Leech, G., & Svartvik, J. (1985). y4 comprehensive grammar of the English language.
London, England: Longman.
For cross-linguistic treatments of complementation in a variety of languages other than English, see:
Dixon, R. M. พ., & Aikhenvald, A. Y. (Eds.). (2006). Complementation: A cross-linguistic typology. Oxford,
England: Oxford University Press.
Horie, K. (2000). Complementation: Cognitive and functional perspectives. Amsterdam, Netherlands:
John Benjamins.
Noonan, M. (2007). Complementation. In T. Shopen (Ed.), Language typology and syntactic description
(2nd ed., Vol. 2, pp. 52-150). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Most ESL/EFL grammar texts at the intermediate level and above cover infinitives, gerunds, and that-clauses.
For many, however, the treatment of infinitives is usually a highly simplified one that does not carefully
distinguish types in the way that we have done in this chapter. Two of the better recent treatments at the
high intermediate level are:
Thewlis, ร. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 3 (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Houck, N., & Hilles, ร. (2009). Grammar connection: Structure through content 4. Boston, MA: Heinle,
Cengage Learning.
Two treatments at the advanced level are in:
Cake, c. D. (2009). Grammar connection: Structure through content 5. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
An interesting series of lessons on infinitives and gerunds from initial presentation to high intermediate
level are in the following texts:
Blass, L., lannuzzi, ร., & Savage, A. (with Reppen, R.). (2012). Grammar and beyond 3. New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press.
Reppen, R. (with Gordon, D.). (2012). Grammar and beyond 1. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Reppen, R. (with Gordon, D.). (2012). Grammar and beyond 2. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Chapter 31: Complementation
705
Endnotes
1.	In his corpus-based study of non-finite complementation in English, Egan (2008) identifies one
additional complementation pattern that is rare but possible (to -ing) (p. 320):
Lind later admitted openly to being an official of the shipping federation ...
Such tokens occurred with only a few of the more than 300 matrix verbs Egan included in his study. Since it is
not clear that to is an infinitive marker here and not a preposition taking a gerund complement as its object,
we shall not deal with this pattern in our treatment of complementation other than to note that prepositions,
like verbs, may take gerund clause complements. We would thus expect prepositions other than to to take
gerund complements. เท fact, such sentences occur:
Susan complained about allowing the men to stay in the office.
The supervisor told US to dispense with editing the new material.
2.	Clausal khat-complements differ from ordinary NPs in that they cannot appear after prepositions as
prepositional objects:
Scientists are often surprised by [great discoveries].
scientists are disturbed by [that the earth is getting warmer].
However, if the fto-clause appears at the beginning of the sentence and the preposition is stranded (i.e. left
at the end of its clause with no object following), this restriction does not hold:
[That the earth is getting warmer] is something scientists are disturbed by.
3.	We choose to expand ร as (comp) (smn) ร because we would want to be able to account for sentences
like the following:
She said that, unfortunately, she could not make the appointment.
4.	เท some generative grammars, infinitives occurring with main clause verbs like believe, know, and report
are called "exceptional clauses" partly because of this chameleonlike property of "subjects looking like
objects," and also because their structural analysis differs from that of other infinitive types.
5.	The verb attempt, of course, can be used in other contexts in which it takes a normal NP object, such as
She attempted a quick exit from the building. เท that case, the what-question would be appropriate. Most
linguists would say that in the lexicon, the verb attempt is listed with two possible syntactic frames: one
in which the verb takes a nonclausal NP object, and another in which it takes an infinitival complement.
6.	Some speakers find it odd to say She promised me to fix the problem; others do not. Those who reject this
construction find an acceptable paraphrase in She promised me that she would fix the problem.
7.	When help occurs without to, it follows the bare-stern infinitive pattern; however, when help occurs with
to, it follows the advise-type infinitive complement pattern.
8.	Duffiey (1992) is a book-length treatment of the "verb + to" versus "verb + 0" alternation, which offers
accounts of other such parallel forms not discussed here.
9.	Note that some of these verbs occur in other environments in which they do not convey this subjunctive
sense. Insist may mean "strongly assert," as in She insisted that the Indians won the World Series in 1949;
in this case, the embedded verb is in past tense. Ask may mean "inquire," in which case it takes a tensed
wheffie/'/Zf-complement, discussed in Chapter 33. เท addition, many of these verbs (ask, require) may also
take infinitival complements, which are by nature tenseless; finally, some verbs with similar meanings
take only infinitival complements (command).
10.	Recall that the -ing of the gerund (whicbTormally marks a nominal form) is not the same as the -ing of
the progressive (which marks an ongoing activity).
11.	Many speakers would simplify such a sentence to:
She remembers listening to a Grieg concerto (all evening).
12.	This problem arises with the relative pronoun that as well; see Chapters 28 and 29 for discussion.
13.	See also Van Bogaert (2010) for further discussion of I think and related complement-taking mental
predicates from a cognitive grammar perspective.
The Grammar Book
Other Aspects of
Complementation
Introduction
In this chapter, we continue the discussion of issues related to complementation begun in
Chapter 31. We also look at some constructions where t/wt-clauses and infinitive complements
function in ways other than as complements to verbs. Then we return to a discussion of passive
voice, examining how it interacts with complementation. In addition, we introduce two more
semantic distinctions among verbs and adjectives that take complement clauses (namely,
factive versus nonfactive predicates and implicative verbs). Finally, we present some relevant
corpus-based studies concerning use.
The six new constructions we discuss in this chapter are:
1.	Subject-to-subject raising—The subject of the complement becomes the subject of the
main clause:
It seems [that they have succeeded].
They seem [to have succeeded].
2.	Complex-NP complements—The tbat-clmse or infinitive functions as a complement
to an NP:
The news [that a hurricane is coming] is worrisome.
A good time [to open a bottle of champagne] will be your birthday.
3.	Adjective complements—Adjectives, like verbs and nouns, can also take test-
complements or infinitive complements:
I'm glad [that you passed the examination].
Joan is eager [to see you].
4.	Extraposition of complements—The tendency of heavy or dominant constituents to
be placed at the end of the sentence with the subject slot being filled by nonreferential
it (sometimes called “anticipatory” or “extraposed zt”):
[That he left without any money] is unfortunate.
It is unfortunate [that he left without any money].
5.	Object-to-subject raising—The object of the complement becomes the subject of the
main clause:
It is important [to solve the problem].
The problem is important [to solve].
6.	Complex passives—The main clause, the complement clause, or both are in the passive
voice, thus making different word orders and structures possible:
707
[That Joe will win the award] is expected.
It is expected [that the award will be won by Joe].
Joe is expected to win the award.
These six constructions provide English speakers/writers with a variety of ways to
express their intentions, to bring to prominence what they wish to focus on, and to facilitate
processing for listeners and readers.
LEARNING CHALLENGES WITH COMPLEX COMPLEMENT CLAUSES
As with other instances in which nonreferential it plays a mainly structural role in English
sentences to fulfill the requirement that a surface subject be expressed, ESL/EFL teachers may
find their students omitting the it in sentences with seem and similar verbs. This is because other
languages may exhibit no such requirement, permitting equivalents of sentences like these to
occur, which are used by English speakers in colloquial speech but not in formal registers:
Seems (that) John is sick today.
Looks like we won't be able to go to the movies.
Learners will also produce sentences like the following, which mix the possible syntactic
constructions for predicates with, for example, seem and he certain:
*He seems like to be not very honest. (It seems like he is not very honest.)
*1 am certain for the assignment to be very easy, (lam certain that the assignment will
be very easy.)
A teacher faced with sentences like the starred ones here should be aware of the range
of options available in English complementation and the confusion that ESL/EFL learners
may experience in trying to select among them.
Another issue for English learners is that not all languages have the raising-to-subj ect
constructions that occur in English. Most languages have the structural equivalent of
(It) seems that John is happy.
but there are languages that have no construction, like the following, where the subject of the
complement becomes the subject of the main clause:
John seems to be happy.
Likewise, most languages have sentences equivalent to
(It) is easy to please Mary.
However, there are many languages that have no construction, like the following, where
the object of the complement is the subject of the main clause:
Mary is easy to please.
Chan (2010), following Yip’ร (1995) observations about cross-linguistic influence from
Cantonese to English, found that Cantonese-speaking students from Hong Kong wrote
sentences such as the following, which shows that deciding which NPs to raise or not raise
is a problem:
*Up to now, we are not easy to work together.
Chan reports that equivalent sentences with infinitive complements like these are common
and acceptable in Cantonese.
M. Shintani (personal communication) tells US that such raised subject constructions are
also challenging for Japanese speakers to comprehend and produce because such constructions
do not occur in Japanese. This is true for speakers of other languages, and ESL/EFL teachers
need to be aware of the special challenges facing these learners. We now discuss one of these
raised subject constructions in some detail.
708
The Grammar Book
The Form of Complex
Complement Constructions
SUBJECT-TO-SUBJECT RAISING
In Chapter 31, we discussed verb classes that are associated with certain complement types.
One additional type of verb that takes an obligatory complement are certain copular verbs,
exemplified here by the verb seem. This verb commonly appears in three frames:
The offer seems good.
They seem to have succeeded.
It seems that they have succeeded.
In the first case, we have a sentence that we can already describe with the phrase structure
rule for VP, one of whose possible expansions is [cop + AP], The other sentences cannot be
so easily accounted for. Such sentences are characterized by subject-to-subject raising, which is
the subject of the embedded sentence moving up to the main-clause subject position, leaving
behind an empty subject slot in the infinitive:
[ 1 seem [they to have succeeded] -> raising -> They seem [<subj> to have succeeded].
Wherever the verb seem is used with a following infinitive, the infinitive has as its logical
subject the subject of the main clause. For example, we cannot have the following:
"They seem their friend to have succeeded.1
The assumption among many grammarians has been that the subject of the main clause
in these sentences is an empty slot, and because almost every sentence in English must have
an overt subject, the subject of the infinitive fills the subject slot in the main clause.
What, then, of the third type of sentence?
It seems that they have succeeded.
We cannot have subject-raising here, since the result would be ungrammatical:
"They seems that [ ] have succeeded.
We may simply assume, then, that the that-clause in this case is a complement after the
verb and that the nonreferential subject, anticipatory it, occupies initial position to fulfill the
requirement for a subject. Other verbs that follow the pattern of seem in all relevant respects
include turn out, happen, and appear:
It turned out that John got the promotion.
John turned out to get the promotion.
It happens/appears that you are right.
You happen/appear to be right.
Three other verblike constructions that are similar but not completely parallel are seem
like, sound like, and look like:
It seems like ("that) something is wrong.
Something seems like it's wrong.
It sounds like ("that) you don't agree.
You sound like you don't agree.
In these examples, the unacceptability of the complementizer that is probably related to
the fact that these verbs involve a verb + prepositional construction (i.e., look + like). As we
have already noted in Chapter 31, a tensed that-c\mse cannot be the object of a preposition.3
Chapter 32: Other Aspects of Complementation
70S
Raising is also sometimes held to operate in the case of certain adjective constructions,
such as be (นท)likely and be certain.'* 1' We get the same structural alternations as with verbs like
seem, and the same patterns of ungrammaticality:
It is (unjlikely/certain that we will be able to return the merchandise.
*We are (un)likely/certain that will be able to return the merchandise.
We are (un)likely/certain to be able to return the merchandise.
The last of these sentences is the same as the seem + infinitive, where the subject NP in the
embedded clause moves to the subject position in the main clause.
Up to now, all the clausal complements we have presented have been verb complements.
However, these are not the only types of complements: both nouns and adjectives may take
complements in English.
COMPLEX-NP COMPLEMENTS
We have seen many cases in Chapter 31 of àr-clauses that function as complement objects
of main verbs. TTwi-clauses often function as complements of NPs as well, especially in
conjunction with certain NPs that represent a cognitive stance or indicate the presumed
truth value of the proposition expressed in the complement clause. Such NPs are often called
complex NPs when they take complements. Some example sentences include those here, with
the head noun in italics:
The belief [that financial reserves are infinite] is misguided.
I don't agree with the notion [that there is no future in electric cars].
Do you believe the claim [that Sam is really a bigamist]?
Her interest in Monet lies in the fact [that he was a French impressionist].
In some cases, head nouns also take infinitive complements, but these are much less
frequent than rfwi-complements:
I had a chance [to play Scrabble with George].
This is a good occasion [to celebrate].
In conversation, only the noun chance occurs with infinitive complements in complex NPs
with any frequency (Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad, & Finegan, 1999, p. 653).
Each complex NP includes a simple NP plus a complement clause. Note that although
the àr-clause examples look similar to relative clauses, they are grammatically distinct from
them. For instance, the that at the beginning of the complement clause cannot be identified
with any NP in the clause (as can the word that in a relative clause, like Mary saw the coat [that
she wanted to buy [0], where that is moved forward from the object position and is identical
to coat). One of the best ways to make learners aware of the contrast between relative clauses
with that as the relative pronoun and complex NP t/w-complements is to use examples with
the same head noun. Biber et al. (1999) state that the head nouns hope, doubt, and suggestion
occur with both constructions in news reports and the head nouns possibility, doubt, belief, and
assumption occur with both constructions in academic writing (p. 650):
NP Comp: The suggestion that the governor should resign is premature.
Rel. CL: The suggestion that the governor made is premature.
NP Comp: I question the assumption that two case studies are enough.
Rel: CL: I question the assumption that they make in their research design.
Our phrase structure rule for NP must be expanded once again to account for complex
NP complements:
NP —> NP comp ร
710
The Grammar Book
The tree structure will be the following:
The belief that financial reserves are infinite is misguided.
det N	that SUBJ
the	belief	NP
-pres
PRED
AUX	VP
financial	infinite
cop	AP
be	ADJ
misguided
Some types of noun complement with the phrase the fact, where the fact is a prepositional
object, have become part of complex prepositional-phrase lexical bundles which, when spoken,
may be uttered so quickly that they seem like single words:
I didn't understand what he said due to the fact that he was facing the other way.
She was angry on account of the fact that he hadn't called her back.
They left town in spite of the fact that they loved the place.
The formulaic nature of these lexical bundles with the fact that may partially be accounted
for by the inability of a full àr-clause to appear as the object of a preposition and the need
for a grammatical means to serve the same function—a need that is fulfilled by NPs like the
fact. Teachers will probably see sentences like the following produced by ESL/EFL students
who are unaware of this restriction:
*My friend drove me home in my car because of I was too tired to drive.
*The principal scolded me in spite of I hadn't done anything wrong.
It is, therefore, worthwhile for a teacher to make students aware of expressions involving
the fact and to provide them with examples in use, especially in written prose.5
Many of the nouns occurring as heads of noun complements are derived from or related
to verbs (e.g., suggest) or adjectives (e.g., possible); fact and idea are the exceptions and are the
only nouns taking tZwi-complements in conversation with any frequency (Biber et al., 1999).
Nouns of cognition occurring commonly as heads of that-complements include assumption,
belief claim, conclusion, decision, impression, reason, suggestion, thought, and view:
The assumption that the war had ended two years ago was false.
Their belief that war was inevitable led to great destruction.
The nouns occurring most frequently as heads of infinitive complements include ability,
attempt, capacity, chance, decision, effort, failure, opportunity, plan, and power:
Their ability to negotiate a truce was an asset.
Most people agreed with the decision to withdraw troops.
Chapter 32: Other Aspects of Complementation
71
When NPs of urging or recommending take that-clause complements, the verbs in
their complements will appear in the subjunctive, just as they do for verbs of urging or
recommendation taking subjunctive clauses:
Ordinary subjunctive verb complements:
We recommended that he take an early plane.
The government demanded that truck drivers be specially tested.
Sentences with complex NP subjunctive complements:
The recommendation that he take an early plane was a wise one.
The government's demand that truck drivers be specially tested was excessive.
ADJECTIVE COMPLEMENTS
As we mentioned, adjectives, like verbs and nouns, may also take clausal complements; they
may be infinitival, they may be tensed that-clauses, or they may be subjunctive that-clauses,
depending on the adjective:
Lorena is eager [to know your birthday].
She was fascinated [to learn the truth].
We're happy [that you could be here with US tonight].
The students are disappointed [that their team lost].
It is imperative [that she leave on time].
[That he complete his required courses first] is essential.
Such clauses can be said to branch from the AP node and will require a revision of the
AP phrase structure rule to read:
AP -> (ADVn) ADJ ( \ ธ H |)
We apply our earlier rule, whereby ร—> comp ร, and the resulting tree structure for the
sentence We are happy that you could come is:
We are happy that you could come.
Si
NP	AUX VP
pro	T cop	AP
we	-pres be ADJ	ร
happy comp ร
that NP VP
pro AUX V
you	M	come
could
Other adjectives that can take ίΖ^ί-complements are apparent, clear, and implicit. Other
adjectives that can take subjunctive ίΖ^ί-complements are vital, (unnecessary, and urgent. The
largest class, other adjectives that can take infinitive complements, includes anxious, (unwilling,
712
The Grammar Book
inclined, and ready. As expected, there are adjectives that can take both rto-complements and
infinitive complements: overjoyed, disappointed, happy, and glad, among others. This causes the
occasional confusion of which type of complement—íZwí-clause, infinitive, or either type—
goes with which adjective:
*1 am anxious that I see you. (I am anxious to see you.)
EXTRAPOSITIOhToiโ
There are instances other than seem-type sentences where it appears in subject position and
a tZw-clause follows the main verb. However, they are distinctly different in that in these
cases, the embedded clause could replace the it in subject position and yield an acceptable
paraphrase. For instance, we cannot have sentences like
*That John is happy seems.
With other verbs, the situation is different. Consider the following related pairs:
[That he left without any money] is unfortunate.
It's unfortunate [that he left without any money].
[That he spent all day playing video games] didn't help his grades.
It didn't help his grades [that he spent all day playing video games].
[That someone would say that] indicates a complete lack of understanding.
It indicates a complete lack of understanding [that someone would say that].
In these .sentences, the rZwt-clause complements are moved to the end of the sentence.
Subsequently, there is no subject, and nonreferential it fulfills this purpose. Note that when
àr-clauses are placed at the beginning of the sentence, we cannot omit the complementizer
that under any circumstances:
*He left without any money is unfortunate.
(That he left without any money is unfortunate.)
However, extraposed àt-clauses may sometimes omit the complementizer, probably
for some of the same reasons we noted concerning that-deletion in Chapter 31:
It's unfortunate he left without any money.
We see the same kind of alternative forms with infinitives, as well as the free relatives
discussed in Chapter 29:
Infinitives:
[For her to quit like that] was scandalous.
It was scandalous [for her to quit like that].
[To do that] would take more time than I have right now.
It would take more time than I have right now [to do that].
Free relatives:
[Who did that] is unknown.
It is unknown [who did that].
[Where we're going] is a mystery to me.
It's a mystery to me [where we're going].
Gerunds are less amenable to extraposition than that-clauses or infinitives; they do not
extrapose well with possessive subjects, although they do sometimes occur in conversation as
afterthoughts, especially in cases without possessive subjects:
[Her whistling old songs] woke up the neighborhood.
*lt woke up the neighborhood [her whistling old songs].
Chapter 32: Other Aspects of Complementation
713
Note: the optional it in
parentheses is a pronominal
reflex for the extraposed
that-c lause.
[Spending the afternoon with you] is nice.
It's nice [spending the afternoon with you].
[Living without a car in this city] is not easy.
It's not easy [living without a car in this city].
[Watching the election results] made me angry.
It made me angry [watching the election results].
Extraposition, in these cases, shifts the entire subject clause6 to the end of the sentence,
where complements tend to occur.
The same sort of movement seems to be taking place in sentences such as the following,
where extraposition occurs from an object position. In these cases, the first alternative is
clearly interpretable but may be awkward:
?! doubt [that she has the answer] very much.
I doubt (it) very much [that she has the answer].
?We appreciate [that you had the time to help us] greatly.
We appreciate (it) greatly [that you had the time to help us].
We want [to go back to our dormitory] very much.
We want very much [to go back to our dormitory].
Extraposition has been claimed to operate elsewhere as well. Sometimes just one part of a
subject, such as a relative clause, a complement, or a participial phrase may detach and move to
sentence-final position; such movement in structures other than complements is most common
in colloquial usage but is not considered good formal written style:
Extraposed thaf-complement:
The fact [that you have won the lottery] is irrelevant.
The fact is irrelevant [that you have won the lottery].
Extraposed relative clauses:
The problem [that I told you about] has been diagnosed. —>
The problem has been diagnosed [that I told you about].
Extraposed participial phrase:
Any questions [regarding the contract] must be dealt with immediately.
Any questions must be dealt with immediately [regarding the contract].
Such movement is sometimes called extraposition fivm NR7
OBJ ECT-TO-SU BJ EcFrAISÍnT^^
A similar but distinct syntactic pattern, often called the easy-to-please construction,8 causes,
frequent difficulties for ESL/EFL students for reasons that we outline next.
The easy-to-please structure depends on the presence of certain adjectives denoting
personal judgments about something: easy, hard, challenging., difficult, annoying, important,
(impossible, safe, dangerous, nice, boring, interesting, and fun:
It's easy to please my friend John. My friend John is easy to please.
It's fun to play this game. This game is fun to play.
It's impossible to solve the problem. The problem is impossible to solve.
It's not safe to eat those mushrooms. Those mushrooms are not safe to eat.
The alternation may occur in embedded structures as well, as in the following bare-infinitive
complement:	'
The teacher made it easy to follow the lectures. The teacher made the lectures easy
to follow.
714
The Grammar Book
This construction may also appear with a for-phrase, similar to verbs like prefer
(see Chapter 31). Where the/òr-phrase is present, the understood subject of the infinitive is
the object offor:
It's easy for me to please my friend John.
The teacher made it easy for US to follow the lectures.
When there is no/òr-phrase, the understood subject of the infinitive complement in all
these cases is normally understood to be a rather vague “anyone” or “someone.”
The construction is formed by raising the embedded object to serve as the main clause
subject:
[ ] is impossible to solve the problem —»[The problem] is impossible to solve [ ]
The embedded clause originates as the complement to an adjective like easy, difficult,
or (im)possible. If the object NP in the complement is raised, it is not necessary to add it: The
problem is impossible to solve. However, if the object NP is not moved out of the infinitive to
serve as the higher subject, nonreferential it fills the subject slot: [It] is impossible to solve this
problem.9
While these movements are from direct object position, they may also occur from a
prepositional object position when the verb phrase of the main clause includes a PrepP; for
example:
It's fun to work on computers. —> Computers are fun to work on.
It's hard to deal with this problem. —> This problem is hard to deal with.
It's easy to talk about the topic. —> The topic is easy to talk about.
In these cases, we are left with a stranded preposition. The prepositional object of the
infinitive complement has moved up to the main-clause subject position (object to subject).
However, for all infinitives like these, it is also possible to move the entire infinitive complement
into initial position in the main clause. This is a marked stylistic option, compared with the
two other possible surface forms discussed previously:
To work on computers is fun.
To deal with this problem is hard.
To talk about the topic is easy.
COMPLEX PASSIVCS^
At this point, it is useful to return to passive voice, a structure that was analyzed in Chapter 18,
and to see how the structure and its uses intersect with the grammar of multiclausal sentences.
As you recall from Chapter 18, a passive structure has a patient or recipient in the subject
position of the sentence and places the agent of the sentence into a secondary position,
appearing (if at all) in a by-phrase in the VP.
We will cover reported speech and writing in detail in the next chapter; however, it is
worth mentioning here that passives frequently appear in reports where the agent—that is,
the reporter—is of no particular interest (or cannot be divulged), and the report, or message,
is the focus. Rather than saying People believe that . . . with a clause following, it is more
common to see sentences like these here:
It is believed that weather patterns are changing worldwide.
It is not known for certain who Homer was.
It is rumored that Colonel Andrews has been demoted.
As you will recall from the discussion in Chapter 18, the passive construction is a means
to topicalize the receiver of an action or the patient of the sentence rather than the agent.
In the case of these sentences, there are no real “actions,” hence no real agents. However,
Chapter 32: Other Aspects of Complementation
715
the “logical” subjects of believe/know/rumor are unstated, possibly because they are unknown
or not being divulged, but also because they seem relatively irrelevant to the main message,
which is the information in the embedded clauses. As we noted in Chapter 18, the verb
rumored does not even have an active voice counterpart, as in
*People have rumored that Colonel Andrews has been demoted.
In these sentences, extraposition of the subject clauses also seems to have taken place,
seemingly for the following two related reasons: (1) heavier, lengthier constituents tend to be
placed at the end of the sentence, and relatedly, (2) new information tends to fall within the
predicate. In these commonly employed ways of reporting others’ utterances, then, we see the
functional interaction of two grammatical constructions.
Passives may occur within embedded clauses as well and are presumably subject to the
same conditions of use in discourse. However, the syntactic options are somewhat more limited,
depending on which type of complement among those outlined in Chapter 31 is present. We
will mention some of the possibilities here.
Passives may occur with cognition-utterance verbs taking tensed or infinitival complements:
Mary believed (that) her son had been given the grand prize.
Sherry thought her son to have been treated unfairly.
The choice of the passive in the second sentence seems motivated by a desire to focus on the
receiver/patient (i.e., her son) rather than the agent. Note that while passives may occur in
infinitive clauses as well, the forms of be must be untensed in such cases: be/been/being occur,
but am/is/are/was/were do not. For want-type verbs, for example, we may have:
Mary wanted her son to be given the grand prize.
Again, the passive seems preferable to its active counterpart. In the case of allow-type
verbs {allow, cause, order, persuade), the choice of passive voice in the complement clause
sometimes may be required since the active voice would have a completely different meaning:
Michelle persuaded her son to be examined by a podiatrist, (passive complement)
Michelle persuaded a podiatrist to examine her son. (active complement)
In the case of bare-infinitive or NP + participle complements, passives may occur, bearing
in mind the usual conditions of use. Recall that these complement types follow verbs of
perception (see, hear, watch, notice) and manipulation (make, let, have). While the syntax of the
following two pairs of sentences is identical, they differ decidedly in terms of naturalness:
We saw a squirrel eating a nut.
?We saw a nut being eaten by a squirrel.
We saw a bear chasing a man.
We saw a man being chased by a bear.
Normally, we would find it odd for a speaker observing the event depicted in the first
pair of sentences to focus on the nut; however, we would not find it at all strange in the second
pair to focus either on the bear or on the man; i.e., the animacy of the NP is highly relevant
in that instance.	_
Issues of Meaning
In this and the last chapter, we have talked about complements in terms of their verbal,
nominal, or adjectival frames, and the semantic classes of verbs or adjectives that pattern with
one or another of these frames. One dimension of meaning that we have not explored thus
far involves the issue of truth versus falsity of complements.
716
The Grammar Book
FACTIVE VERSUS NONFACTIVE PREDICATES
Kiparsky and Kiparsky (1970) distinguished verb and adjective predicates according to
whether they carry presuppositions, or inherent assumptions, regarding the factual status of
their complements. Some examples are listed here:
Nonfactive Predicates
believe
claim
maintain
seem
be likely
be possible
Factive Predicates
comprehend
regret
bear in mind
be significant
be odd
be clear
A factive complement clause is a clause that is true regardless of whether the higher clause
is affirmative, negative, or interrogative:
John regrets that he committed the crime.
John does not regret that he committed the crime.
Does John regret that he committed the crime?
In all three examples, it remains a presumed truth that John committed the crime. In a
courtroom trial, the defense attorney would likely object if the question were posed directly
to the defendant as “Do you regret that you committed the crime?” Whether the question
is answered “yes” or “no,” the response amounts to an admission of guilt. The same quality
holds with the other words and expressions on this list of factives; whether the sentence It is
odd that our friend disappeared is negated, questioned, or left in the affirmative, it remains true
that our friend disappeared.
Now compare these examples with a nonfactive predicate followed by a complement.
The same test yields different results with nonfactives:
The police maintain that John committed the crime.
The police do not maintain that John committed the crime.
Do the police maintain that John committed the crime?
In these sentences, there is no presumption about whether John did or did not commit the
crime, regardless of whether the police have strong beliefs about John’s guilt or innocence. In
a similar way, to say It is likely that the Yankees won the game does not presume that the Yankees
won or did not win, nor is this presumed if the sentence is made negative or cast as a question.
In Chapter 31, we spoke of the Bolinger (1968) principle, which says that gerunds tend
to depict events that are vivid, real, and/or fulfilled, while infinitives tend to depict events
that are hypothetical, future, or unfulfilled. As it turns out, gerunds—especially those with
possessive subjects—and infinitives pattern to a large extent along the factive-nonfactive
dimension as well. The use of gerunds in subject position, for example, involves a presumption
that the event asserted in the gerund is true; if the event is asserted not (yet) to have occurred,
the sentence is slightly odd:
[John's doing that] annoyed me.
?John's doing that would annoy me.
If the event has not (yet) occurred, the far more likely construction would be an infinitive:
For John to do that would annoy me.
The same holds for gerunds in object position. If a gerund is used with hate, we expect
that the event is fulfilled and thus find use of the infinitive somewhat less acceptable:
I hate his having talked like that.
?l hate for him to have talked like that.
Chapter 32: Other Aspects of Complementation
717
With the conditional would indicating an unfulfilled condition, we get the opposite
results:
I would hate for him to say that.
?l would hate his saying that.
The same distinctions may be observed with the verbs like and love, which are treated in
detail in De Smet and Cuyckens (2005).
IMPLICATIVE VERBS
Karttunen (1971) identified a further semantic distinction among verbs in which assumptions
about the factuality or nonfactuality of the complement depend both on the verb itself and
on whether the main clause asserts or denies the complement. Such verbs can be “positive
implicatives” or “negative implicatives” as follows:
Positive Implicatives manage succeed remember get happen	Negative Implicatives fail neglect forget decline
If we say Paula managed to finish her work, we assume that Paula did in fact finish
it. If we say Paula failed to finish her work, we assume that she did not. The same holds
for the other verbs on the list. When implicatives are negated, however, the situation
reverses:
Paula did not manage to finish her work.
Paula did not fail to finish her work.
In the first case (a negated positive implicative), Paula did not finish her work, while in
the second (a negated negative implicative), she did finish her work.
Although these examples are infinitival, it should be pointed out that avoid and refrain
from are also negative implicatives, but that they take gerunds rather than infinitives:
Paula avoided getting (*to get) suspended. (She didn't get suspended.)
Amy refrained from eating (*to eat) dessert. (She didn't eat dessert.)
The majority of verbs taking infinitives are not of the implicative type. Most tend
simply to be ordinary nonfactives: the use of allow, believe, prefer, hate, or imagine with the
infinitives following them presupposes nothing about the truth of the event expressed in the
complement, regardless of whether the sentence is affirmed or denied.
Some Observations on Use
THE USE OF EXTRAPOSITION
As we have seen, English has a tendency for “heavy” or dominant elements to be extraposed
to the end of a sentence, with heaviness or dominance calculated mainly in terms of the
length and informational value of a constituent. One function that extraposition serves is
presumably a processing strategy, since dominant NPs are harder to encode and decode
in initial or medial position than in final position. This is true especially where subjects are
concerned, but it may occur even with other NPs in certain cases. NPs followed by relative
718
The Grammar Book
clause modifiers, for example, are relatively long compared to other NPs and frequently
undergo a shift toward the end of the sentence:
We saw [the movie which she had spoken about] Sunday. -»
We saw Sunday [the movie which she had spoken about].
Note that this would not be a possibility with shorter, simpler NPs:
We saw [the movie] last Sunday. —»*We saw last Sunday [the movie].
Extraposition serves an additional function. As we have mentioned in earlier chapters,
English tends to place old, given information in subject position and new information in
the predicate. Since old information is typically encoded in brief form relative to the rest of
the sentence (because known or assumed information requires no elaboration), postponing a
longer, dominant constituent until the end of the sentence prepares listeners to pay attention
to it. A sentence like the following sounds better with an extraposed subject:
Unextraposed form:
That the governor will formally announce the new sales tax bill is likely.
Extraposed form:
It is likely that the governor will formally announce the new sales tax bill.
If the bill in question is already familiar to listeners or readers and is mentioned within
the subject, it would be far more likely to appear in shorter form, approximately as follows:
The governor's new sales tax bill is likely to be announced today.
Thus, the given versus new distinction may play a considerable role in a speaker’s or
writer’s decision to extrapose.
Conversely, we might ask why someone chooses not to extrapose—why a full clause
might be retained in subject position. One fairly clear case is where the predicate of the
main clause itself contains a clause. The operation of extraposition in such cases may present
serious problems for sentence processing:
That he always selects the correct answer shows that he has studied the material. ->
?lt shows that he has studied the material that he always selects the correct answer.
That you brought this matter to our attention helps US to see the true nature of the
problem. —>
?lt helps us to see the true nature of the problem that you brought the matter to our
attention.
In fact, data from Biber et al. (1999) confirm that subject complements occur most
frequently in cases exactly like these. In terms of where we find such constructions, Lisovsky
(1988) indicates that formal writing has a significantly higher number of clausal rZwt-subjects
than spoken or informal written genres. News reports and academic writing, on the whole,
are more likely to have àr-clauses in subject position than are conversation and fiction.
However, overall the corpus analyses in Biber et al. show that having àr-complement clauses
in subject position is rare in all registers (i.e., extraposition is the preferred or unmarked
option unless a complex predicate makes this option too unwieldy).
USE OF //--EXTRAPOSITION IN ACADEMIC WRITING
Hewings and Hewings (2002) examined the use of zt-extraposition (they call it “anticipatory zt”)
in academic writing. They noted that in published articles in the field of business administration,
which was their focus, such constructions express four types of interpersonal roles:
1.	hedging: it is likely, it seems improbable, it could be argued...
2.	marking the writer's attitude: it is of interest to note, it is worth pointing out, it was surprising....
Chapter 32: Other Aspects of Complementation
719
3.	emphasis: it is evident/apparent, it must be recognized, it is clear...
4.	attribution: ithas been proposed (+ reference, i.e., by someone), it is estimated (+ no reference)
Noting that many languages do not have such extraposed constructions, Hewings and
Hewings (2002) compared the tokens of these four types of zi-extraposition in published articles
in business administration journals with tokens found in MBA theses written by nonnative
speakers of English at a British university. The ESL students made some grammatical errors
in the use of this construction. For example:
*lt was suggested in the marketing literature by Kotler (ใ 973)... to use tangible clues
like physical facilities and personal appearance to enhance institutional image.
However, the differences in the usage of extraposition by the two groups (per 1,000 words)
was the primary focus of the researchers. The ESL writers used 3 8 percent more zi-extrapositions
than the published authors. They did this in the area of marking the writer’ร attitude (2 8 percent
more tokens) and especially in the area of emphasis (91 percent more tokens). They used fewer
zr-extraposition constructions to hedge than did the published authors.
This study points out the need to teach ESL writers rhetorical functions as well as
grammatical form when teaching the use of constructions like z'r-extraposition, which has
multiple functions in academic writing.
USE ISSUES WITH THE EASYTOPLEASECONSTRUCTION
We know of no published work on raising based on an examination of a large corpus that
can provide an explanation of native-speaker choice. It may be that discourse focus is the
key distinction here, just as it appears to be where raising occurs in seem-type structures.
An unpublished study by Santos (ท.d.) does indicate that nonnative speakers tend to disprefer
raising from object to subject in cases where native speakers would raise an NP. Consider the
following example (adapted from Time, April 27, 1998, p. 33):
Much has happened since Betty Currie first faced the Grand Jury back in January. Old
friends who have been speaking with her say
a.	it seems she is calm and unfazed about Round 2.
b.	she seems to be calm and unfazed about Round 2.
In Santos’s (ท..d) study, which involved many items like this one, nonnative speakers
preferred choices like version (a), with nonraised subjects, whereas native speakers preferred
versions like (b), with raised subjects, because they express better topic continuity given the
discourse context. We mentioned earlier that first language patterns might be one reason for
this preference. We also know that this construction can lead to ESL/EFL learner errors for
several reasons. For one thing, when we consider that extraposition is also an option in some
of the sentences, we are now faced with a situation of three-way synonymy among sets like
these here:
I am easy to please. That is easy (for me) to do.
It is easy to please me. It is easy (for me) to do that.
To please me is easy. To do that is easy (for me).
Many learners seem to blend the possibilities, producing sentences like
*1 am easy to do that.
where the intended meaning is It is easy for me to do that.10 The confusion is understandable.
A second problem is that there is also something passivelike in the sentence I am. easy to please·,
it means that someone else, not the speaker, is doing the pleasing.11 Since the underlying
subject that heads the infinitive in I am easy to please is a vague, unnamed agent—rather than
20
The Grammar Book
an easily inferrable one, as in She likes [<subj> to play tennis]—it is somewhat logical for a
learner to expect a passive here. In fact, this logic is the source of learner errors like
*1 am easy to be pleased.
Such an error is readily understood in view of the overall meaning of the sentence, but a
passive infinitive is not acceptable here: the unnamed subject (e.g., anyone) makes the sentence
active. A third source of errors arises from learners’ lack of awareness that where raising
occurs, an NP is moved to the left in a manner similar to relative pronoun fronting, where
there can be no pronominal reflex in the original NP position; thus the ungrammaticality of
the underlined pronouns:
*1 am easy to please me.
*The movie is worth watching it.
Teachers working at intermediate to advanced levels can help students sort out the
difficulties in these constructions, whose similarities of syntax and meaning make them highly
confusing. Although they are syntactically marked constructions, they are relatively frequent
in speech and writing, so it makes sense to devote some attention to them.
THE USE OF INFINITIVES AND GERUNDS AS SUBJECTS
Duffley (2003) examines the use of infinitives and gerunds in subject position. He proposes
that the essential difference is that the gerund subject looks at “the total interiority of its event”
(p. 331); i.e., it takes an inside view. In contrast, the to-infinitive in subject position views an
event from the dutside; it is “the end point of a movement leading up to its actualization”
(p. 333).
Using data from a corpus, Duffley (2003) found that gerunds in subject position were
strongly associated with past tense and occurred in nonconditional contexts with concrete
descriptive words and phrases:
Giving up the violin opened a whole new career for Ilona Schmidt-Seeberg.
Also, no gerunds were found as subjects of predicates signaling desire, ambition, aim,
purpose, or goal. Such predicates occurred exclusively with ro-infinitives as subjects:
To vindicate Lord Raglan... is his purpose.
Duffley (2003) explains his results by saying that subjects taking predicates of desire
and purpose are the end points of a path signaled by to, which can also signal future and
hypothetical events, which the gerund cannot do. This is why gerunds occur with past events
and with examples and explanations of attested present or general events:
Living the life of the Torah makes US meek.
Duffley (2003) also points out that when the subject and predicate are grammatically
parallel (both are gerunds or both are infinitives linked with the verb be), they tend to express
different semantic relationships:
Complimenting is lying.
To be different is to invite shame and doubt.
Here, the gerund + be + gerund signals identity or equivalence (=) whereas the infinitive +
be + infinitive often signals a sequence or outcome (—>), a path and its end point.
Duffley’s (2003) corpus showed a very strong tendency for the to-infinitive in subject
position to express nonreal events (90 percent). Gerunds in subject position, however, were
largely indifferent to the notion of realized or nonrealized events in that both types of events
were expressed with gerund subjects; and as noted earlier, only gerunds occurred with past
tense and specific contexts.
Chapter 32: Other Aspects of Complementation
721
Conclusion
This chapter has taken US beyond the various postverbal complements presented in
Chapter 31 to a consideration of six new constructions:
1.	Subject-to-subject raising with verbs like seem and adjectives like (un)likely:
Bob seems to be unhappy.	John is unlikely to succeed.
2.	Complex NP complements where àt-clauses or infinitives function as complements
of noun phrases:
The fact that Mary left is surprising.
I couldn't pass up a chance to play poker with Roger.
3.	A variety of adjective complements, including that-clauses and infinitives:
I am happy that you came.	I am happy to be here.
4.	Extraposition of complements:
That he said something along those lines does not surprise me —»
It does not surprise me that he said something along those lines.
5.	Object-to-subject raising:
It is easy to please Peter. Peter is easy to please.
6.	Complex passives, where either the main clause or the complement (or both) are in
the passive voice:
It is expected that the award will be won by Joe.
We also discussed the use of infinitives and gerunds in subject position and introduced
some new meaning distinctions that are important to consider when dealing with complements:
factive versus nonfactive predicates and implicative verbs. Many of these constructions yield
roughly synonymous sentences when considered in isolation, but then it turns out that one
construction is strongly preferred over others when the discourse context is considered. For
example, when the speaker or writer is introducing new information, extraposition often
occurs with the new information in its prototypical predicate position:
It seems to me that Ralph has been irritable lately.
Once the new information has been introduced, it can be condensed, often through
nominalization, and moved to subject position (the position for old information), allowing
farther new information to be expressed in the predicate:
Ralph's recent irritability suggests that he may not be getting enough sleep.
Likewise, the choice between (1) and (2) here most often depends on the discourse context:
1.	It's easy to please Peter.
2.	Peter is easy to please.
If the prior discourse is Tell me something about Peter, then the following utterance is
likely to be (2). However, if the prior discourse is What's easy to do? then the answer is likely
to be (1). The fact of rough synonymy here means that issues of use, as well as form and
meaning, come to the fore as dimensions of ESL/EFL teaching.
Of course, learners may well learn these constructions through usage. In such cases,
learners^will encounter them, at least initially, as whole chunks. However, our point is that
students will benefit tremendously from knowledge of the options available to them. That is
the sort of information that ESL/EFL teachers can more readily provide.
In the next chapter, we will see how complex constructions are put to use in reported
speech and writing.
722
The Grammar Book
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form/Use. Learning the rules for raising, extraposition, easy-to-please, and complex
passives helps students to become aware of a variety of syntactic forms that share
essentially the same meaning. Because the variations are roughly synonymous, there is
some value in simply presenting students with one form and having them create other
roughly synonymous variants; for example:
That Seattle is so rainy does not bother me.
(—> It does not bother me that Seattle is so rainy.)
To work with clay is interesting.
(—> It's interesting to work with clay./Clay is interesting to work with.)
People believe that electric cars may soon be popular.
(-> It is believed that electric cars may soon be popular.)
The fact that John passed the exam is not surprising.
(-» John's passing the exam is not surprising.)
However, it is also of value where more complex constructions are concerned for
students to see how the constructions pattern in naturally occurring discourse. After
introducing the constructions and their functions in class, teachers should present whole
paragraphs from written texts that they have collected and ask students why a writer may
have chosen one structure over the other. (In many cases, of course, no definitive answer
may be obvious.) Another option would be for students to collect example paragraphs
containing one or more of these structures from the opinion section of the daily
newspaper (where syntax tends to be somewhat more complex) and to present them to
the class, offering their own explanations of why the writers chose to write the sentences
in the way that they did.
2.	Form. Practicing easy-to-please constructions might go hand in hand with practice with
stranded prepositions (see Chapter 21). Both might be worked on in the context of small
groups, with each student having to solve a problem that is relatively quick to solve, such
as a scrambled-word sentence or a small crossword puzzle. Each group works in pairs or
threes to perform the tasks. The teacher then proceeds to model questions in both forms
for the first group of students as follows:
Teacher: What was Ali working on?
Student ไ: He was working on a crossword puzzle.
Teacher: Was it hard for Ali to solve the puzzle, or was the puzzle easy to solve? Ask him.
Student ไ: Was it hard for you to solve the puzzle, or was it easy to solve?
Ali: It was very hard for me to solve. It was impossible to solve.
The teacher can then present a larger range of adjectives—-fun, interesting, boring,
challenging, and impossible—and have students query each other in their groups as to the
difficulty of their tasks. They can then report their results to the class as a whole.
An alternative to this task might be a question-and-verification sequence, in which
the teacher models the first question and the verification question, using alternative forms
in each sentence. The students then reply directly to the form of each type of question:
Teacher: Alicia, is it hard to drive a car?
Student f; Yes, it is hard to drive a car.
Teacher: Grace, is s car really hard to drive?
Student 2: No, a car is really not hard to drive.
Chapter 32: Other Aspects ÒÍ Complementation
723
Students can then work in groups, taking turns asking each other such questions while
using the adjectives on the blackboard as options.
z. Form. A clause-combining exercise may help students integrate some of the
constructions in this chapter and the previous one in such a way as to allow them not
only to master the formal aspects but also the stylistic ones. It is important to point
out the usefulness of lexical bundles like the fact (that. . .) in clause combining in view
of the impossibility of àt-clauses occurring after prepositions. With these things in
mind, teachers can set sentences like those given here side by side and have students
turn them into all the possible grammatical sentences they can think of, allowing them
to bring in other clause types they know (such as relative clauses and adverbial clauses,
for example). The resulting sentences may or may not express identical ideas:
a.	My brother sleeps late.
That bothers me.
I can't play my music.
That is a fact.
1.	It bothers me that my brother sleeps late because of the fact that I can't play my music.
2.	The fact that my brother sleeps late bothers me because I can't play my music.
3.	My brother's sleeping late means that I can't play my music, and that fact bothers me.
b.	It's unfortunate.
You won't be able to join me for lunch.
My friend is เท town.
You wanted to meet my friend.
1.	(The fact) that you won't be able to join me for lunch is unfortunate because my friend who(m)
you wanted to meet is in town.
2.	It's unfortunate that you won't be able to join me for lunch because my friend is in town
who(m) you wanted to meet.
c.	Something is (not) likely.
My brother will remember something.
Next Friday is my birthday.
My parents will call my brother.
My parents will remind my brother.
1.	It is not likely that my brother will remember my birthday, which is next Friday, even though
my parents will call him to tell him that.
2.	It is likely that my parents will call my brother to remind him that next Friday is my birthday,
but my brother will not remember.
One advantage of this kind of activity is that teachers have the opportunity to guide
students away from the less felicitous combinations that result and toward more natural-
sounding ones. At the same time, however, students often come up with quite sensible
combinations that the teacher would never have thought of!
There is an alternative, more contextualized way of doing this sort of exercise, but
it will somewhat constrain the possible combinations. With some integration, individual
combined clause sets may be sequenced in such a way as to form a coherent story or other
text, provided the right combinations are chosen. Teachers choosing this option may
select paragraphs from newspapers or magazines and adapt them for the purpose of the
exercise, creating three- and four-sentence sets of short clauses to combine.
The Grammar Book
4.	Form. The form of raising structures can be practiced with the help of a series of pictures
that depict a progression of events (e.g., comic strips with dialogue removed or picture
storybooks without words can be useful visual aids). The teacher can tell students that
they cannot be absolutely certain of what is happening in the pictures, so they will have
to hedge their descriptions with verbs like seem, appear, and look like. This can be a good
opportunity for students to practice relatively focused raising structures and relatively
unfocused fr-structures. The teacher can ask a general question first:
Teacher: What is happening in this picture?
Appropriate responses might be
Student ไ: It seems that it is a very windy day.
Student2: It looks like it is a very windy day in the mountains.
The teacher can then zero in on individuals in the picture and ask,
Teacher: What is the man doing?
An appropriate response which focuses on the man would be
Student: The man seems to be holding onto his hat.
This sort of questioning can continue for the other pictures, until the last one:
Teacher: How did the story turn out?
Student: It turned out that everyone was safe inside a cabin.
Teacher: Who did the man turn out to be?
Student: He turned out to be a very famous movie star.
The task is also easily adaptable as a written exercise involving narration and description.
5.	Form/Meaning. Complex-NP complement structures like the fact that, the recommendation
that, and so on can be practiced by providing students with a list of possible NPs like the
following:
the news
the belief
the announcement/report
the recommendation/proposal
the demand
the argument
the fact
the claim
the idea
the possibility/chance
the likelihood/probability
the suggestion
Students then are given sentences to be turned into complements of suitable NPs chosen
from the list; these may include NPs that take subjunctive complements. The sentences
represent controversial statements likely to elicit responses of different types:
a. It has just been announced on the news that engineering students will pay higher col-
lege tuition because they will make higher salaries in the future.
Possible responses:
1.	The idea that engineering students should pay higher tuition is ridiculous because they will
not necessarily make higher salaries.
2.	There is no possibility that engineering students will pay higher tuition.
3.	I am surprised to hear the news that engineering students will pay higher tuition because it
does not seem fair.
Chapter 32: Other Aspects of Complementation
725
b. Cars should be banned completely from the downtown area.
Possible responses:
1.	I completely agree with the recommendation that cars be banned from the downtown area
because it will reduce traffic.
2.	The proposal that cars be banned from the downtown area will cause big problems.
3.	There is no likelihood that cars will be banned from the downtown area because people
need to drive through this area.
This exercise can be adapted to an essay-writing task in which students develop an
argumentative response to one or another of the statements.
Exercises
Test your ability to understand what has been presented.
1.	Provide an example sentence (or pairs of sentences) for each of the following terms.
a.	subject raising	e. extraposition
b.	complex NP	f. easy-to-please constructions
c.	adjective complement	g. complex passive
d.	clausal subject	h. factive verb
2.	State why the following sentences are ungrammatical:
a.	*It seems John to be a successful businessman.
b.	"They avoided that hotel due to it was so expensive.
c.	"To watch Tanya skate it’s interesting.
d.	"Nobody ever complains proves this is a happy office.
3.	Draw tree diagrams for the following sentences:
a.	It seems clear that someone has made a mistake.
b.	The idea is preposterous that parrots are linguistic geniuses.
Test your ability to apply what you know.
4.	Suppose that a writing student who has produced the following sentences asks why
you have identified them as incorrect. How would you answer?
a.	"Is not true that Olivia missed her train.
b.	"I thought I was easy to walk that far.
c.	"This kind of movie is boring -to be watched.
5.	One way has been mentioned in this chapter for distinguishing between relative
clauses with that and noun complements with that: the word that at the beginning
of the complement clause cannot be identified with an NP in the clause the way the
relative pronoun that can. Can you think of another test that can serve to distinguish
them?
The Grammar Book
6.	In this chapter, we have presented, the categories factive and nonfactive to classify
verbs. How would you classify the verbs see and understand based on the following
example sentences?
a.	I see that you’ve bought a new car.
b.	The drunken sailor saw snakes crawling on the floor.
c.	I now understand that there is a faster route to Houston.
d.	I understood Sheila to say that she was from Houston.
Explain your answer based on the criteria presented in the chapter.
Bibliography
REFERENCES
Baker, c. L. (1989). English syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Biber, D., Johansson, ร., Leech, G., Conrad, ร., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and
written English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ltd.
Bolinger, D. (1968). Entailment and the meaning of structures. Glossa, 2(2), 119-127.
Chan, A. Y. พ. (2010). Toward a taxonomy of written errors: Investigation into the written errors of Hong
Kong Cantonese ESL learners. TESOL Qiiarterly, 44(2), 295-319.
De Smet, H., & Cuyckens, H. (2005). Pragmatic strengthening and the meaning of complement
constructions: The case of like and love with the to-infinitive. Journal of English Linguistics, 35(1), 3-34.
Duffley, p. (2003). The gerund and ίο-infinitive as subject. Journal of English Linguistics, 51(4), 324-352.
Emonds, J. E. (1976). A transformational approach to English syntax. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Hewings, M., & Hewings, A. (2002). “It is interesting to note that...": A comparative study of anticipatory
“it” in student and published writing. English for specific Purposes, 21, 367-383.
Karttunen, L. (1971). Implicative verbs. Language, 47(2), 340-358.
Kiparsky, p., & Kiparsky. c. (1970). Fact. In M. Bierwisch & K. Heidolph (Eds.), Progress in linguistics
(pp. 143-173). The Hague, Netherlands: Mouton.
Lisovsky, K. (1988). A discourse analysis of nominal úràt-clauses in English (Unpublished master’s thesis).
University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Santos, T (n.d.). The frequency and usage of raised and non-raised structures in English discourse (Unpublished
paper). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Yip, V (1995). Interlanguage and learnability: From Chinese to English. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John
Benjamins.
SUGGESTIONS FQ^hFuinij]
Raising to subject and extraposition are discussed in a traditional generative framework in:
Akmajian, A., & Heny, F. (1975). An introduction to the principles of transform-ational syntax. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
A functional discussion of raising, including the easy-to-please construction appears in:
Givon,T (1990). Syntax: A functional-typological introduction (Vol. 2). Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
The types of extraposition outlined here and some additional proposed types are discussed in:
Baltin, M. (1981). Strict bounding. In c. L. Baker & J. J. McCarthy (Eds.), The logical problem of language
acquisition (pp. 257-295). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chapter 32: Other Aspects of Complementation
727
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, ร., Leech, G., & Svartvik, J. (1985). A comprehensive grammar of the English language.
London, England: Longman.
Radford, A. (1988). Transformational grammar: A first course. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
For additional studies on /t-extraposition, see:
Kaltenbock, G. (2003). On the syntactic and semantic status of anticipatory “it.” English Language and
Linguistics, 7(2), 235-255.
Kaltenbock, G. (2005). /^-extraposition in English: A functional review. International Journal of
Computational Linguistics, 10(2), 119-159.
Peacock, M. (2011). A comparative study of introductory “it” in research articles across eight disciplines.
International Journal of Computational Linguistics, 16(1), 72-100.
For a description and corpus analysis of complements, see:
Biber, D., Johansson, ร., Leech, G., Conrad, ร., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and
written English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ldt.
Grammar textbooks for ESL/EFL students seldom distinguish raising-type infinitives from other types
previously discussed in Chapter 31, nor do they normally treat extraposition as a whole. However, many
books have sections on subject extraposition; that is, moving subject noun clauses to the end of the
sentences and then inserting it whenever a surface subject is required. Some of the texts teaching subject
extraposition are:
Bunting,}., & Diniz, L. (with Reppen, R.). (2013). Grammar and beyond 4. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Thewlis, ร. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form., meaning, and use 3 (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage
Learning.
Houck, N., & Hilles, ร. (2009). Grammar connection: Structure through content 4. Boston, MA: Heinle,
Cengage Learning.
A presentation of the fact that and other noun complement structures as well as of adjective complements
appear in:
Frodesen, J., & Eyring, J. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 4 (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Heinle, Cengage Learning.
For a lesson focusing on complex passives, see:
Cake, c. D. (2009). Grammar connection: Structure through content 5. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage
Learning.
Endnotes
1.	One reason for the raising analysis is that this type of structure is not quite like the one for verbs like
hope, where the subject of the sentence is identical to the understood subject in the infinitive clause:
They hope [<subj> to win the game]
subj- they
The two structures are also different because, among other things, it is possible to have the semantically
vague there in subject position in the main clause if the main verb is seem, but not if the main verb is hope:
There seems to be something wrong.
"There hopes to be something wrong.
The idea is that something must be controlling the reference of the subject of the embedded infinitive if the
main verb is hope, and the word there cannot fulfill this requirement since there does not refer to anything
specific. With seem, however, control does not seem to be an issue; after all, we can say There seems to be
something wrong.
The Grammar Book
2.	Some generative grammarians have accounted for the ungrammaticality of this sentence by invoking
the Empty Category Principle, which says, among other things, that one cannot remove subjects out of
embedded that-clauses.
3.	เท more formal registers, we have as //appearing in place of like\n these sentences. Since as if is already
an adverb subordinates, the addition of the complementizer that would result in ungrammatical
sentences here as well. เท fact, one could argue that like is also functioning as an adverb subordinate
in these sentences.
4.	We have not listed uncertain here since although we can say We are certain to return the merchandise;
we cannot say *We are uncertain to return the merchandise.
5.	It is, of course, also worthwhile to show that there are less wordy alternatives to sentences like these.
As style manuals have long pointed out, the expression dueto the fact that can be replaced simply with
because.
6.	Baker (ใ 989) calls these clauses pseudocomplements, in that they are understood as moved sentential
subjects even though they appear in a part of the sentence where clausal complements tend to occur.
7.	เท some cases, more than one type of extraposition may even occur in one and the same sentence:
?lt's odd that the customers were so dissatisfied who ate the lobster.
Before extraposition: [That the customers [who ate the lobster] were so dissatisfied] is odd.
Extraposition 1: [ ] is odd [that the customers [who ate the lobster] were dissatisfied].
Extraposition 2: I ] is odd [that the customers were dissatisfied [who ate the lobster]].
With the addition of it to function as the subject, the sentence is structurally complete.
' 8. This construction is also referred to as "object raising" (Emonds, 1976, pp. 77-78).
9.	While the easy-to-please construction is usually associated with infinitives, at least one very common
verb-I—/ทฐุ่ construction, be worth\/-\—ing, seems to follow a similar pattern:
It's worth watching a good program. -> A good program is worth watching.
10.	A possible additional source of blending might be the construction too + adj, to + verb, as in lam too
tired to talk (see Chapter 35).
11.	This characteristic, incidentally, distinguishes this construction from other similar-looking ones where
the alternation with it is not possible:
Salma is happy to help.	*lt is happy to help Salma.
Kim is too tired to go out.	*lt is too tired to go out Kim.
Chapter 32: Other Aspects ofComplementation
729
Reported speech
and Writing
Introduction
In many kinds of speech and writing—whether conversations, formal speeches, journalism,
or academic texts—speakers and writers frequently refer to the statements or ideas of others.
Grammar and rhetoric books typically identify three ways in which we may cite the ideas
of others: direct quotation, indirect reported speech (including reported written text), and
paraphrase as illustrated in the following examples:
Original source (J. Smith): School budgets will not be cut during this recession.
Quotation" Smith stated,"School budgets will not be cut during this recession."
Reported speech: Smith stated that school budgets would not be cut during this recession.
Paraphrase: Smith stated that during the recession no reductions in school budgets would occur.
In the teaching of written English for academic purposes, instruction related to reported
speech and writing focuses on the linguistic and rhetorical conventions for referencing
sources, including the vocabulary and grammar of reporting verbs and phrases to introduce
source materials, choosing between quotation and paraphrasing, strategies for paraphrasing
and, for advanced students, the practices of their disciplines in reporting research. As Hyland
(2000) and others have shown through corpus-based studies, significant differences exist
across disciplines in citation conventions. Also, it is well-known that reporting others’ ideas
in writing is an important skill to master in order to avoid plagiarism.
As for reporting others’ words in speech situations, instructors will want to help their
students understand the different ways that speakers may signal reported speech in monologic
narratives, conversations, and other interactive contexts such as group discussions. As researchers
examining conversational data have pointed out, there are ways that English speakers mark
reported speech, such as intonation, pauses, and expressions like be like that are typically not
found in ESL/EFL textbooks. And in some reported speech situations, there may be a blending
of the forms we typically identify as belonging to either indirect or direct quoted speech.
The Form of Reported Speech Structures
r/Mr-CLAUSES
Indirect reports at the sentence level can appear in several grammatical frames, but reporting
most commonly involves creating complements to a reporting verb such as say or report.
We discuss these frames and verbs more fully later; for the present, we note that ordinary
731
àto-clauses are probably the most common way in which indirect reporting is done in
spoken and written narratives, journalism, and some academic disciplines. Recall that the that
complementizer is structurally optional and that pragmatic factors govern its presence or
absence (see the use section below).
That-clmses were presented in Chapter 31 as objects of a main verb. We can thus use
this analysis for those indirect reports that have that clauses:
Smith reports that budgetary cuts may occur during this recession.
SUBJ
NP
N
Smith
AUX
-pres
comp	ร
that SUBJ	PRED
	
NP	AUX	VP
AP N \	MV	PrepP
	\	1
ADJ cut	-pl may occur prep	NP
	1	\
budgetary	during det	N
this recession
SEQUENCE OF TENSES _	— _	7-' '
When a quotation is reported as indirect speech, reported clauses with tensed verbs are
traditionally subject to a rule referred to as sequence of tenses or backshifting, which is described
below.
Backshifting
The standard textbook treatment of the sequence-of-tenses rule, in both descriptive and
pedagogical grammars, says that the tense in reported clauses is in some sense controlled by
the tense in the reporting clause: when the reporting verb is in the past tense, the verb in the
reported clause must “backshift.” The paradigm below illustrates the contexts in which this
phenomenon traditionally does and does not occur:
1.	Original sentence:"! am leaving tomorrow."(= present progressive)
Report:
Simple present—no backshifting:
She says that she is leaving tomorrow.
Present perfect—no backshifting:
32
The Grammar Book
She has said that she is leaving tomorrow.
Simple past + backshifting to past progressive:
She said that she was leaving tomorrow/the next day.
2.	Original sentence:"! left yesterday." (= simple past)
Report:
Simple present—no backshifting:
She says that she left yesterday.
Present perfect—no backshifting:
She has said that she left yesterday.
Simple past + backshifting to past perfect:
She said that she had left yesterday/the day before.
3.	Original sentence: "I have left already." (= present perfect)
Report:
Simple present—no backshifting:
She says that she has left already.
Simple past + backshifting to past perfect:
She said that she had left already.
4.	Original sentence:"! had left earlier." (- past perfect)
Report:
Simple present—no backshifting:
She says that she had left earlier.
Simple past—no backshifting possible:
She said that she had left earlier.
5.	Original sentence: "I will leave soon." (modal, future)
Report:
Simple present—no backshifting:
She says that she will leave soon.
Simple past + backshifting:
She said that she would leave soon.
6.	Original hypothetical sentence, not yet uttered: "I have the answer."
Report:
Modal, future—no backshifting:1
She will say that she has the answer.
As the examples illustrate, tense shifting occurs only when the main verb is in a past tense;
otherwise the tense remains as in the original quotation. What is most important to notice is
that the tense in the reported clause bears no necessary relation to whether the actual event
described is in the past at the time the report is made. That is, if one says on March 11, “She
said today that she was leaving on March 15,” the listener will interpret the woman's date
of departure to be in four days—that is, four days in the future from the listener/speaker'ร
perspective—rather than a March date in some previous year. In other words, a shift in perspective
occurs with regard to the time of the utterance reported on, which is of necessity in the past.
Chapter 33: Reported Speech and Writing
733
The traditional tense switch is, in most cases, accompanied by:
a.	the changing of pronouns from first-person (I/we) to third-person (she/be/they) forms
b.	the changing of tomorrow to the next day and the changing of yesterday to the
day before.
Such changes are called deictic shifts, from the Greek word deixis meaning "to point,” a term
previously mentioned elsewhere in this book. These shifts will be described in the course of
this chapter.
Exceptions to Backshifting
What makes the backshifting rule more difficult for English learners is that there are exceptions
in use— a fact which most descriptive and ESL/EFL grammar books acknowledge, and some
which call the “rule” into question. Unfortunately, research has not yet revealed a completely
satisfying unity among these exceptions. We list three standard exceptions here:
State-Event Remains True. Thompson (1994), drawing on a corpus database, suggests that
present tense is retained in reported clauses when the author wishes to emphasize that the
state or event in question still holds true at the time of reporting and/or is not presented as
something temporary. He offers as illustration the following example, where the first sentence
deals with a general on-going policy (no tense shift) and the second sentence deals with a
specific situation (tense shift) (pp. 109ff):
A Foreign Ministry spokesman said government policy is not to sell arms to sensitive
areas. But he said his country needed the income to convert arms factories to non
military production.
Perceived General Truths. Many sources such as Quirk, Greenbaum, Leech, and Svartvik
(1985) mention as a chief source of exceptions cases of general truths, as in their examples (p. 1027),
Their teacher told them that the earth moves around the รนท.
Socrates said that nothing can harm a good man.
It seems that the principle underlying this exception involves what is perceived to be general or
timeless truth; in such cases, we hold that we cannot imagine a state of affairs in the world other
than the one we have mentally committed ourselves to. As a hypothetical contrastive case in
point, consider the case of a child who is told by a trusted older sister that, for example, seven
plus four equals twelve. The child might say, “My sister told me that seven plus four is twelve.”
Upon hearing otherwise from a (more trusted) teacher and committing inwardly to this new
answer, the child might say to the sister (perhaps in disappointment or anger), “You told me that
seven plus four was twelve.” The actual sum presumably remains constant regardless of anyone’s
belief, but the child’s mental commitment to the general truth of a certain sum has changed.
Immediate Reports. A third case in which tense shifting tends not to occur involves a specific
discourse context. When a statement is reported to a third person by a second person
immediately following its utterance by a first person, it will often tend to be repeated with its
original tenses unchanged/
Speaker A·. We will be having polenta for lunch.
Speaker B: What did he say?
Speaker C: He said we'll be having polenta for lunch.
An awareness of these exceptions to backshifting should be useful for ESL/EFL students,
especially those regarding state or events that hold true in the present. However, as McCarthy
(1998) suggested, instructors should not “be over obsessed with backshift and sequence of
tenses” (or their exceptions) in indirect speech when teaching about reported speech and
34
The Grammar Book
writing (p. 172). As we will be discussing in further sections, there are many variations in the
forms of reporting others’ words as well as a rich array of functions across registers and genres,
much of which should be of interest to and useful for learners of English.
OTHER DEICTIC SHIFb""-"^”"	^·^^
As we mentioned earlier, the use of reported speech may require not only shifts in tense but
also shifts in time and place adverbiais and in personal and demonstrative pronouns.
Time/Place Adverbial Shifts
In the example given at the beginning of this chapter,
"School budgets will not be cut during this recession."—Smith
a reasonable paraphrase might contain either this or that, but the impheations will be different:
1.	Smith predicted that no school budget cuts would occur during this recession.
2.	Smith predicted that no school budget cuts would occur during that recession.
In the first case, the reader or hearer will assume that the recession in question is still ongoing
at the time that the paraphrase is written; in the second case, one might easily assume with the
use of that that the recession is over at the time of writing.
Likewise, options are available in two of the examples shown above for the backshifting
rule, where tomorrow alternates with the next day and yesterday alternates with the day before,
depending on the relation of the time of original utterance to the time of reported utterance.
Such shifts in-'time are marked quite systematically and without overlap, as the following
comparative tables show. The first table contains expressions with speaker-time, i.e. the
moment of speaking, as the point of reference; the expressions in the second table are used
with some point in the past as the reference-point:
EXPRESSIONS USED WITH REFERENCE TO TIME OF SPEAKING
Past
Present
Future
(6:00 P.M.)	(midnight).... (7:00).	...(8:00) (9:00 AM.)
yesterday	last	two	an	NOW
เ	night hours	hour (= time of
ago	ago utterance, speaker-time)
in
an
hour
at this time/moment/today
(10:00)...(11:00)....(5:00).......(midnight)...(8:00 A.M.)
in this this tonight tomorrow
two afternoon evening
hours
the day before yesterday
three days ago
last week
last year
the day after tomorrow
in three days
next week (in a week)
next year (in a year)
Chapter 33: Reported Speech and Writing
735
EXPRESSIONS USED WITH REFERENCE TO SHIFTED TIME
Past-in-Past
Past
Future-in-Past
(6:00 P.M.)...(midnight)...(7:00)... (8:00)	(9:00 AM.) (10:00)	 the day before,	the	two	an	THEN	an the previous day,	ni9ht	hours	hour	(time of event/	hour a day earlier	before	before	before	reference-time)	later (earlier) (earlier) at that time/moment				(11:00).... (5:00)	(midnight)	(8:00 AM.) two	that	that	the next day, hours	evening night	the following day later		
						
	three days bei a week before the week befo the year befor	ore (earlier) re		three days latí a week later (c the next (folio the next (folio	?r (afterward) fterward) wing) week wing)year	
The parallel between these adverbiais and tense-backshifting is evident; however, there are
no “exceptions” as there were with tense choice. One cannot use the adverb tomorrow to talk
about the day after the day that is talked about in a reported (dependent) clause unless the
condition for using tomorrow in a report still prevails in the reporting clause as well. Likewise,
one cannot use the next day in an utterance to refer to the day after the utterance unless the
condition for using this expression still obtains in the reporting clause.
The same considerations apply to place-deictics, although the range of distinctions is
not as large: the adverb here becomes there (or vice versa), but this shift also depends on
whether the reported utterance was or was not uttered in the same location as the report.
If the two places remain identical, then there is no shift; if they lack identity, there is a shift:
Original quote	Report: Uttered in the same room	Report: Uttered elsewhere
"1 have been cleaning	She said she had been cleaning	She said she had been cleaning
โ here	here 1	there Ί
14...	all day." [this room] 7	4...	โ all day. [this room J	7	that room I all day·
Deictic Shifts in Pronouns
Just as time and place adverbiais shift, pronominal forms also change as necessary. Most
commonly, first-and second-person forihs change to third-person forms:
Original quote
"I hope that a solution to the problem will
soon be found."
Reported utterance
Smith said that he hoped that a solution to
the problem would soon be found.
736
The Grammar Book
Quoted third-person forms can of course be shifted to first-and second-person forms if the
reference of the form is to the reporter or the reader/listener of the report:
Original quote by Mary	Report by Fred	Response to by someone speaking/writing to Fred
"1 hope that Fred gets better soon."	Mary says that she hopes 1 get better soon.	Mary says that she hopes you get better soon.
In the two reporting sentences, note that the complementizer that may be omitted from the
second clause to avoid repetition of that.
In another set of circumstances, a first-person form might be properly paraphrased by a
second-person form, and vice versa, when interlocutors are reporting on their own and each
other’s speech:
Original quote	Report	Response to report
"1 am going to follow your advice."	You said you were going to follow my advice.	Yes, 1 said 1 was going to follow your advice.
In general, time/place adverbial shifts and pronoun shifts seldom leave the reporter
with more than a single proper choice among forms. In this they contrast with backshifts
in verb tense, which frequently permit real options. While pronoun shifts pose relatively
few problems for ESL/EFL students, it is worthwhile for a teacher to spend some time
focusing on adverbial shifts because, as with tense shift, the required changes are not always
reflected in exactly the same ways in other languages’ conventions for encoding time and
place expressions.
SHIFTING AND PARTIAL QUOTATIONS	-^——___--
We have presented the complementizer that as a specific signal of indirect speech or a paraphrase.
It is not used to preface full quotations. Thus, a sequence like the following is not acceptable:
*He said that, "The strong economy is likely to improve still further this year."
On the other hand, that is acceptable when a mixture of quotation and paraphrase is used in
reporting and the quotation does not directly follow that·.
Paraphrase	Quotation
He said that the economy, which has been strong, "is likely to improve still further this year."
Such mixing of paraphrase and quotation may be constrained, however, by the need for the
various shifts we have discussed. For example,
Direct quotation	Full indirect report	Partial indirect report
The mayor told me, "1 am impressed with the level of your commitment this year to the betterment of our city."	The mayor told me that he was impressed with the level of my commitment that year to the betterment of our city.	*The mayor told me that he was impressed with "the level of your commitment this year to the betterment of our city."
Chapter 33: Reported Speech and Writing
737
The problem in the last example is related to the need for complete deictic shifts throughout
the report. Without these shifts, the references of your, our, and this/that year are unclear,
causing serious comprehension problems for readers. Where deictic shifts are possible in
reporting, a writer has three choices: (a) full quotation, (b) full paraphrase, or (c) the use of
shifted deictics in square brackets within quotations to replace the original, unshifted ones:
The mayor told me that he was "impressed with the degree of [my] commitment [that]
year to the betterment of our city."
Let us now look at reported speech that involves constructions other than ordinary àr-clauses.
SUBJUNCTIVES
We have already outlined the nature of subjunctive clauses in Chapter 31 on complementation.
The same general features exist with reporting verbs as with other subjunctives. First, there is
no tense in the complement, which means that backshifting does not apply:
Speaker A: I recommend that you leave tomorrow.
She recommends that we leave tomorrow.
She recommended that we leave tomorrow/the next day.
She had recommended that we leave tomorrow/the next day.
Deictic shifts in pronouns and time adverbiais, however, do apply as with ordinary that-
clauses, as the examples illustrate, specifically,you is changed to we in reference to the speaker
reporting; tomorrow may be changed to the next day. Second, as we showed in Chapter 31,
the verbs that take subjunctive complements all involve an agent who is oriented toward
inducing another agent to perform an act. These verbs might usefully be ordered along a
scale from weak to strong: suggest, propose, recommend, urge, ask (in the sense of request), require,
and demand. Verbs that take subjunctives already have the notions of should or must as part
of their meaning; thus, the complements typically do not take modal verbs such as must
(*She demanded that I must go). Teachers should expect many second-language difficulties in
producing these constructions; learners often use modals with verbs in that-complements
after verbs like suggest or recommend, or they may use infinitival complements, as in "She
recommended me to go. Since subjunctives really represent only a small subset of English verbs,
students tend to overgeneralize the more commonly occurring complement frames to them.
INDIRECT IM p E
Many imperative sentences can be reported accurately with verbs such as demand or insist that
take subjunctive rto-clause complements:
"Please go away!"—> She asked/insisted that he (please) go away.
Imperatives can also be reported with ordinary that-clauses (the presence of the indirect
object with verbs like tell is dealt with later in the chapter):
"Please go away!"—> She said that he should go away.
—» She told me that I should go away.
However, it is probably most common for imperatives to be paraphrased with infinitival
complements when using the main-clause reporting verbs tell, order, ask·.
"Please go away!"—> She told (asked, ordered) him to (please) go away.
738
The Grammar Book
Imperatives can, of course, be used for purposes other than outright commands. They can, for
instance, be used for invitations, as in
"Stop by for some dessert and coffee tonight!"
—> He asked US to stop by for some dessert and coffee tonight. (asked = invited)
Indirect imperatives with to tend to be much less problematical for ESL/EFL students than
subjunctive forms, perhaps because they are simpler and also occur much more frequently in
native speaker conversation.
INDIRECT QUESTIONS '
An indirect question (or embedded question) is so called because the utterer is typically not asking
a question but reporting a real or hypothetical question.4 The difference between direct and
hypothetical questions may be illustrated with the following pair of sentences:
Is anyone interested in the movie?
She wants to know whether/if anyone is interested in the movie.
In the first case, the speaker is asking the question, while in the second case, the speaker may
simply wish to state a fact about someone else’s wishes and does so with whether or if plus
a dependent clause. Just as we have placed the complementizer that into a comp position
directly under the embedded ร, just to the left of the embedded ร position, so will we place
whether/if into comp in yes/no indirect questions. In all other respects, the trees are identical.
Here is a tree for an indirect yes/no question with whether·.
John asked whether he should bring dessert.
รบBJ
NP
N
John
AUX
-past
comp
whether
ร
SUBJ	PRED		
NP	AUX		~VP
pro	M	V	NP
he	should	bring	N
			dessert
Chapter 33: Reported Speech and Writing
739
Word Order in Indirect Questions
We covered the form, meaning, and use of direct yes/no and ๗-questions in Chapters 11
and 13. There, we discussed the fact that direct questions involve subject-operator inversion
and the need in certain cases to add a form of the operator do. Thus we get pairs like,
Statement	Direct Question
Susan can come with นร.	Can Susan come with US?
John walks to school.	Does John walk to school?
She has bought a new car. —» What has she bought?
We arrived before noon. When did you arrive?
In contrast, indirect yes/no and ๗-questions involve no movement and no use of the do
operator; clauses follow normal declarative subject-verb-object order:
Indirect Question
Mary asked [whether Susan could come with us].
(*Mary asked whether could Susan come with US.)
They inquired [what she had bought].
(*They inquired what had she bought.)
Since there is no movement of an operator, there is also no need for addition of the do operator
in indirect questions that have no inherent operator:
They asked US [when we arrived].
(*They asked US when
we did ]	. 1
1 arrive.)
did we J
While do may be used in the uninverted word order with heavy stress to mark the emphatic
do, it cannot be used in the normal way simply as a syntactic operator.
The rule of non-inversion in embedded questions, which is considered standard, is
complicated by the fact that English speakers do not always follow it, particularly in speech.
In some dialects, such as African American English and some regional dialects such as the
one spoken in the New York City area, subject and operator are often inverted in embedded
questions as they would be in unembedded questions:
?She asked where was I going.
?They asked what was the time.
We see farther evidence of inverted subject and operator in embedded questions constructions
in both written and spoken data from the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA):
King was asked what was the greatest satisfaction he got from his job. (San Francisco
Chronicle,2005)
You know, you asked what was the lesson of the story we just watched. (Ann Curry, NBC
Today, 2008)
In the first example above, we see what appears to be tense backshifting and pronoun
shifts in respect to what was most likely the original question: "What is the greatest satisfaction
you get from your job?” In the second example, the form of the original source is less clear,
but tense backshifting seems to occur: “What is the lesson of the story you/we just watched? ”
In both of these examples, the clausal postmodification of the two head nouns, satisfaction and
lesson, may have influenced the inverted forms since otherwise the verbs would either have
to follow a long noun phrase or be inserted somewhere in between (e.g., what the greatest
satisfaction was that he got from his job). Such a non-inverted form would be more difficult to
produce in real time speech.
740
The Grammar Book
Further research is needed to show the extent of such inversion and what pragmatic
factors, such as the length of subject noun modification or of the entire embedded question,
can help explain the environments in which inversion most often occurs.
Main-Verb Choices and Complementizer Types in Indirect Questions
There is a much smaller range of main-clause verb choices in indirect question constructions
than in indirect declarative statements. The most common verbs are ask, inquire, and wonder.
All can take either tensed-clause or subject-controlled infinitival complements. In the case
of complements with a tense or modal, where the indirect question is of a yes/no type, either
whether or if may appear as the complementizer:
John asked (whether/if) he should bring dessert.
For infinitives, only whether may appear:
John asked (whether/*if) to bring dessert.
Such questions can also be introduced with phrasal expressions such as these examples
from COCA:
I wanted to know whether he was planning to resign.
She didn't know if they would be safe.
It's a good question whether they are smart enough to work here.
In the case of indirect ๗-questions, the ๗-พord or expression serves in place of whether/
if as a complementizer. The logical subject of the infinitive is the same as the subject of the
sentence as a whole.5
a.	We wohdered [what we should do เท case of an emergency].
b.	We wondered [what to do เท case of an emergency].
c.	We wondered [which plants we should water].
d.	We wondered [which plants to water].
The tree for an embedded indirect ๗-question, after wh-fronting applies, is:
They asked what we were doing.
AUX
SUBJ
NP
pro
they
-past
V
ask
NP
rule: ๗-fronting
Chapter 33: Reported Speech and Writing
741
It is not always the case that sentences containing w/z-words are indirect questions. Recall
from Chapter 29 that sentence can also have free relatives (who, which) and relative adverbiais
(where, when, how, why). Some verbs associated with such cases are discover, explain, find out,
know, learn, show, teach, and tell:
We found out [who we should call].
An electrician should know [how one fixes an electrical short].
If the wh-clause can best be paraphrased as a direct question with minor adjustments,
then we have an embedded indirect question.
special ESL/EFL Issues with Indirect Questions
ESL/EFL students often have trouble with the form of indirect questions. Common errors
include the following:
1.	The embedded clause is produced without a whether or if complementizer and with
direct-question word order:
*My friend asked me did I really believe that.
*Can you tell me is this the right way to go?
There is some irony in this type of learner error. Students typically have some initial
difficulty producing properly inverted direct questions, producing instead normal
declarative word order. Once the proper order is mastered, many students then
understandably tend to overgeneralize inversion to indirect questions, where inversion
produces ungrammatical results!
2.	In some languages, two adjacent complementizers may occur in embedded yn/no
questions, resulting in the following type of cross-linguistic influence:
*My friend asked me whether that I really believed the story.
3.	Also in some languages, but not in English, a complementizer may co-occur with a
^-question.
*The woman asked US that how we could fix the flat tire.
*She wants to know that when would be a good time to visit you.
Learners should be aware that double complementizers are never used in English.
OTHER methods'ๅ
So far, most of this chapter has covered the use of main-clause verbs to perform attributions
in complement clause constructions. It should not, however, be assumed that reported
speech and writing need always be marked in this way. Other forms include reporting nouns,
prepositional phrases, and, in informal speech, introductory expressions such as be like and go.
In addition, in conversation and monologic narratives, speakers may use intonation and other
cues (that is, zero-quotatives) rather than lexical or grammatical markers to signal reported
speech. We will discuss each of these briefly in the sections that follow.
Reporting Nouns
Many of the verbs used for reporting have related noun forms which can also serve as reporting
devices, e.g., argue!argument, believe/beliefi recommend/recommendation, wam/warning. And
of course some verb/noun pairs, such as claim!claim, have the same form. Thompson
(1994) provides a substantial list of reporting nouns. To give one example, the content of the
following clause may be incorporated into a corresponding noun phrase (pp. 115ff):
742
The Grammar Book
Smith believed that school budgets should not be cut.
... Smith's belief that school budgets should not be cut...
The following sentences with reporting nouns modified by íÂ/7í-clauses are from COCA:
[He] reneged on his promise that all votes would be counted. (Fund, 2004)
While Foss's claim that the [bicycle inner] tube is lighter than the norm didn't
bearout... (Allyn, 2012)
The examples above report on the speech acts of a specific individual and a company,
respectively. However, often a reporting noun occurs without a possessive determiner, but
instead with a determiner like the or this; as such, it reports a commonly expressed opinion or
repeated claim rather than the speech or thought of a specific individual:
[T]he act of dividing students up reinforces the belief that boys and girls are different
(Wood, 2012)
And what I couldn't get out of my head was this claim that tomatoes could be engineered
for precise tastes. (Schonwald, 2012)
Prepositional Phrases
There are also a number of conventional ways that prepositional phrases are used in reporting
others’ thoughts and words. The most common is probably the phrase according to X; others
include in the opinion/viev)/perspective of X, from xys perspective, and so on. Here are a few
examples from COCA:
เท the opinion of the panel, acquiring these [foundational] skills will be necessary for
future achievement. (Fuchs et al., 2012)
We did acknowledge that, from the perspective of this committee, the fact that
chimpanzees are very close to humans gives them a different status. (PBS NewsHour,
May, 2012)
Informal speech Forms: Go, Be All, and Be Like
In reporting speech and thoughts, writers and speakers may use a variety of other forms.
Three expressions current especially among younger speakers, but growing in informal usage,
are the verb go and the predicates be all and be like.
McCarthy (1998) offers an extended example from the Cambridge and Nottingham
Corpus of Discourse in English (CANCODE) of a speaker repeatedly using past tense go as
a reporting verb, an excerpt of which is reproduced here (p. 165):
I can remember getting to the customs in America and this guy went where are you
staying ... I went with my friend [speaker is interrupted by another speaker]
The expression be all may introduce the speaker’s words as reported to another
If I go to an event and someone says, "Would you like to put your bag down?"
"I'm all, "No, thanks!" (Seidman, Confessions of a Bag Lady, Good Housekeeping, 2012)
or may mark speech heard by the reporter as in the following example with be like and be all·.
"And I'm like,'Didn't you get my messages?'And he 'ร all, 'What messages?"' (Riley, 2008)
As the example above illustrates, be like in the first clause serves a similar purpose of
signaling speech. Durham et al. (2012) note that recent studies document the swiftness
with which this expression has spread across age groups. They also summarize recent
research investigating linguistic and social changes in the constraints on be like use in
English dominant countries such as the U.K., Canada, and the บ.ร. For example, some
studies indicate that women tend to be more creative than men in their use of be like;
others indicate that, in the spread of be like globally, some of the social meanings related
Chapter 33: Reported Speech and Writing
743
to its use do not always accompany it, but instead speakers incorporate be like usage in
their speech contexts in innovative ways.
In summary, all three of these quotative forms appear to be increasing in acceptance and
frequency of usage in informal speech. And, as the following example from a television talk show
(COCA) illustrates, sometimes speakers manage to combine all three, i.e., be all, be like and go!
Oh, when [we're] back stage, you should see these guys moving around. They're all like,
and I'm like going, okay, I better get it together fast here. [ABC GMA 2012 (COCA 120228)]
Free Indirect Discourse and Zero Quotatives
There are yet other options for citation, one of which has been referred to as free indirect
discourse (Rimmon-Kenan, 1983). Here, the identity of the reporting author often seems to
phase into the identity of the person reported on, thereby producing what seems closer to
direct than to indirect speech. Often, what is reported in this way are thoughts:
Little Red Riding Hood objected to her mother's advice. Why should she always take
the same path to Gran[d]ma's? She might see something different if she could cut
through the woods. (Yule, Mathis, & HopKins, 1992, p. 247)
The second and third sentences cannot be direct quotations given the use of the third person
pronoun she.
Given appropriate discourse contexts and adequate contrast and texture in voice quality
(Yule, 1995), even entire dialogues can be represented without conventional markers of
speaker-change, as in the following text with two zero-quotatives which also makes use of the
expression be like in the context of a speaker’s conversation with her mother:
She's like, "So what time did you get m?" "We got in at two-thirty." "Well I got home a
little after one"... (Yule, Mathis, & HopKins, 1992, p. 249)
Yule, Mathis, and HopKins note that everyday reporting in conversation is full of such devices
unlikely to be found in textbooks and that ESL/EFL students ought to be made aware of them
not necessarily to produce them but to avoid misunderstanding them when they encounter
such reporting strategies in everyday conversation.
The Meaning of Reporting Devices
THE COMPLEMENTS OF REPORTINfiVERBS
As should be obvious by now, verbs used for reporting do not all share identical complement
types. Verbs like say require tensed àt-clause complements, verbs like wonder take question
complements (i.e., bothyes/no and wh-), verbs like order take infinitives, and others take tenseless
subjunctive clauses. While some of these verbs could also be cross-listed in the lexicon for
either one type of complement or another with virtually the same meaning, with other verbs,
meaning will change depending oft the complement chosen. Complements to the verb insist
can be either ordinary declarative or subjunctive, with a marked difference in meaning:
Jack insists that we have visited that place.
Jack insists that we visit that place.
In the first example, Jack expresses his certainty that we have been at that place before, while
in the second, he strongly recommends our visiting that place at some time in the future.
The verb ask can accompany either subjunctives or interrogatives, again with a meaning
change:
744
The Grammar Book
The conductor asked that we give him our tickets. (asked = requested)
The conductor asked US where we were going. (asked = queried)
Then, too, many verbs used in reporting such as remember, forget, see, and know do not change
their meaning when negated, but there may be a change in the presumed factual status of the
complement depending on which complementizer is chosen:
They remembered/knew that those birds flew south in the fall.
a.	They did not remember/know that those birds flew south in the fall.
b.	They did not remember/know whether those birds flew south in the fall.
In example (a), it is still presumed true that the birds fly south in fall. In example (b), it does
not necessarily hold true; in this case, the presupposition ceases to hold.
Finally, some reporting verbs with complements require either direct or indirect objects,
some cannot take them, and some take them optionally. A few examples are listed below:
No indirect object: agree, realize, conclude, think, believe, say, prove, wonder
I agreed (*him) that it was true.
They said (*him) that it was time to go.
Obligatory indirect object: tell, assure, convince, persuade, remind, inform, warn
She informed US that it was a one-way street.
The speaker convinced the audience that humpback whales should remain on the
endangered species list.
Optional indirect object: show, promise, ask
The presenters showed (us) what the results would be.
He promised (me) not to be late.
This is information that students will have to learn one verb at a time; since there does not
seem to be any reason for why a verb like inform must take an overt indirect object, teachers
should expect to see errors in this area even at advanced stages of learning.
Choice of If versus Whether
Many traditional grammarians claim that the difference between if and whether is one of
register, whether being used when a more formal register is desired. This observation, however,
does not give us the whole picture.
Bolinger (1975) has suggested that there is a difference between these two comple-
mentizers in that if marks true yes/no questions, whereas whether implies the existence of
alternatives. Although this distinction is subtle, it may be true that whether would be more
frequently selected in situations where the listener is being asked to make a choice:
Margaret: Do you prefer Mexican or Greek food?
Margaret asked whether I preferred Mexican or Greek food.
Further support for Bolinger’s hypothesis might be the fact that only whether can be
immediately followed by or not:
1 wondered
whether
*if
or not Helen was coming.
The complementizer if however, may also be followed by or not, provided that there is a short
clause intervening:
I wondered if Helen was coming or not.
Chapter 33: Reported speech and Writing
745
A co-occurrence restriction that always distinguishes between if and whether is that only
whether can occur after prepositions or participial -ing forms functioning like prepositions:
I inquired as to
whether
*if
there were any new developments.
[whether].1
We asked them regarding 1	\ there were any new developments.
*if I
In a data-based study of if vs. whether as complementizers of reported yes/no questions
in written English discourse, Ssensalo (1991) found that usage was genre sensitive. College
textbooks and professional journals strongly preferred whether (91 percent), newspapers
had a modest preference for whether (63 percent), and children’s literature tended to use if
(67 percent). Among the frequently occurring main verbs that preferred z/were ask) see, and
wonder; the most frequent verbs preceding whether were decide, question, determine, and know.
Ssensalo concluded that verbs of interrogation tended to select if whereas verbs of mental
activity tended to select whether; a main verb’s semantic category was more influential in
complementizer choice than the genre in which it occurred, accounting for the selection of
if or whether twice as often as the genre.
Further research is needed to determine whether the same trends obtain in oral discourse.
THE MEANINGS ΑΝΡΠηία^^
The distinction between reporting verbs and other verbs depends largely on the ways in which
they are used rather than on inherent verbal semantics. As an illustration of the importance of
context for these verbs, consider the following examples:
ใ. (a) Our teaching assistant explains statistics well.
(b) Our teaching assistant explained the difference between mean, median, and
mode in class today.
2.	(a) My brother has neglected to maintain his car.
(b) เท their article, the authors have neglected to account for data that conflicted
with their results.
In each of the two sentence pairs, a reporting verb occurs only in sentence (b). The verb
explain in sentence 1(a) introduces a claim about the teaching assistant’s general ability;
1(b) reports on a speech event. Likewise, the verb neglect in 2(a) reports on an activity (or
more precisely, the lack of it), whereas in 2(b), neglect reports on what the writer believes is an
omission in a research article.
English has a large number of verbs that can be used to mark reported utterances, and,
as we will see, these, verbs have been "categorized in a variety of ways, both semantically and
functionally. Most of the reporting verbs, however, appear primarily in written or formal
speech contexts rather than in conversation. Like other grammatical constructions in which
only a few lexical items account for the majority of uses in conversation (e.g., as noted in
Chapter 26 regarding the use of and and so for logical connectors), only a small group of
reporting verbs, including say, tell, know, ask, think, and wonder, tend to be used for informal
reported speech or thought.
McCarthy (1998) underscores the difference between speech and writing in the lexical
variety of reported verbs by comparing two narrative extracts of 300-400 words, one from
written fiction and the other from a spoken story. The shorter fiction text contained eight
746
The Grammar Book
different reporting verbs, including three occurrence of exclaimed and several verbs with
modification such as replied shuddering, while the spoken text used only two lexical verbs: say
and ask, with said used 29 times (p. 155) Even without reference to data analyses, we know
from everyday experience that reporting verbs such as allege, assert, contend, determine, or point
out, just to give a few examples, are not frequently used in conversation and informal oral
narrative contexts. As previously discussed, there are a number of ways that speakers signal
reported speech and thought to their listeners that do not include reporting verbs.
In written registers, reporting the words and thoughts of others can also be marked in
ways other than the use of reporting verbs, such as the use of reporting nouns, as we described
earlier. However, in contrast to informal spoken English, a great number of reporting verbs
occur in written English, especially in academic genres, but also in fiction and journalism.
During the last several decades, genre analyses and corpus-based studies across academic
disciplines have offered a number of classifications of reporting verbs from semantic and
functional perspectives. For example, Thompson and Ye (1991) examined verbs reflecting
both writer (reporter) and author (source text) processes. Their analysis of journal article
introductions across disciplines looked at the interactions between the denotation of
reporting verbs and their evaluative possibilities using an elaborate classification scheme.
Their denotation categories identified authors’ textual, mental, and research processes (e.g.,
state, think, and measure respectively) as well as writers’ acts of comparing (e.g., correspond to)
and theorizing (e.g., account for). Their evaluative categories distinguished various types of
writer and author stance, that is, both the writer’s attitude toward the information reported
(e.g., demonstrate) and the author’s attitude toward the text’s information as reported by
the writer (e.g.,' emphasize). Hyland (2000) adapted and simplified the taxonomy created by
Thompson and Ye for his investigation of citation practices across academic disciplines. The
following chart summarizes his categories for the denotation of reporting verbs, that is, those
that describe reported speech or writing activities.
DENOTATION OF REPORTING VERBS			
Research Acts		Cognition Acts	Discourse Acts
procedures	findings	believe	argue
analyze	discover	consider	discuss
calculate	notice	think	propose
explore	show	view	state
Adapted from Hyland, 2000, pp. 349-350			
Hyland (2000) also simplified Thompson and Ye’s (1991) evaluative taxonomy; again, a
summary is presented here:
EVALUATIVE MEANINGS OF REPORTING VERBS
Writer's stance toward reported information	Factive (writer acceptance)	Counter-Factive (writer disagreemen t)	No clear signal
The authors...	acknowledge point out establish	exaggerate fail ignore overlook	believe examine generalize6
Chapter 33: Reported Speech and Writing
747
Writer's expression of the author's stance	Authors as Positive	Authors as Neutral	Authors as Tentative	Authors as Critical
The authors...	advocate argue hold	address cite comment	believe hypothesize suggest	attack condemn object
Adapted from Hyland, 2000, p. 350
As these classifications of reporting verbs indicate, selecting verbs in order to
describe reported processes, to express one’s attitude toward the reported information
and to express authors’ views toward the reported information is a complex task, both
linguistically and rhetorically. No wonder that ESL/EFL writers, even at the advanced
levels, tend to rely heavily on “simple” verbs such as say, think, or show to indicate what
another speaker or author has said! The taxonomies that researchers have created to
account for all instances of reporting verbs in written texts would be overly complex for
learners, but they can be drawn on for instruction that focus on different aspects of the
meanings of reporting using simpler categories. For example, Frodesen and Wald (2015)
ask students to rank the strength of claims of specific reporting verbs (e.g., argue versus
state versus suggest) and to make binary distinctions between “saying” verbs (e.g., claim,
remark, state) versus “doing” verbs (e.g., describe, examine, present) in research reports
from COCA.
Given the dependence of reporting verbs on context for meaning, it is important that
academic writing instruction include authentic texts from genres and disciplines appropriate
to students’ levels and instructional goals, as well as practice in using reporting verbs with
subsequent corrective feedback. Advanced level students writing within specific disciplines
can be encouraged to compile their own corpora of sample texts to familiarize themselves
with the kinds of reporting verbs commonly used in their fields or to check discipline-specific
use of reporting verbs in the Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English (MICASE). On
the other hand, it is worth considering that even in fields such as engineering, where the
range of reporting verbs in research writing may be fairly limited relative to the numerous
choices available, students in these disciplines presumably also read and listen to formal
speech in areas of interest beyond their academic fields, thus encountering a greater variety
of reporting verbs than they might come across in their academic reading.
Simple Declarative Reporting Verbs
There are a host of possible verbs with which to mark reported utterances. Quirk et al. (1985)
list over 150 of them, many of which overlap in meaning. They divide these into several
categories, including those they call “public” and “private” types—that is, those in which the
person reported on has actually said"or written something publicly observable—and those in
which only an inner “intellectual state” is reported (p. 1181). For ESL/EFL teachers, of greater
importance may be the distinction mentioned in Chapter 32 on complementation, which we
revisit now: the factive/nonfactive distinction. Listed below are some of the more common
factive/nonfactive reporting verbs and a capsule description of their relative complexity. We
might adopt Quirk et al.’s feature [public] as basic and develop further features in the manner
below, taking the verb believe as an understood primitive:
748
The Grammar Book
Nonfactive	Factive
believe say, assert = [believe + public] claim = [say + nonobvious] argue — [claim + reasons] assume = [believe + no reasons] suspect - [believe + doubt] suggest = [say + doubt] be certain = [believe + no doubt]	know, be aware - [believe + FACT] reveal, show, point out - [know + public] prove, demonstrate = [show + reasons] realize, notice = [come to know] discover = [realize + nonobvious]
Students may be surprised to hear that to be certain about something says nothing definitive
about the actual truth-value of the proposition that one is certain about; it merely reflects a
person’s cognitive state. Some verbs, such as explain or understand, may be somewhat more
ambiguous with regard to the factive-nonfactive distinction.
understand
factive: He understood (the fact) that 42 = 16.
(42 = 16 even if one questions or negates the higher verb.)
nonfactive: The children understood that their uncle would come later.
(i.e., Their understanding could be misguided or inaccurate.)
However, there is a decisive difference in such a large majority of cases that the distinction
is worth noting. Other verbs may be somewhat more difficult to present in terms of simple
features. (For instance, to mention something is to say it, but the two verbs are not completely
interchangeable.)
Emotional-State Reporting Verbs
There is a subclass of declarative reporting verbs that reveal not only a cognitive but also an
affective state. These include verbs such as complain, exclaim, rejoice, lament; if we represent
these verbs as well with semantic features, we might do so as follows:
complain - [say + annoyance]
exclaim - [say + surprise]
rejoice - [say + joyfulness]
lament - [say + sadness]
Interrogative Reporting Verbs
The factive/nonfactive distinction does not seem to apply when the truth of a proposition
is being questioned. However, some of the same other distinctions mentioned do apply. For
example, to wonder seems to differ from to ask in the feature [public] ะ
wonder - [not know] + [desire to know]
ask — [not know] + [desire to know] + [public]
One can “wonder” without making public one’s wonder, but “asking” seems to imply a “public”
wonder.
ESL/EFL writers, even at the advanced levels, tend to rely heavily on “simple” verbs
such as say and think to indicate what another speaker or author has said. This may reflect
Chapter 33: Reported Speech and Writing
749
a certain reluctance to use verbs with more complex semantic features whose informational
content is more precise. Indeed, such verbs may prove difficult to use in a nativelike way, and
there may not always be equivalents in students’ native languages.
Uses of Reported Speech and Writing
We will begin this section with uses of reported speech in spoken contexts, first in informal
contexts of conversation and narrative, followed by uses in more formal spoken contexts. We
then turn to citation practices in academic writing, in particular looking at the differences
that have been identified across disciplines and what they reveal in terms of the disciplinary
beliefs about knowledge making and reporting.
USES OF REPORT ED^FFlEoillirNARRATIVESAilD^ONVERSATIO N
Suggesting Authenticity of Past Event
Many examples of reported speech in conversational English serve to develop narratives,
often stories in which the speaker is one of the participants. McCarthy (1998) found that
the great majority of speech reports he examined in narratives from the CANCODE corpus
consisted of indirect speech introduced by past tense reporting verb said or historical present
says. He speculates that speakers use such speech patterns along with discourse markers like
well and oh (e.g., so she said well go in the queue then she said andfind out what’s happening) in order
to create the illusion that the story is a faithful rendition of what actually took place (p. 161).
Providing Evidence
Reported speech is commonly used to provide evidence in conversational interactions. Holt’s
(1996) analyses of dialogues shows how reported speech may offer evidence for a previous
comment, sometimes to counter another speaker’s claim. The following example of a telephone
conversation between two sisters, adapted from one of Holt’s transcripts, illustrates this use:
Lesley: Mum seems to be getting confused. She called me Vanna.
Vanna: No, she said would you like to talk to Vanna.
To counter her sister’s claim that their mother mistakenly called her by the wrong name, the
second speaker uses reported speech by her mother.
Clift (2006, 2007) has looked at the uses of reported speech in conversations that do
not involve extended narratives. She explores how reported speech in dialogues signals the
source of information on which a claim is based. The example below summarizes a multiple
turn exchange between two friends in Clift’s conversational data:
Jenny: Your spn Bill and his wife have such a lovely family; all they need now is a little girl.
Vera: Well, Bill said they hav^enough kids as it is.
In responding to her friend’s comment, Vera offers something her son had said as an assessment
of the situation rather than stating her own opinion.
An awareness of some of the common pragmatic functions of reported speech in social
interactions can help English learners better understand their meanings both in actual
conversational settings and narrative fiction.
750
The Grammar Book
Politeness
Finally, we may note that verbs reporting the speaker’s thoughts are often used to express
politeness in conversational indirect questions. The Collins COBUILD English Grammar
(Sinclair & Fox, 1990, p. 330) mentions expressions like,
I wonder if I could ask you a question.
Don't you think we'd better wait and see?
1 don't suppose you could stay an hour or two longer.
as a means of softening an utterance which might otherwise sound too direct, as in
Could I ask you a question?
We'd better wait and see.
Could you stay an hour or two longer?
....
USES OF_REPORTED SPEECH IN OTHER INTERACTIONAL CONTEXTS___
Less attention has been given to analysis of the functions of reported speech in oral
discourse other than conversation or monologic narratives. In one study, however, Meyers
(1999) offers a taxonomy of reported speech functions in focus group discussions that he
believes could be used as a starting place to investigate other types of group discussions.
Meyers notes that reported speech in these contexts is almost always presented as a direct
enactment without reporting verbs. For example, in one discussion, a speaker describing a
corporation’s failure to appropriately protect laborers in a developing country from injury
in an industrial disaster uses the phrase “It didn’t matter, did it...” to reflect the corporation’s
attitude. Although the speaker doesn’t explicitly attribute the comment to the company,
from the context and the speaker’s intonation, the listeners can be counted on to interpret
the utterance as reported speech and not the speaker’s opinion. In addition, commentary
often both precedes and follows the instances of reported speech, sometimes by the speaker
and at other times by other participants. An implication of this and other interactional
studies for learners, Meyers argues, is that lessons in reported speech should start not with
forms but functions, i.e., not with questions about which tense or pronoun to use but rather
with questions about why it is that people use these forms.
______________________________________________________________
USES IN ACADEMIC WRITING: DISCIPLINARY
IN CITATION PRACTICES
Just as Meyers (1999), in examining focus group discussions, raises questions about why
people use reporting forms in more formal spoken interactions, research on reporting
in academic writing contexts has increasingly investigated such writing as instances
of social activities deeply embedded in dynamic disciplinary and cultural contexts. In
the past, ESL/EFL instructors might rely on composition handbooks to provide what
seemed to be uniform and relatively unchanging “rules” of citation, from the mechanics
of reporting sources, to questions of when and how to use quotations, to the do’s and
don’t’s of paraphrasing others’ words. It appeared that the primary differences across
disciplines resided with mechanical conventions as reflected in style manuals, such as those
of the APA or MLA. However, more recent corpus-based studies of written texts have
revealed that writers across academic disciplines vary in much more significant ways in
their citation practices. Similarly, studies eliciting students’ and teachers’ judgments of
Chapter 33: Reported Speech and Writing
751
what counts as acceptable and appropriate citation practices have indicated there is far
from uniform agreement about these matters.
We have previously summarized Hyland’s (1999) taxonomy of reporting verbs for
academic citations, created as part of his analysis of citation practices in 80 journal research
articles representing eight disciplines, including ones from the sciences (molecular biology,
electronic engineering, physics, mechanical engineering), social sciences (sociology,
marketing) and humanities (applied linguistics, philosophy).
In addition to text analysis, Hyland (1999) consulted with specialists in each of these
fields. He found distinct differences across disciplines, including citation frequency and the
ways in which they referenced sources, especially in comparing what he termed the “soft
disciplines” (those in social sciences and humanities) and the “hard disciplines” (science and
engineering). Methods of citation distinguished between non-integral citations, which do
not explicitly mention the author and are often represented by numbers, either in-text or
following the reported writing,
However, as has been analysed in a recent paper [ใ 7] dealing with the spin-spin...
and integral citations in which the author is explicitly mentioned and thus given greater
emphasis than otherwise.
Sherin (1990) argues that police agencies establish triage systems whereby...
Hyland also classified citations according to whether they were quotations, summaries, or
generalizations from more than one source and categorized the main verbs associated with
the authors of the articles.
Among Hyland’s (1999) main findings were the following:
1.	The soft disciplines tended to use citations more frequently, with sociology citing
most often. In the hard disciplines, physics had the fewest citations.
2.	The humanities and social sciences tended to use integral citations more than the
sciences, but the differences between the disciplines were for the most part not great;
more than two thirds of citations were non-integral. The striking exception was
philosophy with over two-thirds integral citations. Hyland accounts for this difference
by observing that articles in philosophy often feature arguments between writers other
than the reporting author.
3.	The great majority of citations in all disciplines fell into the category of summary
(ranging from 72 percent in biology to 89 percent in philosophy); most others were
classified as generalizations; few citations (3-13 percent) were quotations, including
block quotations.
4.	There were clear disciplinary differences in the use of specific reporting verbs for
citation. For example, almost all of the uses of Cognition verbs say and think occurred
in philosophy; most uses of Research-type verbs report and describe were found in
science and engineering articles; social science and humanities articles accounted
for the majority of uses of Discourse act verbs argue, suggest, and study, and applied
linguists contributed over half of all instances of the verb examine.
From these and other findings, Hyland (1999) concludes that writers in the humanities
and social sciences tend to recognize the authors of cited information both more frequently
and more explicitly through integral citations (often putting authors into the subject position),
quotations, and a variety of reporting verbs that express 'an author’s stance. Extensive
references in the “soft disciplines” tended to reflect broader historical and topical connections
to the subject at hand. In contrast, writers in the sciences typically downplayed the authors of
752
The Grammar Book
reported discourse through non-integral citations as illustrated above; further, their citations
tended to be closely related to the specific research being presented and assumed a high level
of shared knowledge by readers. In short, Hyland claims these findings reflect important
differences among disciplines in the ways in which they view the roles of individuals in
constructing knowledge. As he explains in part: “Articles in the hard sciences still suggest
that knowledge is accomplished by the correct application of prescribed procedures... in this
perspective, human judgment as a mediating link in the interpretation of data is downplayed”
(p. 355). What a long way such interpretations take US from the “cut and dried” rules of the
style manuals!
DIRECT QUOTATION VERSUS PARAPHRASING	__________
As for the use of direct quotations versus paraphrasing in reported writing, typically, in
academic writing instruction, student writers are advised to use quotations sparingly and only
for specific purposes. For example, here are guidelines for when to use quotations from a
widely used handbook for college-level writers (Hacker & Sommers, 2010):
•	When language is especially vivid or expressive
•	When exact wording is needed for technical accuracy
•	When it is important to let the debaters of an issue explain their positions in their
own words
•	When the words of an authority lend weight to an argument
•	When the language of a source is the topic of your discussion (as in an analysis or
interpretation)
These guidelines are followed by the recommendation to avoid excessive quotation,
adding “it is almost impossible to integrate numerous quotations smoothly into your text”
(Hacker & Sommers, 2010, p. 632).
The articles in Hyland’s (1999) corpus certainly reflect the sparing use of quotation for
reporting, with very low frequencies of quotations relative to other types. However, current
research suggests that general guidelines need to be considered carefully in light of writing
goals and contexts. In an analysis of direct quotations in MA theses written by students
from Central and Eastern Europe in an English medium university, Petrie (2012) found that
high-rated theses had close to three times as many direct quotations per 1000 words as the
low-rated theses. Perhaps most important were the differences between the two groups in the
kinds of direct quotations. High-rated theses used mainly quotation fragments, sometimes
strings of only two or three words, integrating the quotes into the writers’ sentences and
modifying when needed; in contrast, in the lower-rated theses, quotations were primarily
clause-based and without any modification by the writer.
We turn now from text analyses of reported writing to look at studies that have elicited
instructors’ and students’ evaluations of reporting practices such as paraphrase, providing
yet further evidence of the complexity of referencing sources and the challenges for teachers
of ESL/EFL students in this area. As part of a larger project on reporting source texts in
academic writing, Shi (2012) explored the extent to which student writers and professors in
a North American university agreed on the acceptability of paraphrased, summarized, and
translated texts in four samples of L2 student writing.
Shi’s (2012) inclusion of translated texts is interesting since there has been little
research in this area of reported writing; here, however, we will focus on responses to the
paraphrased texts since the use of paraphrasing plays such an important role in academic
writing pedagogy. From responses of 48 native and nonnative English speaking students
Chapter 33: Reported Speech and Writing
753
(20 undergraduates and 28 graduates) and 27 instructors (mostly native English speakers),
Shi found more differences across disciplines than between students and faculty in their
opinions about the acceptability of citation practices in the sample texts. In general,
interviewees in the sciences and applied sciences were more accepting of close paraphrases
in which strings of words had been copied without quotation; these participants commented
that they focused more on the ideas than exact wording and tended to feel it didn’t matter
whether the words were changed. Students and professors in the arts and social sciences, in
contrast, for the most part found the closely paraphrased texts less acceptable and in some
cases bordering on plagiarism.
In summarizing the participants’ comments on the paraphrase samples, Shi (2012)
states they offer a definition of good paraphrasing as “balancing between a rigorous use
of citations and a readable text with an integration of others’ words and ideas with those
of one’s own” (p. 142). At the same time, Shi emphasizes that these characteristics of good
paraphrasing can be interpreted variously depending on a variety of disciplinary differences.
These include the accepted citation conventions, expectations of expert level knowledge,
and inferential thinking in content areas. They also involve the rhetorical purposes for
using citations in a particular context. Shi’s interview data further documents nonnative
students’ struggles to paraphrase effectively in order to avoid plagiarism, indicating that
this is an area deserving of much attention in academic writing instruction for students.
While students in Shi’s study could recognize that one paraphrase was much too close to
original wording, unlike the instructors, they were often unable to suggest how to improve
it. These and similar studies remind US that paraphrasing is a complex process, one that
is especially challenging for second language writers and requires extensive practice and
feedback. Although students may understand the need to use “their own words,” they may
lack the linguistic skills to do so; thus problems with inappropriate textual borrowing are
often not intentional plagiarism. Writing instructors will need to help ESL/EFL students
not only to learn principles for effective paraphrasing but to develop the grammatical and
lexical resources to implement them.
Other Issues of Use เท Reporting
PRESENCE AND ABSeIkE OF
In Chapter 31 we discussed the presence or absence of the complementizer that with respect
to all verbs taking that complements. Here we restrict our observations to the co-occurrence
of that with reporting verbs say and think in spoken and written American English.
Biber, Johannson, Leech, Conrad, and Finegan (1999) found that omission of that is very
frequent in conversation, fiction, and news registers when think or say is the main verb. They
also noted that that was more often omitted when subjects in the main clause and that clause
were co-referential (pp 680-681). Here are several examples of this pattern in MICASE and
magazine articles from COCA:
I said I'd be willing to do it... (MICASETranscript OFC285SG135)
Hesaid he's gonna be in Germany in May... (MICASETranscript SGR999SU146)
Until that moment, I thought I knew how to be quiet around wildlife. (Backpacker, January 20Ί 2)
It was so hot you thought you were going to die. (Washington Post, April 2012)
754
The Grammar Book
Does any variable favor the retention of that? Huang (1993), in a study of said + ๘พ-clauses
in written English, found that when an adverb intervened between the verb said and the
complement clause, that was retained 65 percent of the time. The following examples from
COCA illustrate this pattern.
He said earlier that one of the planes had fired the first shot. (Associated Press, 2011)
I said before that there's just 25 guys in [the clubhouse]. (Sporting News, August 2010)
VERB TENSE USAGE WITH REPORTING VERBS
While much has been said about the sequence of tenses in complex sentences when a main
verb occurs in a past tense, we have said nothing about how speakers and writers choose
between present and past tense in main clauses—i.e., Smith says X versus Smith said X. This
is an issue that arises frequently in instruction for advanced level ESL/EFL students just as it
often does for native English writers.
Vividness
One criterion mentioned by Thompson (1994) that bears on tense choice is the desire to
achieve a “vividness effect” (pp. 11 Off), a desire mentioned in Chapters 7 and 9 in connection
with historical present tense in general. The difference in effect can be seen below:
The newspaper said the shop windows downtown are/were all decorated for the holidays.
The newspaper says the shop windows downtown are all decorated for the holidays.
The choice of present tense in the second sentence may reflect the speaker’s sense of
immediacy and vividness.
Present Relevance
Another criterion mentioned by Thompson (1994) has already been noted in connection
with a condition where sequence-of-tenses can be overridden: the case in which the reporter
wishes to emphasize that a statement is still true or somehow of present relevance. Thompson
offers the following as examples:
The shopkeeper says he won't be able to carry on if the population drops any further.
It helps that your friend's handy with a pistol. She tells me that she actually got in
some target practice in the woods yesterday morning.
Presumably the shopkeeper and the friend, if asked, would repeat the same statements at the
time that the reporting occurs.
Speaker/Writer Stance
Indirectly related to the notion of “present relevance” is the idea that speakers/writers may
convey personal stance with regard to a reported proposition through the choice of verb
tense. Batstone (1995) illustrates this with the following invented quotation:
Smith (1980) argued that Britain was no longer a country in which freedom of speech
was seriously maintained. Johnson (1983), though, argues that Britain remains a
citadel of individual liberty.
Although the writer of the passage may be writing for many years after both quotations were
made, he/she has chosen to cast the 1980 report in the past tense and the 1983 quote in the
present. While it is not impossible to argue that a writer might make these choices in order
to emphasize time sequence, Batstone interprets the tense distinction as a means for the
writer to show “subjective distribution of approval and disapproval” (1995, p. 198); in effect,
Chapter 33: Reported Speech and Writing
755
the writer juxtaposes the two tenses to indicate personal agreement with the idea in the 1983
quotation. While Batstone does not support his claim with a corpus of evidence, it seems
likely that the choice of tense often does convey stance in the way described.
Managing Conversational Topics
In his investigation of speech reporting in the CANCODE corpus, McCarthy (1998)
proposes that among the strategies speakers use to control or manage topics is their
choice of reporting verb tense. He found that speakers typically use present tense I/you say
expressions, often preceded by the conjunction but to summarize a topic. For example, one
speaker, in concluding a conversation segment about building a garden pond with his wife,
concludes (p. 168),
But as I say, we did it ourselves.
In other contexts, the present tense verb may signal a shift to another topic. In contrast,
McCarthy found that the past continuous tense used with a reporting verb was/were saying
often marks a return to an earlier point in the conversation in order to farther develop a topic
rather than to summarize it (p. 170):
Back to what I was saying before a bit...
McCarthy comments that although the reporting verb was/were saying is frequent in
conversation, the past progressive tense is rarely mentioned in discussions of verb tenses used
in main clauses for reported speech and deserves more attention.
Published Sources
The question of which verb tenses to use for citations when writing for publication, especially
in research reviews of the literature, is one raised frequently by ESL/EFL students in graduate
programs. In providing a guide that responds to this issue, Feak and Swales (2009) state that
according to several studies, one of three major patterns can account for at least two-thirds of
all citing statements. Here we offer illustrations from COCA for each of these patterns, along
with Feak and Swales’ description of the use of each of the three patterns (p. 52):
1.	Past—Reference to a Single Study (often an integral reference to researcher activity of
findings)
For example, in 2009, Sheng et al. examined major blacklists and browser tools...
(Hong, 2012)
Older and younger adult reading speeds and error rates for different font types (which
varied in legibility) were examined by Smither and Braun (1994). (Gasser eta!., 2005)
2.	Present Perfect—Reference to an Area of Inquiry (generally non-integral citations)
เท more recent studies, the ontogeny of root systems has been investigated...
Functional properties have been used to define different categories of roots. (Ghestem
et al., 2011)
เท addition, there have been studies focusing on systematic differences between
[social work and nurse discharge planners], (Holliman et al., 2003)
3.	Present—Reference to Generally Accepted Knowledge of the Field
Considering the wealth of supporting literature that argues the benefits of song for
language learning, the question must be asked: Why is this not common practice?
(Trinick, 2012)
Feak and Swales further note that exceptions to these patterns, which account for about a
third of other citations, involve the options a writer has depending on factors of relevance to
the context of the citation (p. 53). For example, as Batstone (1995) noted, when reporting on
756
The Grammar Book
what a researcher or group of researchers wrote or thought in a single study, a writer may use
present perfect or present tense rather than past tense to signal some kind of closeness: to
the writer’s opinion, the writer’s own research, or the current state of knowledge. Here is one
from a study in 2011 reporting on another study done eleven years prior.
Huang (2000) finds that declared major, academic involvement... and part-time work
experience all significantly influence students'psychosocial development. (Lin, 2011)
Of course it is up to the reader to determine from the context what type of closeness has
motivated the writer’s verb tense choice. In any event, such motivations reflect the relevance
and stance factors for both speech and writing that we discussed at the beginning of this section.
READER INFERENCES IN EXTENDED REPORTING
Where reporting is done in academic writing, writers must not only be careful about conveying
their stance and personal commitment to the (ทoท)factuality of statements reported on; they
must also be scrupulous about making certain that readers are able to discern the difference
between the reporter’s assertions and those of the speaker/author reported on. For this
purpose, all of the means mentioned in this chapter are at the writer’s disposal. Obviously,
one sure way for a writer to distance him or herself (both cognitively and affectively) from the
assertions of the original source is to preface every sentence with an explicit reporting device.
However, naturalistic reporting, even in more formal writing, is not always done this way.
Students who are simply taught, first, that reporting is always done with reporting verbs, and
second, that it is necessary to attribute the content of every sentence by naming the source
explicitly, are faced with a stylistic dilemma that is impossible to escape (The author says X...
Then the author claims Y... And then he says z... ). Yet practiced writers do, in fact, manage to
properly differentiate the contribution of the reporter from that of the reportee by a variety
of means as we have shown in this chapter.
Conclusion
Reporting the ideas of others presents challenges to ESL/EFL students at the levels of form,
meaning, and use. The strictly grammatical structures provide a challenge largely from the
standpoint of selecting the proper complement type; the challenge of meaning lies mainly
in the proper choice of reporting terms. By far the greatest challenge at the higher levels of
instruction comes from the use to which students put these structures and terms in written
work, especially in academic writing, where attention must be given to rhetorical purposes
and disciplinary conventions. Clearly, students will need continued instruction and practice
in these complex tasks at all class levels.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form. For practice in backshifting tenses in reported speech, ask students to work in
pairs interviewing each other about what they plan to do or want to do the following
weekend. The teacher can decide how many responses should be elicited; students should
take notes on their partner’s responses (e.g., Fang is going toplay tennis on Saturday; Carlos
wants to see the new James Bond movie). Ask students to save the written responses for a
follow-up activity the next week. For the next class after the weekend, the teacher can first
Chapter 33: Reported Speech and Writing
757
ask students what their classmates had planned or wanted to do and then find out if they
in fact happened. For example:
Teacher: Carlos, what did Fang say her plans were for last weekend?
Carlos: Fang said she was going to play tennis on Saturday.
Teacher: Fang, did you play tennis?
Fang: No, it was raining on Saturday.
TeachenToo bad; I'm sorry about that. Well, what did Carlos plan to do?
Fang: He said he wanted to see the new James Bond movie.
Teacher: Oh, that sounds like fun. Why don't you ask him if he saw it?
2.	Form. Indirect questions of all types can be practiced as repetitions: Student A asks
Student B a question, which Student B pretends not to hear. Student B asks, “I’m
sorry. What did you say?” Student A then produces indirect speech (“I asked you whether/
how/when ...”).
3.	Meaning. An activity that can be used for either speaking or writing activities involves
students listening to short monologues and dialogues. An especially rich source for this is
StoryCorps (http://storycorps.org), a collection of thousands of brief interviews recorded
and then preserved at the American Folklife Center at the Library of Congress. Most
recordings are around two minutes, malting them very useful for classroom listening.
They are indexed online according to a wide range of topics, such as discovery, romance,
work, and wisdom. Many of the interviews themselves involve recorded speech or
thought. As an example, here are a few excerpts from just one StoryCorps interview in
which a father (JC) talks to his young son (JW) whom he and his partner adopted as a baby
from Vietnam:
Excerpt 1:
JC: So what are some of your dreams?
JW: Well, I kinda wanna go to Mars and be an astronaut.
JC: What do you think it'll be like on Mars?
JW: Red.
Excerpt 2:
JW: So do you remember what was going through your head when you first saw me?
JC: I thought you were so ... can I say beautiful, or do I have to say handsome?
JW: It doesn't matter.
JC: Well, you were both.
For less advanced students, the teacher could transcribe short excerpts for the students to
read as they listen to the interview and/or structure questions for the students to answer,
e.g., What didjc ask his son and what did his son respond? More advanced students could be
asked to take notes and then summarize the interview either orally or in writing. They
could also listen to several interviews on the same themes and compare them with what
the speakers said.
4.	Form/Meaning/Use. In multi-skills classrooms, one excellent activity using indirect speech
involves students conducting an extended interview with a classmate and then presenting the
findings orally or in writing. Students can choose topics in which each is an “expert.”The topic
could be a hobby or sport, an area of academic or vocational study, an aspect of the student’s
native culture such as a holiday custom or a method of preparing food, or a particular area
of life experience (parenthood, the experience of being a refugee, the experience of living in
another country, etc.). Students can be asked to take extensive notes during the interview
758
The Grammar Book
and, from these notes, write an essay or give a talk in which each reports on what his or her
partner has related. Again, StoryCorps (http://storycorps.org) could prove a helpful resource
for this activity as the site has a downloadable lesson plan for middle school to high school
levels that aims to give students interviewing as well as story telling skills.
ร. Form/Meaning/Use. At the high-intermediate level and above, summary writing is a
good activity for ESL/EFL students to practice reported speech patterns while breaking
away from a rigid pattern of making attributions at the beginning of each sentence.
Students may be given a short piece to read as many times as they like. Without looking
back at the text, they should then be encouraged to use a variety of devices—reporting
verbs, according to the author-type expressions, and contextual cues—to convey the content
of the piece to an audience. After finishing the summary, students may look back briefly
at the text to check for accuracy.
6.	Use. As composition handbooks advise, student writers should either quote language in
a source that is “vivid or expressive” (Hacker & Sommers, 2010, p. 380) or paraphrase it.
In other words, copying an author’s “vivid language” without attribution is considered
by many unacceptable textual borrowing. However, ESL/EFL writers, like many
native English developing writers, may need explicit instruction on what constitutes
such language. One way of helping writers distinguish between ordinary language and
distinctive language needing quotation or paraphrase is to give them groups of words that
are roughly synonymous, only one of which would be considered vivid or expressive and
ask them, to identify that word. Here are some examples:
1.	limited	scanty	insufficient
2.	arduous	hard	difficult
3.	ecstatic	happy	joyful
4.	ability	flair	skill
Vocabulary can be adjusted to the levels of students and distinctive words could be
selected from class readings. This is a good consciousness-raising exercise since often
when students see the distinctive word grouped with more ordinary ones, they can easily
identify it as different from the others even though in an actual writing task using sources,
they might have copied it without quoting. For further vocabulary development, students
can check a dictionary, thesaurus, collocation dictionary or concordancer such as COCA
to see how the distinctive words have special connotations and co-occur with particular
content or function words (e.g., scanty is often used with nouns like evidence or proof, flair
is often followed by for [noun]).
7.	Use. Students can also be asked to identify distinctive words in authentic text such as the
following (with distinctive vocabulary in bold):
After years of slogging through her English lessons, stumbling over impossible
pronunciations and baffling rules of syntax, Chae Eun came up with a better idea.
If they are asked to replace the distinctive words with their own, they should understand
that this is a pre-paraphrasing activity and that paraphrase involves much more
restructuring of language, not just synonym substitution—and that often a word is part
of a group of words that would need to be replaced.
8.	Meaning. To gain more familiarity with reporting verb meanings, students can be
given authentic texts and asked to underline and categorize the verb types, using a
taxonomy such as the one proposed by Hyland (1999), shown in this chapter. The
instructor could also select verbs in the text to discuss strength of claims.
Chapter 33: Reported Speech and Writing
759
Here is one example of text with a variety of reported verbs from a survey of academic
manual styles:
Some authors, such as Rose (2007), who is aiming at the mature student, give very simplistic
advice, while others, particularly in discipline-specific works, provide more complex models.
Storey (2004:72-82), writing for history students, distinguishes between the Analytical and
Narrative essay, providing models for each; while in literature, Fabb and Durant (2005:67-76)
offer several different techniques for arguing a case.. ..Macmillan and Weyes (2007a:96-97)
also suggest a series of different structural approaches... (Bennett, 2009, p. 46)
9.	Use. This chapter has shown that academic disciplines vary widely in the kinds of
reporting verbs used and the purposes for citations. Thus, for graduate-level writing
classes, students should be examining research reports they are assigned to read that
provide models for the kinds of writing in which they are engaged or hope to be. Students
can be asked to select a journal article of their choice and to list and classify reporting
verbs in at least a section of the article. They could consider whether their lists reflect
Hyland’s (1999) findings on disciplinary (or “soft discipline” versus “hard discipline”)
practices. As an out-of-class assignment, students could be given a summary of citation
uses discussed in current research and asked to use them to identify uses in the journal
article they have selected.
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1.	Create an original sentence in which each of the following terms is illustrated:
a. reported that-	f. deictic time-	k. nonfactive
clause	adverbial shift	reporting verb
b. indirect imperative	g. deictic place-	1. emotional-state
c. indirect wh-	adverbial shift	reporting verb
question	h. deictic pronoun	m. free indirect
d. indirect yes/no	shift	discourse
question	i. reporting noun	ท. zero-quotative
e. backshifting	j. factive reporting verb	
2.	Draw tree diagrams for the following sentences:
a.	This book argues that a political shift is occurring.
b.	The author claims she has shown why parrots imitate humans.
c.	They asked if we had seen John.
d.	The reviewer wondered where Ann had found her evidence.
3.	Why are the following sentences unacceptable in Standard English?
a.	*We were asked did we have the time?
b.	*The bureaucrat informed John his license to have expired.
c.	"The owner asked the customer to do not shop at another store.
d.	"They asked whether that it would be possible to do it another way.
The Grammar Book
4.	A type of error made with one intended interpretation of the following sentences
is frequently found both in ESL/EFL and native writing. What is that intended
interpretation, and what is the problem with the following sentences, given that
intention? What is the alternative acceptable interpretation?
*ln Smith's opinion, he believes that there is no alternative to petroleum.
*According to Smith, he says that DNA cannot account for these facts.
Does the same problem occur in the following sentence? If not, can you suggest the
reason why?
Smith says that in his opinion DNA cannot account for these facts.
5.	Explain as fully as possible the difference between the following two sentences:
John said that he would be leaving next week.
John said that he would be leaving the next week.
Test your ability to apply what you know.
6.	Suppose that you wish to conduct a survey to determine the extent to which native
speakers follow the sequence-of-tenses rule. How would you proceed in your survey?
7.	Suppose that a student writes the following sentences in an essay. How would you
explain the problems to the student?
a.	*I’m not sure can go or not.
b.	‘My mother asked me that how I planned to raise my grades.
c.	*My father insisted for me to work harder.
d.	*My friend said that, “Can you please help me?”
e.	*1 told to him that it wouldn’t be possible now.
8.	Suppose that a student has handed in an essay, part of which includes the following
summary of an article from the newspaper. Assuming that the summary reflects
honest paraphrase of the original author’s words and ideas, how might you provide
feedback on the student’s way of presenting the summary?
เท this article, Richard Walter gives his opinion on violence in movies. He says that
violence in movies is not as bad as many people think. He tells US that there are
several reasons for this. The first reason that he gives is that strong emotion and
tension are a part of everyday life. Then he says that famous plays since antiquity
have been full of violence, and says that nobody objects to those plays. He also
says that it is wrong for people to think that violence in movies causes violence in
the real world, because in his opinion, movie violence is just a reflection of the real
world. He does not think it is a cause of violence at all. So he tells US that he is not
able to understand why people are so emotional about this issue.
9.	Locate direct quotations in five or six separate articles. Can you make any inference as
to why the author of the article chose to quote rather than to paraphrase?
Chapter 33: Reported Speech and Writing
761
Bibliography
REFERENCES __ ___________________________________________________________________________
Batstone, R. (1995). Grammar in discourse: Attitude and deniability. In G. Cook & B. Seidlhofer (Eds.),
Principle and practice in applied linguistics: Studies in honour ofH. G. Widdowson (pp. 197-213). Oxford,
England: Oxford University Press.
Bennett, K. (2009). English academic style manuals: A survey. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, §(1), 43-54.
Biber, D., Johannson, ร., Leech, G., Conrad, ร., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and
written English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ltd.
Bolinger, D. (1975, February 12). About questions. Lecture conducted at the Linguistics Colloquium,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Clift, R. (2006). Indexing stance: Reported speech as an interactional evidential. Journal of Sociolinguistics,
10(5), 569-595.
Clift, R. (2007). Getting there first: Non-narrative reported speech in interaction. In E. Holt & R. Clift (Eds.),
Reporting talk: Reported speech in interaction (pp. 120-149). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Davies, M. (2008). The corpus of contemporary American English: 450 million words, 1990-present. Retrieved
from http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/
Durham, M., Haddican, B., Zweig, E., Johnson, D. E., Baker, z., Coceram, D., Danks, E., & Tyler, L. (2012).
Constant linguistic effects in the diffusion of be like. Journal of English Linguistics, 40(A), 316-3 3 3.
Feak, c., & Swales, J. (2009). Telling a research story: Writing a literature review. Ann Arbor, MI: University of
Michigan Press.
Frodesen, J., & Wald, M. (2015). Exploring options: Grammar and vocabulary for academic writing. Ann Arbor,
MI: University of Michigan Press
Hacker, D., & Sommers, N. (2010). The Bedford handbook. Boston, MA: Bedford/ St. Martins.
Holt, E. (1996). Reporting on talk: The use of direct reported speech in conversation. Research on Language
and Social Interaction, 29, 219-245.
Hyland, K. (1999). Academic attribution: Citation and the construction of disciplinary knowledge.
Applied Linguistics, 20(3), 341-367.
Hyland, K. (2000). Disciplinary discourses·. Social interactions in academic writing. Harlow, England: Longman.
Huang, c. (1993). A contextual analysis of that retention/deletion with the reporting verb said (Unpublished
paper). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
McCarthy, M. (1998). spoken langtage and applied linguistics. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Meyers, G. (1999). Functions of reported speech in group discussions. Applied Linguistics, 20(3), 376-401.
Petrie, B. (2012). Legitimate textual borrowing: Direct quotation in L2 student writing. Journal of Second
Language Writing, 21, 102-117.
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, ร., Leech, G., & Svartvik, J. (1985). A comprehensive grammar of the English language.
London, England: Longman.
Rimmon-Kenan, ร. (1983). Narrative fiction: Contemporary poetics. London, England: Methuen.
Ssensalo, D. (1991). On wondering iftheyll choose whether or whether theyil choose if (Unpublished TESL &
Applied Linguistics paper). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Shi, L. (2012). Rewriting and paraphrasing source texts in second language writing. Journal of Second
Language Writing, 21, 134—148.
Simpson, R:- c., Briggs, ร. L., Ovens, J., & Swales, J. M. (2002). The Michigan corpus of academic
spoken English. Ann Arbor, MI: The Regents of the University of Michigan.
Sinclair, J., & Fox. G. (1990). Collins COBUILD English grammar. London, England: Collins.
Thompson, G. (1994). Collins COBUILD English guides 5: Reporting. London: HarperCollins.
762
The Grammar Book
Thompson, J., & Ye, c. (1991). Evaluation in the reporting verbs used in academic papers. Applied
Linguistics, 27(4), 501-530.
Yule, G., Mathis, T, & HopKins, M. F. (1992). On reporting what was said. ELT Journal, 46(3), 245-251.
Yule, G. (1995). The paralinguistics of reference: Representation in reported discourse. In G. Cook &
B. Seidlhofer (Eds.), Principle and practice in applied linguistics: Studies in honour ofH.G. Widdovoson
(pp. 185-196). Oxford: Oxford University Press, 185-196.
SUGGESTION S~FÍPR~FÍJRTHER~REJÍíDÍNG
One highly accessible source with a wealth of detail about reporting is:
Thompson, G. (1994). Collins COBUILD English guide 5: Reporting. London, England:.Harper Collins.
Another good source that also gives a comprehensive list of reporting verbs is:
Sinclair, J., & Fox, G. (1990). Collins COBUILD English grammar. London, England: Collins.
Two useful papers written from a linguistic perspective—one on quotation in general, the other a cross-
linguistic treatment of verbs like "say" are:
Partee, B. (1973). The syntax and semantics of quotation. In p. Kiparsky & ร. Anderson (Eds.), A Festschrift
for Moms Halle (pp. 410-418), New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Munro, p. (1987). On the transitivity of £say’verbs. In p. Hopper & Thompson (Eds.), Syntax and semantics
(Vol. 15, pp. 301-318). New York: Academic Press.
For a treatment of reported speech as part of reflexive language in general, see:
Lucy, J. A. (Ed.)i (1993). Reflexive languageะ Reported speech and metapragmatics. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
For treatment of tense usage and backshifting in reported indirect speech, see:
Comrie, B. (1986). Tense in indirect speech. Folia Linguística, 20(3—4), 265-296.
Coulmas, E (Ed.). (1986). Direct and indirect speech. Berlin, Germany: De Gruyter.
Harman, I. (1990). Teaching indirect speech: Deixis points the way. ELT Journal, 44(3), 230-238.
Salkie, R., & Reed, ร. (1997). Time reference in reported speech. English Language and Linguistics, 1(2),
319-348.
For an article that classifies reporting signals beyond the traditional types of signal presented in grammar
books, see:
Thompson,}. (1996). Voices in the text: Discourse perspectives on language reports. Applied Linguistics, 27(4),
501-530.
For another corpus-based taxonomy of reporting verbs in academic writing, see:
Bloch, J. (2010). A concordance-based study of the use of reporting verbs as rhetorical devices in academic
papers. Journal of Writing Research, 2(2), 219-294.
Some of the linguistic devices by which writers can achieve cohesion to assist readers in making proper
inferences about reporter vs. reportee are found in:
Halliday, M. A. K., & Matthiessen, c. Μ. I. M. (2004). An introduction to functional grammar (3rd ed.).
New York: Oxford University Press.
For a variety of approaches on techniques of reporting and shifting perspectives in natural oral discourse
and literature, see:
Holt, E., & Clift, R. (Eds.). (2007). Reporting talk: Reported speech in interaction. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Taimen, D. (1989). Talking voices: Repetition, dialogue, and imagery in conversational discourse. Cambridge,
England; New York: Cambridge University Press.
Chapter 33: Reported Speech and Writing
763
Yule, G. (1995). The paralinguistics of reference: Representation in reported discourse. In G. Cook &
B. Seidhofer (Eds.), Principle and practice in applied linguistics: Studies in honour ofH.G. Widdowson
(pp. 185-196). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Short, M. (1994). Understanding texts: Point of view. In G. Brown, K. Malmkjaer, A. Pollitt, & J. Williams
(Eds.), Language and understanding (pp. 170-190). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
For a nontraditional view of the function of quotations, see also:
Clark, H.H., & Gehrig, G. H. (1990). Quotations as demonstrations. Language, 66(4) 764—805.
For an interesting discussion on the motivation for indirect speech, see:
Pinker, ร., Nowak, M. A., & Lee, J. J. (2008). The logic of indirect speech. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 105, 833-838.
Pinker, ร. (2011). Indirect speech, politeness, deniability, and relationship negotiation: Comment on Marina
Terkourafi’s “The Puzzle of Indirect speech" .Journal of Pragmatics, 43(11), 2866-2868.
Terkourafi, M. (2011). The puzzle of indirect speech. Journal of Pragmatics, 43(11), 2861-2865.
Terkourafi, M. (2011). Why direct speech is not a natural default: Rejoinder to Steven Pinker’s “Indirect
Speech, Politeness, Deniability, and Relationship Negotiation”. Journal of Pragmatics, 43(11), 2869-2871.
Many high intermediate and advanced level ESL/EFL textbooks offer chapters or sections on the forms of
reported speech. Three of the better sources are:
Bland, ร. K. (with Savage, A., & Meyers, P). (2008). Grammar sense: Advanced grammar and writing 4. New
York, Oxford University Press.
Cake, c. D. (2009). Grammar connection: Structure though content 5. Boston: Heinle, cengage Learning.
Thewlis, ร. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 3 (4th ed.).Boston: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
A textbook offering extensive coverage of reporting verb meanings and uses in academic writing is:
Frodesen, J., & Wald, M. (2015). Exploring options: Grammar and vocabulary for academic writing. Ann Arbor,
MI: University of Michigan Press.
Two useful textbooks for multilingual graduate writers that include focus on language features of reported
speech are:
Feak, c., & Swales, J. (2009). Telling a research story: Writing a literature review. Ann Arbor, MI: University of
Michigan Press.
Swales, J., & Feak, c. (2012). Academic writing for graduate students: Essential tasks and skills (3rd ed.). Ann
Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
One article directed at ESL/EFL teachers that proposes an alternative pedagogical approach for teaching
reported speech is:
Goodell, E. พ. (1987). Integrating theory with practice: An alternative approach to reported speech in
English. TESOL Quarterly, 21(2) 305-325.
End notes
1.	There is a possibility of shift in modals as เท other verbs; recall from Chapter 8 that historically, modals
had both present and past forms, however, the shift is somewhat less than systematic, although will
becomes would and can becomes could เท a regular way, may becomes might only when may expresses
possibility, not permission; otherwise, only could is possible:
"The children may (= are allowed to) go to the circus."
Father said that the children could go to the circus.
Likewise, shall does not become should, since such a shift would alter meaning considerably.
2.	The immediate repetition could also be from the first person, who would then be repeating him/
herself—B: What did you say? A: / said we'll be having polenta for lunch.
7 64
The Grammar Book
3.	Distinctions such as those in this table arise, incidentally, not only in reported speech but also in cases in
which comparison of two sequential events or states in the past or future are compared. For example:
She finally picked up the car. She had paid for it a month before.
She is finally picking up the car today. She paid for it a month ago.
They are leaving now. They will return in a month.
4.	One can, of course, ask direct questions that contain indirect questions, such as Who knows what will
happen? or Who asked whether we could drive them home? It is also possible to ask highly polite questions
by phrasing them as indirect questions; see the section on use in this chapter.
5.	Because whether' if, and for ail function as complementizers and English cannot have double
complementizers, it is not possible to have for/to infinitives in indirect questions, as for example:
*They asked whether for John or Mary to do the job.
6.	The three examples in this section of the chart were taken from Thompson and Ye (1991) since Hyland
did not include examples for this category.
Chapter 33: Reported Speech and Writing
765
HAP'
Degree—
Comparatives and
Equatives
Introduction
One of the most basic and powerful human cognitive capacities is the ability to comprehend
and express the fact that two things are similar or different. Often, such a similarity or
difference is expressed in terms of degree, extent, or quantity. This chapter describes the two
most important English constructions used to express differences or similarities of degree
or extent—that is, the comparative and equative constructions, respectively. We also briefly
discuss the major ways in which the languages of the world express degree-type comparison.
From the outset, it is important that we distinguish the absolute use of adjectives and
adverbs from the relative use of such words:
Absolute Use:	John is tall.
John runs fast.
Relative Use (Comparative):	John is taller than Susan.
John runs faster than Bill.
Relative Use (Equative):	John is as tall as Bob.
John is as fast as Peter.
There are important semantic differences in these three underlying uses. For example,
if we negate a sentence with absolute use and conjoin the resulting negative statement with
the affirmative absolute statement, we produce a contradiction:
*John is tall, but he isn't tall.
A contradiction does not result, however, when we conjoin the same negative absolute
assertion with the sentence containing the affirmative relative usage found in comparative
and equative statements:
John is taller than Susan, but he isn't tall.
John is as tall as Bob, but he isn't tali.
The reason for this difference is that words and phrases such as tall(er) and fast(er) and
phrases such as as tall as and as fast as are used in a relative sense, without making any assertion
about the referent’s absolute height or speed.
In this chapter, we discuss comparative and equative constructions, which involve the
relative rather than the absolute use of gradable adjectives and adverbs. It is important to
note, as we did in Chapter 20, that there are also nongradable adjectives and adverbs, such as
right, wrong, real, totally, and so on; such adjectives and adverbs normally are not compared, or
used in a relative sense (Bolinger, 1972).1
767
__________________________________________________	...	..
A TYPOLOGICAL OVERVIEW OF COMPARISON
There seem to be at least four different ways in which the languages of the world express
comparison. We will use English words to exemplify these different construction types. For
examples of these constructions in other languages, see Celce-Murcia (1972, pp. 160-167).
Comparison by Juxtaposition2
Some languages express comparison by mere juxtaposition of clauses and have no explicit
syntactic device or construction for expressing comparison. For example:
My boat (is) big. + Your boat (is) very big. ('Your boat is bigger than mine.')
Limited Scope Comparison
Some languages, such as Chinese and Japanese, compare by limiting the scope of an adjective—
or some other part of speech—so that it has a relative rather than an absolute meaning:
โCompare(d) (to) 1 ____
[From	I Mary, John (is) tall. (,J0hn waller than Mary.')
John, compare(d) to Mary, (is) tall.
“Surpass” Comparatives
Still other languages, such as many West African or Bantu languages, express comparison
using a verb that means "to pass” or “to surpass”:
โ pass ไ
John 1 _____1 Mary (in)
[surpass J
tallness
height
Many languages of this type cannot directly express the reverse of such a statement—that is,
Mary is shorter than John ?
• ('John is taller than Mary.')
Comparison Using Degree Morphemes
Finally, there are languages like English (i.e., most Indo-European languages) that have
developed verbs, adjectives, quantifiers—words like more and less—and inflections like -er
that use these words or morphemes to directly express comparison:
John (is) tall MORE than Mary. ('John is taller than Mary.')
_____.. . Í short MORE
Mary (is) 1
[ tall LESS
■than John. ('Mary is (shorter/less tall) than John.')
In such languages, comparisons can always be reversed, but one form is usually preferred
over the other in any given discourse context for semantic and pragmatic reasons. As we shall
see next, the unmarked or positive form occurs most frequently.
________________________________________________________
TYPICAL LEARNER..
In the preceding section, we noted that all languages have ways of expressing comparison
but that the devices used can differ greatly from one language to another. Depending on
the type(s) of comparison used in the native language of your students, different kinds of
problems will occur, especially at the initial stage of learning. Then as students become more
advanced, challenges of a different nature occur.
Here are some of the common learner errors:
1.	Omission of the comparative inflection—and perhaps also the copula:
*John (is) tall than Mary.
68
The Grammar Book
2.	Substitution of some other function word for than (a) or inappropriate use of than (b):
a.	*John is tall(er) from Mary.
b.	*Paul is as tall than John.
3.	Use of more where -er is required, or vice versa:
*John is
tall more
more tall
than Mary.
*Mary is beautifuller than Karen.
4.	Use of a regular pattern where an irregular form is required:
*His handwriting is badder than mine.
5.	Double marking of the comparative:
*Jim runs more faster than Paul. *This car is more better than that one.
While the first three errors may be explained in terms of cross-linguistic influence, the last
two are developmental errors that young English-speaking children also produce during first
language acquisition. In addition, these days we hear proficient speakers using double marking, too.
Forms of Comparison
There are a number of form-based factors, such as the range of construction types and the
factors involved in choosing more versus -er, that are useful to be aware of in order to teach
comparison effectively.
WHATMAI^
The Range of Comparative Construction Types
Most reference grammars and ESL/EFL texts center their discussion of comparison in
English exclusively on adjectives and adverbs. Actually, each major part of speech in English
(i.e., nouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs) permits comparison.
Recall that when we formulate a comparison, we presuppose a difference of degree or
extent; for example:
has
other
verbs
MORE
LESS
FEWER
A (-er) thanY
(presupposes "X is different from Y with respect to A")
As the following examples illustrate, each major part of speech in English can be used
with some version of this formula to make comparisons. Many languages do not have as large
an inventory of comparative constructions as does English:
Adjective: John is taller than Mary (is).
Joe is less intelligent than Sam (is).
Adverb:
Bill runs faster than Peter
runs
does
Cynthia dances less gracefully than Judy t
dances .
does
Noun:
Jack has more money than Harry l
has
does
Chapter 34: Degree—Comparatives and Equatives
769
น9vh« [fewerbooks]	[ have 1
Max has 4	than I G 1 H.
[ less money	[do ]
Verb:	Paul weighs more than Alex (does).
This book costs less than that one (does).
Collectively, these examples raise a number of problems and questions, which we discuss
in the following sections.
The Choice of- Er versus More with Adjectives and Adverbs
There is a metrical tendency, although it has some exceptions, based on English syllable
structure that in many cases helps English speakers decide when to apply the -er inflection
and when to use the periphrastic comparative form more with adjectives and adverbs. The
following rules are adapted from Celce-Murcia, Brinton, and Goodwin, with Griner (2010):
• First, gradable adjectives and adverbs of one syllable take the inflectional ending, as
do two-syllable adjectives with a final unstressed -y ending:4
Base Form	-er
big	bigger
tall	taller
soon	sooner
hard	harder
happy	happier
noisy	noisier
• Second, many other two-syllable adjectives that have a stressed first syllable and
an unstressed second syllable ending in -ly, -ow, or -le (syllabic [I])5 also take the
inflection, although it is certainly possible to use the periphrastic form in certain
contexts, such as when contrastive emphasis is being placed on the comparative
element (Ann is friendly, but Beth is MORE friendly.).
Base Form	-er	Also Possible
friendly	friendlier	more friendly
narrow	narrower	more narrow
gentle	gentler	more gentle
Also, even if these two-syllable adjectives add derivational prefixes, they still take the
same inflections that the base form does (e.g., unhappier, นทฺfriendlier, etc.).
• Third, all two-syllable adverbs ending in -ly that do not have an adjective homonym
also ending in -ly take only periphrastic more (never inflectional -er):
Base Form	Base + More	Not Possible
slowly	more slowly	*slowlier
brusquely	more brusquely	*brusquelier
sharply	more sharply	*sharplier
• Fourth, some adjectives that seem-to prefer the periphrastic comparative form may
also occasionally occur with an inflectional ending, especially in informal use. These
include two-syllable adjectives that (a) end in -er or -ure, such as tender, mature·,
(b) end in a weakly stressed vowel followed by nothing more than a final /d/ or /t/,
such as stupid, quiet; and (c) end in a weakly stressed syllable with final /m/ or /n/, such
as handsome, awesome, common.
Base Form	Base + More	Base + -er
tender	more tender	tenderer
stupid	more stupid	stupider
handsomer	more handsome	handsomer
common	more common	commoner
The Grammar Book
Ό
• Fifth, adjectives and adverbs with two syllables having any ending other than those
described previously, as well as all adjectives and adverbs of three or more syllables,
take only the periphrastic form more:
Base Form		Base + More
Adjective	devious	more devious
	pleasant	more pleasant
	beautiful	more beautiful
Adverb	skillfully	more skillfully
	cautiously	more cautiously
	independently	more independently
• Finally, we note that more is often easier to use with one-syllable adjectives and
adverbs when modified by much; for example,
Rudy is feeling much more rich since he won the lottery.
or when followed by a complement (Taylor, 2012):
My friend is more prone to accidents.
The “rules” presented here for the comparative inflection are less predictable than
those for the plural or past-tense inflections. See, for example, Hilpert (2008). We regularly
hear English speakers use a periphrastic form with one-syllable adjectives for emphasis (e.g.,
Before this happened, I didn’t believe I could be MORE sad) when the “rule” would predict the
inflected form, and, in fact, such periphrastic forms seem to be increasingly used. There is
also some individual variation, and thus some speakers may prefer quieter and stupider over
more quiet and morestupid. Thus, we speak of a tendency rather than a rule when discussing
this phenomenon; the variation that occurs among English speakers can be partially explained
by the fact that the second and fourth groups of adjectives and adverbs listed here can take
both the periphrastic and the inflectional forms. It also may be the case that the language is
becoming more regular, opting for one form, the periphrastic one. This development would be
welcome to teachers and learners alike, given the dizzying array of forms that exist currently.
At this point in time, students should probably be taught the general tendencies and
should also be alerted to the fact that the comparative affix -er is sometimes used by English
speakers for specific effect (i.e., to get attention) or in literature and other forms of creative
writing. These are cases where the normal rules would not lead US to expect an -er comparative.
One of the most famous examples of this is when Lewis Carroll had Alice say “...curiouser
and curiouser!” in Alice in Wonderland. (We would normally use more, not -er, with adjectives
that end in -ious such as curious, especially given the fact that the periphrastic form seems to
be gaining in frequency in those cases where both forms are possible.) A good heuristic might
be, “When in doubt, use the periphrastic more construction.” Other aspects of variation will
be discussed later in this chapter, in the section about the use of comparatives.
Less versus Fewer
A much less complicated rule accounts for the distribution of less and fewer, the negative
counterparts of more. In contrast to more, which may occur before both count and noncount
nouns, less changes to fewer when modifying plural count nouns in formal contexts:
1 have more	money -■	â.	/ .	, Ithan Mr. Sims (does). books J
Mr. Sims has	less money น	1,,10). fewer books
We will have more to say about the distribution of less and fewer in informal contexts
later in this chapter.
Chapter 34: Degree—Comparatives and Equatives
771
Clause Reductions and Case Adjustments
By now, you may have noticed that the constituent following than sometimes resembles a
reduced clause:
She has more books than 11	.
[ do
and sometimes a noun phrase:
She has more books than John.
In the latter context, if a pronoun follows than, it tends to change from subject to object
form (i.e., a subject form standing alone seems rather awkward):
She has more books than I ■' I.
[ me J
In other words, if no verb or operator follows the NP, English speakers tend to analyze
the pronoun as the object of a preposition because even though than is a complementizer (like
that, as discussed in Chapter 31), it also has prepositional force in such cases.
Irregular Comparative Forms
A number of irregular quantifiers, adjectives, and adverbs in English cannot be explained with
reference to the -er inflection or the periphrastic more in comparisons:
Base Form	Irregular Comparative Form
Quantifiers
much 1	more
many J
little	less
Adjectives & Adverbs
good/well
better
bad/badly
far -___
old
worse
farther (distance)
further (nonspatial progression)
elder (ages of siblings)
older (regular form used elsewhere)
In informal usage, further6 is sometimes used instead oÍfarther to compare distance as well
as nonspatial relationships of progression, and in all contexts, older is now generally used to refer
to a sibling of greater age—that is, elder is becoming somewhat archaic even in this function.7
Substitute Expressions Used with Comparatives
Another source of difficulty to be aware of are the nominal substitute expressions commonly
used in comparative constructions. Since English comparative constructions often involve
two clauses, the second, of which has been reduced, certain substitute expressions commonly
occur as part of a comparison. The-possessive pronouns are one such type of substitute
expression (Halliday & Hasan, 1976):
This car is bigger than mine (is), (mine = my car)
However, when a possessive pronoun is not used, the nominal substitute expressions
one and ones' are often used along with an appropriate determiner such as a demonstrative or
a definite article:
This car is bigger than that one. (one - car)
The blue books are cheaper than the red ones, (ones = books)8
2
The Grammar Book
The nominal substitutes one and ones may also occur without a definite determiner to
replace a modified noun in comparisons with indefinite or generic reference:
A wool garment is warmer than a cotton one.
Wool garments are warmer than cotton ones.
In more formal contexts, the demonstrative pronouns that and those may be used in a
comparison to introduce the second of two prepositional phrases; possessive constructions
formed with of are especially common in this type of construction:
The financial resources of Mr. Jones are greater than those of Mr. Johnson.
A common error is deletion of the demonstrative and the of in such a context:
*The financial resources of Mr. Jones are greater than Mr. Johnson.
The demonstratives that and those also introduce relative clauses as part of a comparison:
Food	which we cook at home	15 _ [ often better than	that
Foods		are J	those
which we eat in a restaurant.
Again, there is a tendency to erroneously simplify such a construction. The result is an
error such as the following:
*Food
which I
.1 . 1 we cook at home is often better than in a restaurant,
that
In both cases cited here (i.e., the possessive of phrase and the relative clause), the
prescriptive rule is that the speaker/writer should maintain parallel structure in the reduced
clause following the comparative construction in order to produce a grammatical sentence.
The demonstrative pronouns that and those help satisfy the parallelism condition in such
contexts.
The possessive pronouns and the substitutes one and ones tend to occur in informal
language, whereas the use of the demonstrative pronouns that and those are more typical
of formal usage. When they refer to countable norms, either form can be used, the main
difference being one of register:
Informal: The stories (that) she wrote 10 years ago are more interesting than the ones
(that) she is writing now.
Formal: The stories (that) she wrote ใ 0 years ago are more interesting than those
(that) she is writing now.
However, when the substitute refers to mass nouns, only the demonstrative pronoun
that is possible, since the use of one(s) requires a countable noun antecedent:
The coffee on the stove is fresher than 1
*the one
on the counter.
Modifiers Occurring in Comparisons
The adverbs even and still sometimes are used to intensify the degree of a comparison:
The second game was (even/still) more exciting than the first one.
There are also words and phrases that quantify the degree of a comparison. Here are
some common patterns going from high to low degree or extent:
For adjectives: far more interesting
a lot happier
(somewhat/a little/a bit) stronger
not (all) that much (bigger/more important)
Chapter 34: Degree—Comparatives and Equatives
773
OTHER COMPARATIVE CONSTRUCTIONS ______________
In addition to the four major types of comparative constructions outlined previously (i.e.j
comparing adjectives, adverbs, nouns, and verbs), there are a number of other structurally possible
types of comparatives that you should be aware of, such as the following:
Correlative Comparison
This construction (see Capelle, 2011) is a frame in which the definite article combines with
comparative phrases to express a special type of condition; the first part of a correlative
comparison expresses the condition and the second part expresses the outcome. Both parts
can be positive (more), both negative (less), or they can be mixed. For example:
The more sugar we eat, the more (sugar) we crave.
The less we earn, the less we spend.
The more you learn, the less you know.
The less he sees her, the more he wants her.
Sometimes correlative comparisons are reduced to brief idiomatic aphorisms:
The more, the merrier.
This sentence can be expanded to something like “The more people who are at the
gathering, the merrier the event will be.” As unusual as the correlative comparison construction
looks, it seems to be productive. For example, one of the coauthors of this volume recently
encountered the following statement in an e-mail:
The more global large institutions are, the less control we have over them.
You may wish to make your students aware of this special comparative construction
whenever it arises and allow them to interpret instances of the construction and to practice using
it themselves, asking them if there is an equivalent construction in any other languages they know.
Conjoined and Paratactic Comparatives
Conjoined and paratactic comparatives are used to indicate that something is changing over
time or space. For example, conjoined comparatives can express how things change over time:
We're all just getting older and older, aren't we?
Each time I see her, Arlene looks prettier and prettier.
See Browne (1964) for further discussion of such comparatives, which he called “free comparatives.”
In paratactic comparatives, comparative forms are used in sequence without a conjunction
like and to indicate how close or far something is. For example, a parent giving clues to a child
looking for an Faster egg might say:
Okay, Joey, you're getting hotter, hotter, colder, hotter...
where hotter means “closer to” and colder means “farther from.” Alternatively, someone
indicating the amount of milk that they want someone to pour into their coffee might say:
More, more, a bit more, stop! Thanks.
Fixed Phrases Using Comparative Forms
Carter and McCarthy (2006) point out that there are a number of common fixed forms involved
in comparison (p. 766):
all the better	any the wiser	any the worse
all the more	none the wiser	no worse/none the worse
After the ten-mile hike, my new boots were none the worse for wear.
When Sam took third place in the 10K race with little practice, he vowed to try all the
more to prepare for the next race.
The Grammar Book
Pseudo Comparisons9
There are some constructions that use surface comparative forms but do not express true
comparisons of degree. They function instead as sentence-level adverbial logical connectors:
a.	(more than - rather than) and expresses a preference; for example,
Peter seeks danger more than adventure.
b.	(more than — instead of) and suggests a more accurate alternative; for example,
That specimen looks like an eel more than a snake.
Other Types of Comparison: A list of Remaining Constructions
•	Comparison of two different properties of the same object rather than one property of
two different objects; for example:
The river is wider than it is deep.
•	Comparison involving two or more agents/experiencers as well as two or more objects;
for example:
John enjoys movies more than I enjoy the theater.
•	Comparison with a phrase of measurement rather than another object used as the
standard of comparison;10 for example:
Mark is more than six feet tall.
This book weighs more than two kilos.
•	Comparison with an absolute adjective used as the standard of comparison (used a lot in
advertising); for example:
That basketball center is taller than tall.
This product is newer than new.
•	Comparison with the comparative modifying a cardinal number; for example:
Ben has (more/fewer) than three brothers.
•	Comparison with a measurement phrase modifying the comparative adjective or adverb;
for example:
Mark is two inches taller than Phil.
•	Comparison with 0/plus a predicate noun; for example:
He's more of a fool than (Alex/I thought).
•	Comparing the degree to which an adjective applies to a given situation; for example:
Mia is (more/less) than satisfied with her marriage.
The additional comparative constructions discussed here combine with the four basic
types outlined initially (adjectives, adverbs, nouns, and verbs) to yield many different syntactic
and semantic combinations.
Issues of Meaning with Comparatives
COMPARATIVE FORM BUT SUPERLATIVE MEANING
True comparatives involve relative differences between two or more entities, two or more sets, two
or more quantities, or two or more properties. A number of English constructions superficially
appear to be comparatives, but in fact, they function semantically as superlatives (thus, they are
only mentioned here but are discussed further in the following chapter on superlatives):
Chapter 34: Degree—Comparatives and Equatives
775
Type of Comparative Form	Example
Comparatives used as suppletive variants of superlatives when there are only two members in a set	Clem is the taller of the two boys, three Clem is the tallest of the four boys, etc.
Comparatives with (n)ever, which express a superlative meaning	That's more people than I've ever seen. / I've never seen more people. k-That's the most people (that) I've ever seen.)
Comparatives with any other, which express a superlative meaning	This play is better than any other play I've seen. (= This play is the best one (that) I've seen.)
OTHER FORMS USED TO EXPRESS COMPARISON IN ENGLISH
The English language also has a number of other syntactic and lexical means to express
comparison. Some of these are reminiscent of the dominant comparative construction types
found in other languages of the world (see the earlier discussion of language typology in the
introduction of this chapter):
Type	Example
Some constructions limit the scope of an adjective or adverb, thereby making its meaning relative rather than absolute (see the previous discussion in this chapter).	Kate is tall for a girl. Gianni is tall compared to Raul.
Sometimes special verbs are used to express a superior degree or extent (see the previous discussion in this chapter).	Dylan's height exceec*s Ryan's (height).
As an extension of the preceding type, some derived verbs using out-, under-, and over- as prefixes are also inherently comparative.	Andrew outplayed his opponents. The professor underrated his students.
One of the meanings of prepositions such as over and under is inherently comparative (i.e., is equivalent to more than or less than), respectively.	The temperature rose to over 80°F. Bob's annual salary is under $40,000.
POTENTIAL AMBIGUITY OFSOMECOMPARISONS
Consider the following sentence. Depending on where one assumes that ellipsis has occurred,
it is ambiguous and can have two readings:
Mary likes Alice (more/less) than Tanya.
a.	Mary likes Alice (more/less) than she likes Tanya.
b.	Mary likes Alice (more/less) than Tanya likes Alice.
776
The Grammar Book
Such ambiguity only occurs if all three NPs share the same semantic features. There would
be no ambiguity with a sentence like the following, where the semantic features of the NPs
would make the meaning clear:
Mary likes eggplant (more/less) than broccoli.
The Use of Comparatives
markednessãndYhe use of comparative^
As discussed in Chapter 20, many adjectives and adverbs that are commonly used to express
comparison in English form oppositions:
tall—short
Positive polarity (+) long—short Negative polarity (-)
(unmarked form) - old—young	(marked form)
heavy—light
fast—slow
The existence of such paired positive and negative polarity forms gives US a way to
avoid the use of less (which is marked and sounds awkward in many contexts). Markedness
theory also predicts the use of unmarked more or -er as often as possible in the expression of
comparison;11 for example,
Dylan is taller than Ryan. Ryan is shorter than Dylan.
(?Ryan is less tall than Dylan.)
Psycholinguists call more and the positive polarity forms listed here “unmarked” because
they are used more frequently in any given language, are learned first by children, and occur
with greater frequency in the languages of the world. The unmarked forms also tend to be
used in neutral questions that convey no special presuppositions:
How old (?young) are you?
How tall (?short) is Kate?
What more (?less) do you want?
Psycholinguists call less and the negative polarity forms listed here “marked” because
they are used less frequently in any given language, learned later by children,12 and typically
used in highly marked contexts.
When Are Marked Comparative Forms Used?
In an attempt to determine when and why marked comparatives are used, Ssensalo (1976)
examined the White House Transcripts (New York Times, 1974) and also a large number of
advertisements. In both databases, the unmarked comparative forms were dominant;
however, Ssensalo found that two major principles explained most of the marked or negative
comparatives that she located in the White House Transcripts:
1.	The marked form best expresses the speaker’ร message or point of view; for example:
They will have to redesign it as a narrower action.
(saying narrower is more direct and specific instead of simply saying it is too broad).
2.	The marked form was cued by the proximity of a related word or idea; for example:
เท the [Washington] Post article, we're so low now we can't go any lower.
(Lower cannot easily be changed to higher in a paraphrase.)
Chapter 34: Degree—Comparatives and Equatives
777
In the advertisements, Ssensalo (1976) found that marked comparatives were used only
about 20 percent of the time. When they occurred, they were used to indicate either the
poorer quality of a rival product (e.g., the same amount of the other detergent will do fewer dishes)
or because the marked form signals something desirable to the potential buyer:
Look younger!
We have lower prices.
USE OF LESS VtimJSFEWER
Earlier, we gave the formal rule for the distribution of less and fewer in negative comparisons
of noun quantity:
1.	Use less before uncountable nouns:
He has less furniture than you do.
2.	Us & fewer before plural countable nouns:
He has fewer chairs than you do.
However, anyone who has been closely observing informal English speech will have
noticed that less is often used with plural countable nouns:
He has less chairs than you do.
Also, written uses of less modifying countable nouns have been attested even in formal
or edited writing. Here are two examples written back in 1958, as cited in Chen (1982):
Out of the 170 million people in the country, less than 81 million have IQs that are high.
(Harper's Magazine, March, 1958)
Rejoice then that no less than 34 of the 81 past volumes... are back in print. (N.Y. Times
Book Review sections March 30,1958)
Chen (1982) examined a corpus of more than 180,000 spoken words and a control corpus
of about 50,000 written words. In these corpora, he found 26 tokens of less and 2 tokens of
fewer. Both tokens offewer occurred in the written corpus. In the spoken corpus, less occurred
in 6 tokens where traditional grammar would have prescribed fewer:
... less people (this form occurred twice)
... less than 300 people
... less such fellows
... less than one person in four
... the number of farmers is less every day
Because neither form was particularly frequent in his corpora, Chen (1982) administered
a written, fill-in-the-blank questionnaire and an oral elicitation task to native English speakers
(the oral task involved people looking at pictures of two apple trees, one having more apples;
or two desks, one having more books on it, etc.). He found that only 16 percent of the
responses on the written task used less where fewer was predicted by the traditional rule, but
that slightly over 50 percent of th&jresponses on the oral elicitation task used less where fewer
was predicted. No one used fewer where less was predicted on either task. This suggests that
the college students that Chen used as consultants tended to monitor their use of less and fewer
on the written questionnaire but did this much less often on the oral tasks.
On the basis of his various sources of data, Chen (1982) identified four factors that seem
to influence the use of less rather than fewer:
1.	English speakers are less likely to USe. fewer in informal speech than in formal writing.
2.	Nouns of measurement (like bushel) are even less likely to be preceded by fewer than
plural countable nouns (like apples):
778
The Grammar Book
less bushels of apples (rather than fewer)
fewer apples//ess apples (both occur)
3.	Separation offewer from the head noun encourages the use of less:
less than 50 people
4.	Ellipsis of constituents following less or fewer encourages the use of less (i.e., fewer is
rarely used pronominally):
They told US 300 people would come to the rally, but there were less.
Chen’s (1982) results are reinforced by the fact that less occurs in all syntactic environments
where a negative comparison is possible:
Adjective: to be less extravagant than
Adverb: to dance less gracefully than
Verb: to weigh less than
Noun: less money than
However, fewer can occur only in the last environment—with nouns—and then
only if the noun is countable and plural (e.gfewer dollars than). Thus, fewer seems to be a
suppletive13 form of less that can occur only as a modifier of plural countable nouns. Chen
(1982) speculates that because less can encode a smaller-than-other quantity with no regard at
all for countability and plurality, while fewer must explicitly take these features into account,
it is sometimes hard to USe fewer as a modifier of plural countable nouns, and this is especially
true when the modifier and the head noun are not adjacent.
USE OF ER VERsisMOft^^
Solomon (1994) compared the use of naturally occurring tokens of inflected (-er) and
periphrastic more comparatives in a corpus of spoken American English and found that
periphrastic more is being used increasingly in many cases where the -er form is expected.
Some of the discourse-sensitive reasons that she isolated to explain this are the following:
1.	The speaker changes from the inflectional form to the periphrastic form because she/
he needs to emphasize the positive comparison (one can stress more but not -er):
My instructor told me to come up with a clearer thesis statement, but I don't see how
I can make it any MORE clear.
2.	Periphrasis is used with the base form in some cases where the positive form of the
base word occurred in the preceding clause (no special emphasis):
It's easy to bake a cake... It's more easy to bake cakes than pies.
3.	Some collocations frequently occur with more: a (whole) lot more, way more, even more,
a (little) bit more, much more, and so on. If one has started using one of these strong
collocates, there may be pressure to use periphrastic more:
I'm way more funny than he is.
4.	In some environments, the choice of either periphrasis or inflection seems to depend
on an earlier comparative form occurring in a more or less parallel structure, and this
seems to happen much more often with periphrasis [i.e., there are many more cases
like (a) than cases like (b)]:
a.	I'm more aware of pressures... so I'm more tense, like now.
b.	There's been a lot of influence from English, in a briefer but intenser manner.
Chapter 34: Degree—Comparatives and Equatives
779
Sometimes, Solomon’s (1994) examples seem to reflect two or more of these tendencies.
For example, the following has both the emphatic stress illustrated in (1) and the repetition
of forms mentioned in (2):
It's gonna be tough with him... It's gonna be MORE tough without him.
Finally, we should note that Solomon (1994) found five tokens of double marking
produced by native speakers, two of which involved irregular forms:
?l am way more funnier than he is.
*lt seems to taste more better when it's oily and fried.
*She didn't make the problem worsen (i.e., comparative worse + -er)
?And it made her a little more sneakier, (two tokens from the same speaker)
Form and Meaning of Equative
Constructions
PATTERNS FOR EQUATIVES
In many respects (i.e., both semantically and syntactically), equative constructions are similar
to comparatives. However, when we formulate an equative construction, we presuppose a
degree of similarity or identity (as opposed to the degree of difference we presuppose when
we formulate a comparison). For example:
has
other
verbs
as (MUCH /MANY) A as Y
Xis
similar
identical
to Y with respect to A
The equative construction—like the comparative—occurs with all four major parts
of speech:
Adjective: Mel is as tall as George (is).
Adverb: Ava runs as fast as Charlotte (runs/does).
Noun: Ed has as (much money/many books) as Jack (has/does).
Verb: Roger weighs as much as Paul (weighs/does).
Also, the complementizer as—like the complementizer than—can be followed by a
reduced clause:
have
do
She has as many books as I
or simply an NP:
She has as (many/few) books as John.
In the latter context, if a pronoun follows as instead of a lexical noun, it once again tends
to change from subject to object form in informal conversation:
She has as many books as
In other words, if no verb or operator follows the NP, English speakers tend to treat the
NP as the object of a preposition. Thus, the complementizer as—like the complementizer
than—appears to have some of the features of a preposition.
?l
780
The Grammar Book
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS REGARDING EQDATIVES
Surface Variations
Notice that the underlying much in the formula “as (MUCH) ... as" changes to many before
plural count nouns, and that the much must be deleted before adjectives and adverbs. The
failure to observe these environmentally motivated alternations produces errors like these:
*Sam has as much books as Harry.
*Jill climbs hills as much fast as Jack.
Similes
English has a productive figure of speech called the simile, which takes the form:
NP1 + linking verb + as + Adjective + as + NP2
The baby's skin is as soft as silk.
Peter's stare was as cold as ice.
You look as white as a ghost.
c.	Fillmore (personal communication) has pointed out that only literal equatives can take
a complement clause with a redundant verb or operator. A figurative simile cannot do this:
เท summer, Washington is as hot as Tokyo is.
"Washington is as hot as hell is.
"You are as dead as a doornail is.
In informal speech, the first as can be deleted in a simile:
Washington is hot as hell.
Moder (2010) points to a simile with the It’s like NP construction that is not as strong
as an equative, but which can be used to claim a resemblance:
That road is like a roller coaster.
Similes are perhaps not frequent in spoken or written corpora that reflect everyday usage
or factual prose. However, they are part of English, and learners need to recognize similes as
a figurative rather than a literal use of language when they encounter them (Moon, 2008).
The Negative Equative
The equative construction has a negative form, which is equivalent semantically to a negative
or marked comparative:
Paul doesn't have as much money as Peter. - Paul has less money than Peter.
The Occurrence of So (Much) ... As
The form so may replace the first as of the equative formula when it is immediately preceded
by not:
tall as Kate (is).
Rachel is not
so
This is not possible in affirmative equatives:
"Rachel is so tall as Kate (is).
Certain negative words other than not can also account for some of the variation of so
with as:
Nothing isl
exciting as this!
never seen anyone \ รรํ
happy as Carolyn.
Chapter 34: Degree—Comparatives and Equatives
781
In addition to sentences like those given here with overtly negative words such as not,
nothing., and never.) so may also occur instead of as in at least two other types of sentences that
have the potential for negative (as well as positive) implication:
l/l/7?-questions: What is! so 1 rare as a day in June? (rhetorical)
(= "There is nothing J as I rare as a day in June.")
Conditionals: I'll be happy! as Hong as 1 have you.
l— "If I have you. I'll be happy")
We will say more about the use of so versus as later in this chapter.
THE MEANING OF EQUATIVES VIS-A VIS
Mitchell (1990) has pointed out that equatives are not constructions of strict identity but
convey instead a sense of “same or more.” Of the following examples, Mitchell says that
most people treat (1) and (2) as synonymous, yet the possibility of (3), the contradiction in
(4), and the somewhat tautological but still possible (5) indicate that equatives are more like
comparatives than most grammars would suggest (p. 59):
1.	Mary is as tall as her father.
2.	Mary and her father are identical in height.
3.	Mary is as tall as her father. เท fact, she's taller than him.
4.	?Mary is as tall as her father. เท fact, she's shorter than him.
5.	Mary is as tall as her father. เท fact, they're identical in height.
Further, if comparison with respect to quantity (much/more; little/less) is combined with
negation, we get the following equivalences between comparatives and equatives (Mitchell,
1990, p. 63):
Comparative	Equative
X costs more than Y	-	X doesn't cost as little as Y
X costs less than Y	-	X doesn't cost as much as Y
X costs no more than Y	—	X costs as little as Y
X costs no less than Y	—	X costs as much as Y
If one adds the possibility of using gradable adjectives with positive and negative polarity
(1tall/short), then the following equivalences are available (Mitchell, 1990, p. 67):
Comparative	Equative
[taller than]	— not as short as
less short than
less tall than	— not aS tall as
[shorter than]
no taller than	— [as short as]
no less short than
no less tall than	— [as tall as]
no shorter than
782
The Grammar Book
Thus, as Mitchell (1990) shows US, comparatives and equatives—in combination with
negation—have an inverse relationship, such that the cognitively least demanding form (i.e.,
the forms in square brackets in these paired sets) will tend to be used most often to express a
given meaning.
OTH E R AS p ECTSÕFÊQUÃnvÍ7ÍÊÃNÍNM
The Same ... As versus As ... As
Many textbooks suggest that the same ...as can function as the equivalent of an equative:
1.	Joe is as tall as Jim.
2.	a. Joe is the same height as Jim. = Jim is the same height as Joe.
b. Joe and Jim are the same height.
As we have just pointed out by citing Mitchell’s (1990) work, an equative expresses
“as much as and possibly more than.” Use of the same does not have this meaning. It means
“identical, exactly the same.” This is often reinforced through the use of modifiers like just
and (very) much:
He looks just the same as his father.
I have (very) much the same opinion as Ralph does.
Also, the same can function as a symmetric predicate, where all the permutations are
equivalent at the sentence level, as shown in the examples in (2). Such permutations are not
possible with equative constructions; thus, the constructions are not equivalent.
The Potential Ambiguity of As Well As
Because of the deletions that occur in degree constructions, sometimes these constructions
are ambiguous. Consider, for example, a sentence such as the following:
Jane can sing as well as Sarah.
In one interpretation—“Jane is as good a singer as Sarah”—as well as expresses the
similarity in their degrees of proficiency as singers. The other meaning for this sentence is “In
addition to Sarah, Jane can sing,” which could be paraphrased as “Sarah sings and Jane sings
too.” In these cases, as well (as) is functioning as a prepositional logical connector expressing
addition; that is, no element of degree is being expressed.
Issues Concerning the Use of
Equative Constructions
MORE ON SO!AS VARIATION	________________________________
A number of factors other than an adjacent negative form or an inherent negative meaning
must be considered in accounting for so/as variation in equatives. First of all, the acceptability
of 50 greatly diminishes when other lexical items intervene between the negative word and so/as:
Joe does not speak
well as Mark.
Chapter 34: Degree—Comparatives and Equatives
783
However, the probability of so occurring increases when an adverb with negative
associations such as nearly (— not exactly) directly precedes the equative construction:
. โ doesn't
Joe 1 ■1··· ■ .
does not
speak nearly \ so j-well as Mark.
Also, since so is perceived as somewhat formal—perhaps even literary or slightly archaic
when used in equatives—its use greatly diminishes when not is contracted and no negative
adverb like nearly is present:
Rachel isn't! tall as Kate.
N EG ATI VE EQUATIVES VERSUS NEGATIVE COMPARATIVES
In many cases, an equative is preferable to a negative comparative with less or a negative
polarity adjective plus -er because it is perceived as being less direct or blunt. For example:
Rachel is not
as
tall as Kate (is).
—versus—
(Rachel is
?less tall
shorter
than Kate.)
Negative equatives are also often preferred over comparatives with negative polarity adjectives
because they seem to be less awkward stylistically, or more tactful and polite:
Joe doesn't run as fast as Burt (\ jUnS ).
does
—versus—
[?less fasti	[runs!
(Joe runs ๅ 1 f than Burt ห 1 f ].)
[slower J	[does J
A data-based study of when to use the negative equative rather than a less/fewer
comparative or a marked comparative with -er is not yet available (to our knowledge); thus,
further research on this topic would be useful. We have observed such sentences being used
as models or being elicited in drills—but in inappropriate ways—in ESL/EFL classrooms
and textbooks. In the meantime, using the bracketed version of semantically equivalent forms
indicated on page 782 in the sets adapted from Mitchell (1990) seems to be a good rule of
thumb.
Conclusion
This chapter has in nó way exhausted all that could be said about comparative and equative
constructions in English. We have riot provided the usual syntactic analysis (i.e., the tree
diagrams) because the available descriptions were either inadequate or too complicated
to incorporate here. Furthermore, it is obvious that many important questions of usage
(e.g., -er versus more, equative versus negative comparative) deserve careful future study.
Depending on how comparison is expressed in the learner’s language or languages, the
learning challenge could very well involve all three dimensions of'grammar: form, meaning,
and use.
The Grammar Book
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form/Meaning. Badalamenti and Henner-Stanchina (2007) demonstrate a good way
to practice comparison of adjectives (the simplest pattern). They have students work in
pairs to elicit information about each other and to generate as many comparatives and
equatives as possible:
Category	Me	Partner
1.	Age 2.	Height 3.	Hair color 4.	Eye color 5.	Personality Etc.		
Examples: My partner is older than (I am/me).
I'm not as old as my partner.
2. Form/Meaning. Ίο introduce comparison of noun quantities, have each group of students
compare the amount of money that two people in the group have in their wallets:
	Pennies	Nickels	Dimes	Quarters	Dollars	Total money
Greta	3	2	4	2	5	$6.03
Christine	2	4	1	3	4	$5.07
Example: Greta has more pennies than Christine.
(or—more precisely—Greta has one more penny than Christine.)
3. Form/Meaning. To compare adverbs, Badalamenti and Henner-Stanchina (2007)
suggest the following: Students work in pairs, and together they produce comparisons
based on a grid with verbs and adverbs.
Verb	Adverb	Comparisons
study	hard	My partner studies harder than I do.
read	well	
write	neatly	
speak	clearly	
run	fast	
4.	Use. A realistic environment for eliciting negative polarity (or marked) comparatives
is to show students objects—or present them with situations where both things are, for
example, smaller, shorter, or less than normal. In such a case, it makes sense to use a
negative polarity form. Here are a few examples:
a. Two pencils—both short, but one more so than the other:
The blue pencil is shorter than the yellow one. (rather than The yellow pencil is longer
than the blue one.)
Chapter 34: Degree—Comparatives and Equatives
785
b. Stick figures of Stan and Bill with heights indicated [Stan is short (5'2"); Bill is very
short (5')]:
Bill is shorter than Stan, (rather than Stan is taller than Bill.}
5.	Use. Wisniewska, Riggenbach, and Samuda (2007) offer suggestions for making tactful
comparisons. One suggestion is to take the comparisons made by a newly arrived student
from abroad and rewrite them so they are more tactful and polite.
Original statement	Polite Revision
1. Children in the บ.ร. watch more TV.	Children in my country don't watch as much TV as they do in the บ.ร.
2. People have dinner earlier in the บ.ร.	In my country, people don't have dinner as early as เท the บ.ร.
3. People change jobs more often in the บ.ร.	เท my country, people don't change jobs as often as in the บ.ร.
6.	Form/Meaning. To introduce equatives, use the concept of identical twins so that the
equatives can be practiced naturally.
	Age	Height	Weight	Number of Siblings	Year in College
Sandra	18	5'5"	115 lbs.	3	Freshman
Sheila	18	5'5"	115 lbs.	3	Freshman
Examples: Sandra is as ■ tall 1 as Sheila.
Sheila weighs as much as Sandra.
This information could also be used to practice the same... as:
Example: Sandra is the same age as Sheila.
7.	Form/Meaning. Comparatives and equatives can often be combined if information
about cities, states, or countries can be assembled for purposes of comparison.
	Area	Population	Year of Statehood	State Bird	Highest Point
Kentucky Virginia	About 40,000 sq. miles About 40,000 sq. miles	4,400,000 8,000,000	1792 1788	Cardinal Cardinal	4,150 ft. 5,730 ft.
Examples: Kentucky is as large (in area) as Virginia.
Virginia has a larger population than Kentucky.
786
The Grammar Book
studying harder and harder.
8.	Form/Meaning. One way of teaching conjoined comparatives is to present information
about an individual over a period of time:
Harvey Age	10	13	16	19	21
GPA	2.5	2.9	3.3	3.6	3.8
Examples: Harvey's GPA has been getting better and better.
Harvey !L_ 1____
7 has been
9.	Use. You can present the use of -er versus more to your students by contrasting short,
informal adjectives with longer, more formal adjectives in a context where both types of
adjectives are being used to make similar comparisons.
Situation: Mrs. Harrison owns a public relations firm. She is creating a new position and
asks her manager if she should promote Ms. Franklin or Ms. Thomas.
Manager (on the phone with Mrs. Harrison): Oh, I'd promote Ms. Thomas. She's smarter,
works harder, and is much friendlier.
Manager (in a written memo to Mrs. Harrison): I recommend Ms. Thomas for the promotion
because she is more intelligent and more industrious than the other person being considered.
Also, Ms. Thomas is more personable, which will also be an important asset to bring to the
new position.
Students can then be given other situations; they can work in pairs or groups to generate
the phone dialogue and written memo based on the model.
10.	Use. Carlisi (2008) suggests using the first two stanzas of William Wordsworth’ร poem “I
Wandered Lonely as a Cloud” to introduce similes and to show that in some genres, like
poetry and casual conversation, the first as can be deleted in equatives, as Wordsworth
does in this poem:
I wandered lonely as a cloud	(He was as lonely as a cloud.)
That floats on high o'er vales and hills,
When all at once I saw a crowd,
A host of golden daffodils;
... Continuous as the stars that shine (The daffodils were as continuous
And twinkle on the Milky Way...	as the stars on the Milky Way.)
To then practice similes, Carlisi suggests that students work in groups to discuss some
stereotypical similes and to try to generate new, more creative ones to share with
the class.
Stereotypical simile	New, original simile
I feel as fresh as a daisy.	I feel as fresh as the morning after it rained.
His skin is as tough as leather.
Her heart is as cold as ice.
I'm as hungry as a bear.
She's as pretty as a picture.
Chapter 34: Degree—Comparatives and Equatives
787
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1.	Provide an original example sentence for each of the following terms. Underline the
pertinent word(s) in your examples.
a.	the comparative construction	e. use of an adverb to express degree
b.	the equative construction	f. correlative comparative
c.	irregular comparative adverb	g. unmarked comparative adjective
d.	absolute use of an adjective
2.	Describe the ambiguity in the following sentences.
a.	Phyllis likes Carol more than Sue.
b.	Mark teaches Sam as well as Ralph.
3.	What part of speech is being compared in the following sentences?
a.	Harry throws the ball farther than Ned does.
b.	John has more than two cars.
c.	I bought more oranges than we can eat.
d.	This book costs more than I want to pay.
e.	This movie is more interesting than the one we saw last week.
4.	Why is the following sentence awkward or questionable? What would be better?
?Joan sings less well than Sally.
Test your ability to apply what you know.
5.	ESL/EFL students have produced the following statements. What would you tell
them?
a.	*To make the story more short, I'll just tell the ending.
b.	*1 like this book more better than that one.
c.	*1 was lucky than my little brother.
d.	"Their prediction about empathy was not as realistic than they had thought.
e.	"The newspapers in Los Angeles have better international coverage than in
San Diego.
6.	Many languages express compound comparatives with a meaning of progressive
change in a way that more clearly parallels more formal English constructions like these:
He grew ever taller.	It became progressively more overcast.
To learners who are only familiar with such formal constructions, how would you
present the more frequent and more colloquial compound construction? For example:
He grew taller and taller.	It became more and more overcast.
7.	Consider the following sentences:
a.	I've seen monkeys more intelligent than Herbert.
b.	I’ve seen more intelligent monkeys than Herbert.
What’s the difference in meaning?
788
The Grammar Book
8.	A student brings you a magazine article that contains the following:
Benjamin Franklin was both smarter and loyaler than...
He asks you why the writer used loyaler instead of more loyal. He thinks loyaler may
be a mistake and wants your opinion. What would you say to the student?
9.	What follows is a shortened form of the beginning of an article by Brock Brady,
“Essential Strategies for Teaching Large Classes” (2013). Read it over. There are nine
comparatives and two equatives. Identify these constructions and describe what part
of speech is being compared or equated in each case in the following two paragraphs:
1.	When does a class become large? It depends on the class. Young students make a
2.	class larger than older students because of shorter attention spans. Diverse classes
3.	become large sooner than homogeneous classes. However, in a survey done in
4.	2008 covering more than 30 countries most respondents felt that a class became
5.	large with about 30 students (Brady, 2011).
6.	Teachers can make the commitment to make a large class as effective as a smaller
7.	class. You can do almost everything in large classes that you do in smaller ones;
8.	you can make them as student-centered as smaller classes, but you have to do it
9.	more explicitly and routinely.
Bibliography
REFERENCES
Badalamenti, V.) & Henner-Stanchina, c. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 1 (4th ed.).
Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Bolinger, D. (1972). Degree words. The Hague, Netherlands: Mouton.
Brady, B. (2011). Managing assessment in large EFL classes. In c. Coombe, K. Folse, & N. Hubley (Eds.),
Issues in assessment (pp. 291-299). Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Brady, B. (2013, August). Essential strategies for teaching large classes. TESOL Connections. Retrieved from
http://newsmanager.commpartners.com/tesolc/issues/2013-08-01/3 .html
Browne, พ. (1964). On adjectival comparisons and reduplication in English (Unpublished paper). Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Capelie, B. (2011). The the....the... construction: Meaning and readings. Journal of Pragmatics, 43(f),
99-117.
Carlisi, K. (2008). Grammar connection: Structure through content 3. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Carter, R., & McCarthy, M. (2006). Cambridge grammar of English (2nd ed.). Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Celce-Murcia, M. (1972). A syntactic and psycholinguistic study of comparison in English (Unpublished doctoral
dissertation). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Celce-Murcia, M., Brinton, D., & Goodwin, J. (with Griner, B.). (2010). Teaching pronunciation: A course book
and reference guide (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Chen, z. (1982). An analysis of less vs. fewer (Unpublished paper). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Donaldson, M., & Balfour, G. (1968). Less is more: A study of language comprehension in children. British
Journal of Psychology, 59,461-412.
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion in English. London, England: Longman.
Hilpert, M. (2008). The English comparative: Language structure and language use. English Language and
Linguistics, 12, 395-417.
Chapter 34: Degree—Comparatives and Equatives
789
McCawley, J. D. (1964, December). Quantitative and qualitative comparison in English. Paper presented at the
Annual Linguistic Society of America Winter Meeting, New York, NY.
Mitchell, K. (1990). On comparisons in a notional grammar. Applied Linguistics, 77(1), 52-72.
Moder, c. L. (2010). Two puzzle pieces. Fitting discourse context and constructions into cognitive
metaphor theory. English Text Construction 3(2), 294-320.
Moon, R. (2008). Conventionalized as similes in English: A problem case. International Journal of Corpus
Linguistics, 73(1), 3-37.
New York Times. (1974). White House transcripts. New York, NY: Bantam Books.
Reppen, R. (with Gordon, D.). (2012). Grammar and beyond 7. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Solomon, G. (1994). A more closer look at comparatives and superlatives (Unpublished TESL and Applied
Linguistics paper). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Ssensalo, D. A. (1976). Markedness and the usage of comparatives (Unpublished master’s thesis). University of
California, Los Angeles, CA.
Taylor, J. R. (2012). The mental corpus: How language is represented in the mind. Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURT^EIÃRÍÃÍDING 2Z	-
For useful descriptions of the English comparative, see:
Carter, R., & McCarthy, M. (2006). Cambridge grammar of English (2nd ed.). Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Jespersen, o. (1964). Essentials of English grammar University, AL: University of Alabama Press.
Quirk, R., & Greenbaum, ร. (1973). A concise grammar of contemporary English. New York, NY: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich.
For transformational analyses of the comparative and the equative construction in English, see:
Bresnan, J. (1973). Syntax of the comparative construction in English. Linguistic Inquiry, 3(3), 275-342.
Celce-Murcia, M. (1972). A syntactic and psycholinguistic study of comparison in English (Unpublished doctoral
dissertation). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
For useful treatments of semantic opposition and markedness, see:
Kruse, D. A. (1986). Lexical semantics. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Mettinger, A. (1994). Aspects of semantic opposition in English. Oxford, England: Clarendon Press.
For ESL/EFL texts with good ideas for teaching the comparative construction to beginners, see:
Badalamenti, V., & Heimer-รtanchina, c. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 1 (4th ed.).
Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
O’Sullivan, J.K. (2007). Grammar connection: Structure through content 1. Boston, MA: Heinle,
Cengage Learning.
For materials designed to practice comparatives and equatives with intermediate-level learners, see:
Carlisi, K. (2008). Grammar connection·. Structure through content 3. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Firsten, R. (2008). Grammar connection: Structure through content 2. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Thewlis, ร. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 3 (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage
Learning.
Wisniewska, L, Riggenbach, H., & Samuda, V. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form., meaning, and use 2
(4th ed.) Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
For information on the adjectives and adverbs that occur most frequently in comparative and equative
constructions, see:
Reppen, R. (with Gordon, D.). (2012). Grammar and beyond 1. New York: NY: Cambridge University Press.
Reppen, R. (with Gordon, D.). (2012). Gramm-ar and beyond 2. New York: NY: Cambridge University Press.
90
The Grammar Book
Endnotes
1.	These nongradable adjectives occasionally are compared to express exaggerated or emphatic
statements; for example:
You couldn't be more wrong about that!
The questionability of using the unmarked -er inflection here reinforces the unusual nature of such a
statement; for example:
*You couldn't be wronger about that!
2.	We had been unaware of this typological pattern until R. Longacre (personal communication) informed
us that several languages of New Guinea expressed comparison this way. Then later, B. Glover (personal
communication) confirmed that this mode of comparing also occurs in some Native American
languages.
3.	M. Mould (personal communication) has told US, for example, that Igbo and most Bantu languages
cannot reverse such a "surpass" comparison to directly express the notion that"Mary is shorter than
John"; l.e., the pass verb can only be used to compare in a positive direction. However, not all languages
having a "surpass" comparative are quite so restricted. D. Meyers (personal communication) has informed
us that in Yoruba, it is possible to say"Mary surpasses John in shortness." At the moment, we do not know
whether Yoruba always had this flexibility, or whether it acquired flexibility through internal change
or through contact with other languages of the type discussed in the next section, "Comparison Using
Degree Morphemes."
4.	There are a few one-syllable adjectives that are exceptional in that they take only periphrastic more or
most: real, right, wrong, and like (= similar to). Also adjectives with final consonant clusters prefer the
periphrastic form, .e.g., more apt (Taylor, 2012).
5.	Syllabic [I] in this context generally becomes consonantal and begins a new syllable when the inflection
is added (gent'ler).
6.	According to Reppen (2012), further occurs 10 times more often than farther (p. 401).
7.	The adjective elder does, however, occur in certain fixed collocations, such as e/der statesman. The noun
form elder occurs in limited contexts, such as church elder.
8.	เท Standard English, the plural substitute ones does not follow a plural demonstrative:
These cars are bigger than those (*ones).
9.	What we are calling "pseudo comparisons" here were referred to as "qualitative" (rather than
"quantitative") comparisons by McGawley (1964).
10.	เท this chapter, we are using the term measure phrase or phrase of measurement to refer to phrases like
6 feet tall or 2 kilos rather than the term partitive noun, which was used in Chapter 17 to describe such
constructions.
11.	See Celce-Murcia (1972) for empirical evidence that unmarked comparatives are produced significantly
more frequently in English than are marked ones.
12.	Donaldson and Balfour (1968), for example, have demonstrated that young English-speaking children
cannot correctly distinguish less from more (i.e., they consistently interpret less as more) until they have
reached a certain cognitive developmental stage that occurs somewhere around the age of 5.
13.	Recall that suppletive forms are grammatically related forms that are not historically derivable from the
same morpheme (e.g., go—went; bad—worse, etc.).
Chapter 34: Degree—Comparatives and Equatives
791

Degree—
Complements and
Superlatives
c
Introduction
In this chapter, we continue the discussion of degree constructions that we began in the
preceding chapter, which covered comparatives and equatives. First, we discuss several
degree complements that take infinitives and express notions such as “excess” [too (much/many)],
“insufficiency” [too (little/few)J, and “sufficiency” (enough). Before adjectives and adverbs, only
too occurs, and it expresses excess or insufficiency, depending on the meaning of the adjective
or adverb it modifies:
Excess
Tyler is too smart to believe that story.
He has too much money to understand poor peoples' problems.
She has too many tasks right now to finish any one task well.
Insufficiency
Nancy is too young to vote.
Bob has too little time now to go bird-watching.
Eric has too few supporters to win the election.
Sufficiency
We have enough money to buy a house.
Ann runs fast enough to win the race.
Second, we consider complements of “causality,” which also involve an element of degree:
(so much/many; so little/few; or such a/an) all of which take that complements. The that
complementizer is often deleted in informal speech:
I had so many choices (that) I felt overwhelmed.
We had so little time (that) we couldn't finish the job.
There was such a clamor (that) we didn't hear most of the speech.
Then we examine the absolute use of too, so, and such in contexts where they function as
emphatic counterparts of the intensifier very:
You are so/too kind.
He is such an idiot.
The final degree construction that we consider is the English superlative (-est, most,
least). We comment on the highly marked nature of this construction since many languages
of the world do not have a superlative degree that is morphologically distinct from their
comparative degree. For example, French uses the word plus (more) to express both comparative
and superlative meanings: .
793
Joel est plus grand que Roger. ( Joel is taller than Roger.)
Joel est le plus grand dans sa classe. ( Joel is the tallest in his class.)
Many other languages are like French rather than like English or its related Germanic
languages, which have distinct comparative and superlative forms. We will elaborate on
this typological distinction later in the chapter. In Chapter 34, we showed how the English
comparative could be used to express superlative meanings. In this chapter, we focus on the
superlative forms most) least, fewest) and -est) which explicitly convey superlative meanings in
English.
We also contrast the superlative degree with the comparative degree because this
contrast is the crux of many of the teaching-learning problems encountered when superlatives
are presented in the ESL/EFL classroom.
Form, Meaning, and Use of
Degree Complements
There are several degree complements that resemble comparatives and equatives in that they
make relative (rather than absolute) use of the four major parts of speech.
TOO (MUCH/MANY;LITTLE/FEW) PLUS INFINITIVE COMPLEMENT
too +
ADJ
ADV
โ much ไ
(N noncount)
[ little \
โ many] ____
J MN count)
[ few J
+ (for NP) + infinitive complement
He's too old to join the army.
She left too quickly for me to thank her.
โ much money
Burt has too 1
[ many investments
to understand what it's like to be poor.
I have too little time to exercise.
There were too few examples in his essay to support his hypothesis.
Martha talks too much to be a good listener.
Semantically, this construction indicates either an excess or an insufficiency of some
quality or of something measurable, when much or many occurs, the meaning of excess is
explicit. Likewise, when little or few occurs, the meaning of insufficiency is overtly expressed.
None of these quantifiers, however, occurs before an adjective or an adverb. In such cases, an
adjective or an adverb with positive polarity would express excess (e.g., too fast)) whereas an
adjective or an adverb with negative polarity would express insufficiency (e.g., too smalt). Note
that much and little precede noncount nouns, while many and few are the related forms that
precede count nouns.
F94
The Grammar Book
____	________________________________________
so (MUCH/MANY; LITTLE/FEW) PLUS THAT-CLAUSE	_____
ADJ
ADV
rmuch 1
I	r (N noncount)
โ many 1
\	HN count)
(few J
(to VP) (that} + complement ร
They're so noisy (that) we can't sleep.
He ran so fast (that) no one could catch him.
[ much work ไ____________1	_ . 1
I have so 1	t to do (that) I'll never finish.
[ many errands J
_______ 1_____โ little ability 1	.______.______1. .
Bess has so !	” ■ Mthat) she won t find a good job.
[ few skills J
He runs so little (that) it won't help him get in shape.
When so (much/many, little/few) is used in this construction, the notion of “causality” is
conveyed; that is, the degree, extent, or amount—positive or negative—expressed in the main
clause is sufficient to bring about the result expected in the complement clause preceded by
that. Just as in the previous construction, much and little occur before noncount nouns and
after verbs, while many and few occur before countable nouns. Also, none of these quantifiers
precedes an adjective or an adverb; the so occurs directly before the adjective or adverb in
such environments.
_______________________________________________
SUCH (A/AN) (ADJ) NOUN PLUS ΠΜΓ-CLAUSE
a__ \ (adj) N count
an I *
such
(adj) N plural
(adj) N noncount
(that) + complement ร
Bobby was such a nuisance (that) he was sent to his room.
They were such fine philanthropists (that) many organizations benefited from their generosity.
The victim was in such agony (that) she was taken to the hospital.
This construction closely parallels the one above in meaning and structure. In both
constructions, causality is expressed in the clause containing so or such, and a result is expressed
in the that-clause. Unlike so, however, such modifies only nouns or noun phrases. Such is used
instead of so when the degree or extent of a noun is being conveyed rather than its quantity
or amount. When such modifies a singular countable noun, the indefinite article a/an must
follow such. In other environments, such may directly precede the noun it modifies. Note that
an adjective frequently occurs between such (a/an) and the head noun:
such an unusual incident...	such easy questions...
There is often a near-paraphrase relationship between so and such in those cases where
semantically parallel nouns and adjectives exist:
Chapter 35: Degree—Complements and Superlatives
795
Jane is such an athlete that the boys want her on the varsity team.
Jane is so athletic that the boys want her on the varsity team.
The test had such easy questions that I finished early.
The test questions were so easy that I finished early.
___________	_________________________
ENOUGH PLUS INFINITIVE COMPLE^M
ADJ
ADV
verb
cnoun x>*
enough<nounx>' (for NP) infinitive complement
She's qualified enough for them to hire her.
He ran fast enough to win the race.
He weighs enough to compete as a heavyweight.
[ enough money
I havei	,
[ money enough
to get by for a while.
Enough, unlike the two previous degree complements we have discussed, follows
adjectives and adverbs as well as verbs. It expresses “sufficiency,” and it usually precedes
nouns; however, there is a less frequent variant of the enough + noun construction where
enough may follow the noun instead (see the last example). Another difference is that enough
simply doesn’t occur with the quantifiers much J many, little ,2 or few.
Semantically, not + enough is similar to too + little/few since, in both cases, the meaning
of “insufficiency” is conveyed:
He doesn't have enough time to exercise.
He has too little time to exercise.
There are some differences we should mention with regard to infinitive complements
and that-clause complements occurring in degree constructions. When not + enough is used to
paraphrase so little/few, any not occurring in the à^-clause complement following the so is not
expressed in the corresponding infinitive complement following not enough:
He exercises so little that he is not in good shape.
1. ._________._________. โ to be in good shape ใ
He doesn t exercise enough ..1. โ. r
1 *not to be in good shape]
The same thing happens when [too (much/little) for NP) infinitive complement] is used
to paraphrase [so (much/little) that-clause or such (a/an) (adj) N à^-clause]. In other words, any
overt negative in the that-clause following so or such is not expressed in the parallel infinitive
complement following too (much/little):
He is so weak that he can't speak coherently.
L. . ._______I, [ to speak coherently 1
He is too weak] y	7 l·
[ *not to speak coherently]
The ESL/EFL teacher might point out that the infinitive complements following not
enough or too (little/few) are implicitly negative since this fact is not always obvious to learners.
Another detail to be pointed out to learners is a fact already established in Chapter 31:
when a for phrase precedes the infinitive, it provides a subject for the infinitive complement.
When there is no for phrase, the subject of the main clause controls the reference of the
unexpressed subject of the infinitive:
The Grammar Book
The soup is too hot for me [subj] to eat. (subj = me/l)
Nora exercises enough [subj] to stay healthy, (subj = Nora/she)
THE ABSQLUTÊljsElpFsõTroõrÃNDTfigr
Quirk, Greenbaum, Leech, and Svartvik (1985) have pointed out that so is sometimes used
absolutely as an emphatic form of very:
I'm so tired!
The party was so delightful!
They add that this usage is more typical of women’s speech than men’s. To their
observations, we add that in environments where so does not precede an adjective or adverb,
so much/many may also be used absolutely as emphatic forms of very much/many:
I enjoyed this book so much!
They have so many friends!
Quirk et al. (1985) also mention that too is sometimes used absolutely as a colloquial
emphatic counterpart of very:
He isn't too bright.
I don't feel too good.
They add that this use is more typical of informal American English than of the British
variety. In the past, this informal use of too as an intensifier has generally been most acceptable
in semantically negative contexts. When ESL/EFL learners overgeneralize this absolute use
of too to affirmative contexts, questionable utterances sometimes result:
?This food is too good.
when what such learners want to say “This food is very good.”
In all dialects of English, too much and too little can be used absolutely, but again, this use
occurs most often in contexts where a negative meaning is implied:3
He drinks too much.
They study too little.
Some ESL/EFL learners incorrectly extend this pattern to affirmative contexts and
produce questionable utterances such as this:
?We like you too much.
when what they mean to say is, “We like you very much.”
We should point out that younger speakers of American English use absolute too in
positive as well as negative contexts in informal speech, as the two following examples with
too fun indicate:
[context: ordering dessert at a restaurant]
None of US really knew what a whoopie pie was, but the name sounded too fun to pass up.
(Finz, 2010, as cited in COCA)
[context: if the pet iguana Zanzi should also move to Chicago]
I suggested that Chicago might not be too fun for Zanzi, given its cold winters. (Kalpakian, 2005)
Obviously, such current uses of absolute too deserve further analysis.
Not surprisingly, the degree morpheme such (a/an) can also be used absolutely as a noun
intensifier:
This is such nonsense! (= complete/utter nonsense)
It was such a surprise! (= a very big surprise)
Chapter 35: Degree—Complements and Superlatives
797
The Form of the Superlative
Construction
HOW OTHER LANCUAGEsljxP^^	G R E E
ESL/EFL teachers should be aware of the fact that most languages do not have
morphologically distinct comparative and superlative forms. However, English and related
languages (i.e., other Germanic languages such as German, Dutch, Swedish, and Danish) are
somewhat idiosyncratic, in that they have distinct superlative forms. Languages without a
distinct superlative form often express a superlative meaning by using either a definite article
or some other defining word(ร) with a comparative morpheme; for example:
Ben is the more intelligent student in the class, (literally)
Ben is the most intelligent student in the class, (meaning)
or by using a construction that excludes all other members of the set to which the subject
belongs:
The VW is more economical than any other car. (literally)
The VW is the most economical car. (meaning)
Citing examples similar to these sentences, Jespersen (1924) points out that the superlative
degree does not necessarily indicate a greater or lesser degree than the comparative; rather,
it expresses degree from a different point of view. For this reason, Jespersen feels that many
languages are able to make do without superlative forms. In addition, some languages, such
as those in the Romance family which originally possessed a distinct superlative (it existed
in their source language: Latin), have since discarded their superlative form and have simply
extended the semantic domain of their comparative forms. In other words, many languages
have no distinct superlative form, either because they have never developed one or because
they had one but discarded it over time because they found it unnecessary.
Furthermore, in his work on language universals, Greenberg (1966) has pointed out
that superlatives are more “marked” than comparatives. That is to say, comparatives occur
more frequently than superlatives in any language that has both forms. He also noted that if
a language has a superlative form, it must also have a comparative form; however, the reverse
is not true. Solomon’ร (1994) data-based analysis of English comparative and superlative
forms in spoken American English supports Greenberg’s claims. She found 561 tokens of
inflected, periphrastic, and irregular comparatives and superlatives in her oral corpus. Only
180 (32 percent) of these tokens were superlatives (i.e., marked forms occur less frequently
than unmarked ones). Of these 180 superlatives, 76 tokens (42 percent) occurred with the
-est inflection, 55 tokens (31 percent) occurred with the periphrastic most, and 49 tokens
(27 percent) were irregular (e.g., best, worst).
This evidence suggests that the English superlative may be harder for most ESL/EFL
students to learn than the comparative and that the two forms can frequently be confused.
Neuman (1977) did, in fact, find the following in compositions written by intermediate-level
ESL students, confirming our prediction that these forms can be confused even by learners
who are well beyond the beginningdevel in their acquisition of English (p. 131):
*1 am the younger in my family.
*That food is worst than the food for the pig.
'98
The Grammar Book
SIMILARITIES AND DIFFERENCES BETWEEN
COMPARATIVES AND SUPERLATIVES
In terms of morphological distribution, the -est and most forms of the superlative behave
exactly like the -er and more forms of the comparative. The following discussion is a brief,
simplified restatement of the morphological rule that was given in somewhat greater detail
for comparative forms in the preceding chapter.
Superlative Inflectional Endings'
First, adjectives and adverbs of one syllable take the inflectional ending, as do two-syllable
adjectives with a final -y suffix (pronounced as unstressed /i/)ะ5
Base Form	-est
big	biggest
tall	tallest
soon	soonest
hard	hardest
happy	happiest
noisy	noisiest
Second, many other two-syllable adjectives that have a stressed first syllable and an
unstressed second syllable ending in -ly (/li/), -Ota (/o/), or -le (syllabic [I])6 also take the
inflection, although it is certainly possible to use the periphrastic form in specific contexts,
such as when extra emphasis is being placed on the superlative element (e.g., “She is the
MOST friendly person I know”):
Base Form	-est	Also Possible
friendly	friendliest	most friendly
narrow	narrowest	most narrow
gentle	gentlest	most gentle
Note also that these two-syllable adjectives can add derivational prefixes and still take
the same inflections as the base form (e.g., unhappiest, unfriendliest, etc.).
Third, all two-syllable adverbs ending in -ly that do not have an adjective homonym also
ending in -ly take only the periphrastic form:
Adverbs Taking the Periphrastic Form
Base Form	Most	Not Possible
slowly	most slowly	*slowliest
brusquely	most brusquely	*brusqueliest
sharply	most sharply	*sharpliest
Fourth, there are adjectives that seem more suited to the periphrastic superlative form
but that also may occur with the inflectional ending, especially in informal use. These include
two-syllable adjectives that (a) end in -er or -lire, such as tender, mature·, (b) end in a weakly
stressed vowel followed by nothing more than a final /d/ or /t/, such as stupid, quiet; and
(c) end in a weakly stressed syllable ending in /m/ or /n/, such as handsome, awesome, common:
Base Form	Most	Also Possible
tender	most tender	tenderest
stupid	most stupid	stupidest
handsome	most handsome	handsomest
common	most common	commonest
Chapter 35: Degree—Complements and Superlatives
799
Fifth, adjectives and adverbs of two syllables having any ending other than those
described previously, as well as all adjectives and adverbs of three or more syllables, tend to
take only the periphrastic form:	Base Form	Most
Adjective	curious	most curious pleasant	most	pleasant beautiful	most	beautiful
Adverb	skillfully	most skillfully cautiously	most cautiously independently	most	independently
However, recall that we pointed out in Chapter 34 that these guidelines are more
tendencies than airtight rules. In fact, there are 13 attested instances in the Corpus of
Contemporary American English (COCA) of a three-syllable adjective with the inflectional
ending (Taylor, 2012). Here is one he cites from a New Zealand newspaper:
They say that sorry is the hardest word. It can also be the slipperiest. (The Press, November 10,2007)
Nevertheless, the above mentioned morphological similarities are probably the main
reason why so many people erroneously believe that comparative and superlative constructions
are the same grammatically, with the only difference being the number of persons or objects
compared; that is, they believe that when two things are being compared, one should use
the comparative, and when three or more things are being compared, one should use the
superlative. This, in fact, is the rule given in most ESL/EFL texts, as well as the rule cited
in most reference grammars. If we do nothing else in this chapter, we hope to dispel this
misleading oversimplification.
IRREGULAR SUPERLATIVE FORMS _______________________
The same adjectives and adverbs that were morphologically irregular in the comparative
degree are also irregular in the superlative degree:
Base	Comparative	Superlative
good/well	better	best
bad/ill	worse	worst
far	farther/further	farthest/furthest
much/many	more	most
little	less	least
The further/furthest forms are used as the comparative and superlative forms of far
in nonspatial contexts and are even now being used in spatial contexts in informal use:
Spatial: We won the award for coming to the reunion from the (farthest/?furthest) distance.
Nonspatial: Leroy's testimony was furthest from the truth.
The form eldestrexists, but normally only as an adjective in NPs describing family
relationships (e.g., the eldest [brother/sister/sibling/’cousin], etc.).
The Meaning of Superlatives
Comparatives are often used quite appropriately when three or. more persons, objects, or
properties are involved:
800
The Grammar Book
Jack is taller than John
and
__7
Bill.
Jill and Ann have more A's than B'r
and 1
ไ \ C's.
Likewise, many speakers of English feel comfortable about using superlatives informally
when only two objects or properties are being compared, even though use of the comparative
form is considered to be formally more accurate in such cases; for example:
Bill is 6 feet tall, and Joe is 6 feet 2 inches tall.
Who's the tallest?
In fact, if we ask, “Who’s the taller (of the two)?” which would be the prescriptively
correct form here, we are merely using a comparative form in a superlative sense. This is
because the semantic function of the superlative is to select one or more members out of
a set (mathematically, a set has two or more members) because they rank first or last (with
respect to other members of the set) on a scale that measures a particular attribute (e.g.,
height, size, weight, age, intelligence, or speed). This is why superlatives, like ordinals, tend
to co-occur with a definite determiner and to be followed by prepositional phrases or that-
clauses that describe the whole set out of which the subject of the superlative has been
selected. For example:
Clem is the tallest one of the four boys.
Clem and Bob are the tallest boys that are in my class.
The superlative thus concerns itself with the extremes of a given scale with regard to a
specific set, whereas the comparative ignores the extremes and looks at two points anywhere
on the scale with regard to two or more individuals, objects, and so on. The number of persons
or objects involved in a comparison, therefore, is not the most important thing that a native
speaker of English considers when deciding whether to use a comparative or a superlative form.
This distinction of the extremes versus any two intermediate points on a scale gets
blurred, however, since it’s a fact that English comparative forms are sometimes used to
express a superlative meaning. One example of this was given previously (i.e., “Who’s the
taller of the two boys?”), and at least two other situations exist where comparative forms are
used to express a superlative meaning:
1.	Comparatives with (ท)ever:
I've never seen more people.
That's more people than I've ever seen. (That's the most people I've ever seen.)
2.	Comparatives with any (other):
This play is better than any other play I've seen. (This is the best play (that) I've ever seen.)
As a rule, if a sentence containing a comparative form can be paraphrased using a
sentence with a superlative form, then we can say that the comparative form is being used to
express a superlative meaning. (In fact, all superlative sentences in English can be paraphrased
using a comparative form.) Superlative forms, on the other hand, are not used to paraphrase
comparative meanings. Furthermore, as Stateva (2003) points out, while comparatives can be
used for a superlative meaning, as in:
The chess set is the most expensive.
The chess set is more expensive than every toy.
Chapter 35: Degree—Complements and Superlatives
801
a measure phrase can be added to the comparative, but not to the superlative (p. 276):
The chess set is 5 dollars more expensive than every toy.
*The chess set is (the) 5 dollars most expensive.
NONSUPERLATIVE MEANINGS OF MOST
Intensifier. The adverb most can be used to intensify, with a meaning similar to very, to express
a strong degree:
He was a most gracious host.
That was most thoughtful of you.
The use of the indefinite article a in the first example demonstrates that most is not
being used to express a superlative meaning8 since a true superlative would select the definite
article (if it occurred with an article).
Sometimes there can be ambiguity between a superlative reading and an intensifier
reading of most', this is normally resolved by the context:
This book is most useful. (= the most useful of the set of books, or very useful)
Colloquial Use. In conversation, most is sometimes used as an informal shortened version of
almost'.
Bob reads the newspaper most every night.
Proportional Use. Most can also function as a general, indefinite quantifying determiner that fills
the semantic space between “more than half’ and “almost all” (see Chapter 17 and Ariel, 2004):
Most sausages contain pork.
I like most fish.
The same quantifier can be used in partitive constructions with definite reference:
Most of the students in this class are Asian.
Most of what he said was believable.
Sometimes the definite proportional use of most behaves as a pro-form with ellipsis of
information that is recoverable from the preceding discourse:
That student made a lot of mistakes on the test. Most were trivial. (most = most of the mistakes)
Both the indefinite and definite use of the proportional most occur with plural or
noncount nouns or an embedded clause, as in most of what he said. Note that while most
has both superlative and proportional meanings, neither fewest nor least have such semantic
duality; they function only as superlatives. (See Huddleston & Pullum, 2002, for further
discussion.)
The Use of Superlatives
COLLOQUIAL USE	โ^
Colloquial use of the superlative involves using it absolutely, without explicitly specifying any
set. In such..çases, a superlative meaning is intended nonetheless:
the greatest!
You're! . โ “	1!
the best	J
Joe still thinks All's the greatest!
02
The Grammar Book
Another type of abbreviated superlative that occurs in colloquial usage includes
sentences like the following, which end in ever:
That book was his best ever, (i.e., That was the best book that he ever wrote.)
The play was the most resounding flop ever, (i.e., The play was the most resounding flop
of any play ever performed.)
The presence of ever makes such sentences more emphatic because the proposition
holds true over a period of time.
CO-OCCURRENCE OF SUPERLATIVES WITH THE DEFINITE ARTICLE
It has already been noted that superlatives usually co-occur with the definite article or some
other definite determiner or defining word; however, the underlying the can be omitted if -est,
most, or least is not followed by a noun or a noun substitute like one9 in the surface structure—
that is, if the underlying noun has been deleted.10 For example:
the obligatory	the optional
Which is the highest mountain?	Which mountain is (the) highest?
Who climbed the highest one?	Who climbed (the) highest?
THE USE OF MARKEDANdIiNMARKE^
In the preceding chapter and in Chapter 20, we stated that there were semantically related
adjectives that'had positive and negative polarity and that the positive forms were unmarked,
while the negative forms were marked; here, we add most to the unmarked forms and least to
the marked forms:
(+) = unmarked [most] tall tall big old deep etc.	(—) = marked [least] long short little young shallow
These oppositions are as valid for superlatives as they are for comparatives, with the
added caveat (noted earlier in this chapter) that superlatives are inherently more marked than
comparatives.
The superlative form least is the most highly marked of all these forms. In other words,
we tend not to say phrases such as “the least tall”:
?Bob is the least tall of all the boys.
but prefer to use most, or its morphological variant -est, if there exists a negative polarity word
such as short, which we can combine with most or -est:
Bob is the shortest of all the boys.
Thus, whenever there are negative and positive polarity adjectives and adverbs available
for English speakers to combine with most or -est, the form least tends not to occur.11 So when
does the form least occur? It is used frequently as the opposite of most whenever the ranking
or scaling of items is involved to denote lowest rank or lowest position. For example:
likely
the most/least expensive
important
Chapter 35: Degree—Complements and Superlatives
803
Another environment in which least occurs is a less negative one, where the use of least
indicates the least negative (i.e., most nearly positive) member(s) of a set that is viewed as
being completely negative; for example:
the least
objectionable
sinister
reprehensible
There is, of course, the related comparative form lesser, which can also be used in
negative contexts with this special type of superlative meaning if the set described has only
two members:
,_____โ of two evils 1
the lesser \	.1	\
[ evil	J
Lesser, however, has more semantic flexibility than least since it can also be used as an
adjective in a comparative sense that has no superlative counterpart:
a lesser punishment l- a less severe punishment)
Least versus Fewest
We should also briefly mention fewest, the suppletive variant of least that occurs before
countable nouns in formal or prescriptively correct usage. (In informal usage, least often
occurs in this environment instead oÍfewest.) Semantically, fewest is like least, in that it occurs
as the opposite of most when items are being ranked or scaled:
Of all the children in the class, Barbara seems to have the most friends and Peggy the
fewest (friends), (informal: the least [friends]).
Fewest also occurs in predominantly negative contexts to indicate the least negative
(or most nearly positive) member of a set that is viewed as having only negative members:
Paul has reservations about all the proposals; however, he has the fewest
reservations about the third one.
Again, /eâmaybe used as an informal variant of fewest here (i.e., he has the least reservations).
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN REGULAR QUANTIFIERS AND SUPERLATIVES
In Chapter 17, we presented least and fewest as superlative forms of the quantifiers little and
few; however, we should note several grammatical and semantic differences between the
quantifiers (little, few) and the superlative forms (least, fewest). The quantifiers can be used to
make assertions about small quantities that the speaker perceives negatively (and that do not
imply any specific comparison):
They have little money.
They have few friends.
The superlative forms, on the other hand, occur with the definite article and specify (or
imply) a relevant set for which the extreme negative quantity is being asserted:
They have the least money of anyone I know.
They have the fewest friends of anyone I know.
LACK OF DOUBLE MARKINGWITHSUPERLATIVES
Solomon’ร (1994) findings for the use of superlatives in spoken data produced by native English
speakers exhibit some differences with comparatives, in that no tokens of double marking
occurred with superlatives, whereas 6 double-marked tokens occurred with comparatives
804
The Grammar Book
(e.g., more sneakier). She also found only 1 token of the periphrastic most superlative with a
one-syllable adjective (versus 17 tokens oimore with one-syllable adjectives for comparatives),
and this token was a case where most was stressed (p. 17):
It's one of the MOST grand sights in New York City.
The 62 other one-syllable adjectives and adverbs took the -est inflection; for example (p. 17):
At the very deepest level of awareness....
For two-syllable adjectives and adverbs, Solomon (1994) found 21 periphrastic forms
versus 14 inflected forms. However, the periphrastic forms included tokens where -est would
be predicted (p. 6):
That is the most corny thing I've ever done. (corniest would be predicted)
All three-syllable adjectives and adverbs (3 3 tokens) occurring in a superlative form in
Solomon’s (1994) corpus took the periphrastic most.
There were no instances of superlatives in Solomon’s (1994) data that had -est occurring
where most was predicted. Thus, while there appears to be some minor variation in the use of most
and -est superlatives, there is not nearly as much as Solomon had detected in the case of more and -er
comparatives. We feel that this is due to the major differences that we have described in the syntax
of superlatives and comparatives: superlatives function as complex modifiers (post-determiners or
intensifiers) within larger constituents, whereas comparatives function as higher-order predicates
with two arguments (i.e., two clauses or phrases) and seem to have a freer distribution.
Teaching Implications: Arguments
for Presenting Comparatives
and Superlatives Separately
Part of the general confusion between comparatives and superlatives may stem from the fact
that most ESL/EFL textbooks present them in the same lesson or chapter. From a semantic
point of view, it seems more sensible to present comparatives and equatives along with verbs,
adjectives, and nominais such as the following, all of which express similarity or difference:
Verbs	Adjectives12	Nouns
to differ from NP sound feel to look like NP taste seem to behave like NP	to be different from (than) NP13 to be similar to NP to be comparative ADJ than NP to be as ADJ as NP to be equal to NP to be identical to NP	to be the equivalent (of) NP to be the same NP (as NP)
John differs from Bill.
Mary is similar to Jane.
John is taller than Bill (is).
Joe'S assets are the equivalent of John's.
Jim and Art are the same height.
Chapter 35: Degree—Complements and Superlatives
805
Comparatives and equatives, in our opinion, can be considered usefully as complex
transitive adjectives for the purposes of grammatical analysis.
Superlatives, on the other hand, should be presented in the context of ordinals and
ordinal-like pronominal modifiers that occur in the post-determiner position:
Core Determiner Post Determiner	Head Noun
the		first		Í NOUN (that +S)
my	+	second	+	t NOUN (prep NP)
this		third		
		next		
		last		
core post head noun core post head noun
This is my first course. /This is the best course (that) I have taken.
core post head noun	core post head noun
This exercise is your next assignment. / This exercise is the hardest assignment of
the semester.
In other words, we feel that it is useful to classify superlatives grammatically as a type
of post-determiner that generally gets expanded with a that-clause or prepositional phrase.
Therefore, given all these differences—syntactic and semantic—we feel that it is
important for most ESL/EFL students to understand and practice comparatives first, and
then, at some later time, superlatives, each in different contexts and in conjunction with the
semantically and syntactically related patterns, which we cited previously Once the two forms
have been fairly well established independently, you can combine them in contexts where
students can learn to properly distinguish their use.
One noteworthy exception to this suggestion has been brought to our attention by
พ. Kruse (personal communication). Kruse points out that when ESL/EFL students are
speakers of German or some other Germanic language, they are already familiar in their
LI with comparative and superlative forms similar to the English forms and use them in
their own language in much the same way that they are used in English. For such students,
the main learning problem is a morphological one—that is, they need to learn when to use
-er versus more and when to use -est versus most. We agree with Kruse that for such students,
our reasons for strict segregation of the two constructions at the initial stage of instruction no
longer apply. The teacher of such students should concentrate on presenting and practicing,
in communicative contexts, the distributional differences between the inflectional forms
(-er, -est) and the corresponding periphrastic forms (ไทore, most).
Conclusion
This chapter concludes our discussion _pf degree constructions in English. As we always
conclude, there is much more to say about comparatives, equatives, superlatives, and the
other degree complements than we have been able to cover in these two chapters. However,
we feel that the chapters provide background and a point of departure for further research
on degree constructions in English. One obvious suggestion for additional research is that a
more extensive, corpus-based analysis of the distribution and functions of more versus -er and
most versus -est would provide ESL/EFL teachers with valuable information regarding when
and how these forms are actually used. Another is the need for additional research on fewer
versus less and fewest versus least to inform US about the current use of these forms (given that
fewer and fewest seem to be used ever less frequently).
06
The Grammar Book
J
There are also some additional complex constructions with superlatives that could
usefully be further explored. Carter and McCarthy (2006), for example, mention the following
patterns (p. 770):
1.	It's the most beautiful landscape imaginable.
2.	[the trip] was designed to inflict the greatest possible suffering.
These sentences require adjectives like imaginable, conceivable, possible, thinkable, etc. In
the first sentence, the superlative most beautiful modifies the predicate noun landscape, which
is then followed by the adjective complement imaginable. This can be paraphrased as “the
most beautiful landscape that one can imagine.” In the second example, the adjective possible
directly follows and is intensified by the superlative greatest; together, they modify the head
noun suffering and can be paraphrased as “the greatest amount of suffering that is possible.”
These more complex constructions involving superlatives are worthy of further consideration.
They should be discussed with advanced learners when they appear in authentic discourse.
Teaching Suggestions
1.	Form/Meaning. In an adaptation of Celce-Murcia and Hilles (1988), we suggest that for
teaching and practicing superlatives, teachers should find four pictures of buildings and
reproduce them for each group of five students. Four students each get a picture that they
do not show the others, and the fifth gets a copy of the worksheet with questions such as:
Most stories? Fewest stories? Oldest? Newest? Most windows? Fewest windows?
If necessary, the students first practice questions to ask each other in order to have their
group discussions and make their decisions, such as How many stories does your building
have? How old/new does your building look? Then the group members discuss details of their
buildings, and the fifth student records the decisions that the group makes regarding
which building should receive the superlative status. At the end, they all look at the four
pictures to see if they have made good decisions, and if not, why not.
2.	Form/Meaning. Comparing statistics about places such as states can also elicit authentic
practice of superlatives:
	Alaska	California	Texas	Vermont
Area (square miles)	586,412	158,693	263,338	9,609
Population	710,000	37, 254,000	25,146,000	626,000
Highest point	Mt. McKinley	Mt. Whitney	Guadalupe Peak	Mt. Mansfield
	(20,320 feet)	(14,494 feet)	(8,751 feet)	(4,393 feet)
Year of statehood	1959	1850	1845	1791
Examples: Alaska is the youngest/largest of the four states.
Vermont is the oldest/smallest of the four states. It has the fewest people.
Teachers are encouraged to add data to the chart for other states of interest to the class.
3.	Form. For presenting a variety of superlative forms in context, p. Le Vasseur (personal
communication) suggests that ESL/EFL teachers give their students a handout consisting
of several advertisements extracted from newspapers and magazines. In groups, students
Chapter 35: Degree—Complements and Superlatives
807
are instructed first to identify all the superlative forms and meanings and then to ask each
other questions (and to answer them) about the content of the ads. For example:
a.	"The Gillette TRAC II Shaving System. The closest thing to a perfect shave."
b.	"Everyone agrees the only rums worth coming back to are the rums of Puerto Rico. The
best-tasting, best-selling rums made."
c.	"New York Life's Best-Seller Policy. It's not our least expensive policy. But, then again, no
other life insurance can do quite as many things for you."
4.	Form. Ίο introduce so (much) . . . that degree constructions, the ESL/EFL teacher can
present contexts like this one to students:
Salwa is having a bad day at school.
She's sleepy. She can't pay attention to the lecture.
She's hungry. She can't concentrate on the quiz.
The weather is hot. She can't study.
Later เท the day, Salwa goes home and tells her roommate about her bad day:
"I was so sleepy (that) I couldn't pay attention to the lecture."
Students continue using this pattern to describe Salwa’ร day and then share with each
other account of bad days that they have had.
5.	Form/Meaning. Students can practice “too (much). .. to” and “enough ... to” degree
constructions if the teacher gives each pair (or small group of students) a situation like
this written on a card:
You have to be 18 years old to vote.
Harry is ใ 7 years old.
Ned is 20 years old.
The students must then write down at least one sentence with too, one with enough, and
one with not enough based on the information; for example:
Harry is too young to vote.
Harry isn't old enough to vote.
Ned is old enough to vote.
The groups then share their situations and sentences with the class. Feedback is provided
by fellow students (and by the instructor, if necessary).
6.	Meaning/Use. To learn differences in the meaning and distribution of so, too, and very,
students can work with two types of modified “cloze” exercises: (a) informal conversation
and (b) expository writing.
a.	X: I'm not hungry today. It's (1)hot._________
Y: Why don't you try this salad? It's (2)good._________
X: I have (3)much work to do. I'll just skip lunch._________
Y: Don't rush off (4)fast. You could get sick if you skip meals._________
b.	The results of yesterday's election are (ใ)ambiguous at this point that_________
we don't know who won. Both candidates are still making (2)optimistic_________
statements, and even the experts feel that the race is (3)close to call._________
The choices the students make in their cloze passages are then discussed by the class.
7.	Meaning/Use. Ultimately, the ESL/EFL teacher may use exercises that will help students
discriminate between comparative and superlative forms. Here are some suggestions for
practicing modified cloze exercises in dialog or story form where the correct degree must
be supplied for the word indicated:
808
The Grammar Book
a.	DIALOGUE. Use some form of “tall”:
X: Are you (1)____, or am I?
Y: I don't know. Let's ask Lars. He's (2)than either of US.________
X: Yeah. He's the (3)one in the class._____
Note that irregular forms can be practiced this way too.
STORY. Use some form of “good”:
Mr. Jenkins was asked to judge the apple pies at the fair. So he started, and each new
one tasted (1)than the previous one. He had a very hard time picking the________
(2)one.________
b.	Three-term problems can be used to test comprehension of comparative and
superlative forms. The teacher can provide the problems orally or in writing and the
students can give a name (orally or in writing) to indicate their answer. For example:
(1)	If Bob is taller than Joe and Joe is taller than Mike, who's the tallest?
(2)	If Mary is younger than Nancy, and Nancy is older than Judy, who's the oldest?
c.	To bring out the similarity of content but difference of form and focus between
comparatives and superlatives, the teacher can use pictures and data such as were
presented in the first and second teaching suggestions. The students would be asked
to generate either comparative or superlative sentences using the pictures or the data
and then to paraphrase using the other form (if possible); for example:
Student ไ: Tom's building has more stories than mine.
Student 2: Tom's building is the tallest of the four.
Student ไ: Alaska is the largest state (largest of the 50 states).
Student 2: Alaska is larger than the other 49 states.
It should be emphasized that while all superlatives can be paraphrased with a
comparative form, not all comparatives (e.g., Ann runs faster than Harry.) can be
paraphrased with a superlative.
8.	Form/Meaning. Typically, a daily horoscope contains many tokens of comparatives,
superlatives, equatives, and degree complements. Students can be given printed
horoscopes, or they can find them online. Then they can work in groups to identify all
the degree constructions and produce an alternative horoscope using the same degree
forms.
Here are a few slightly modified examples from such a horoscope (the teacher can
draw on and adapt from several horoscopes to include as many degree constructions as
possible):
Aquarius (Jan. 20-Feb. 18): Remind yourself today that good thoughts can make you a
better person.
Pisces (Feb. Id-Mar. 20): Check on your friends who have been too quiet lately.
Aries (Mar. 21-Apr. 19): Do your best to deliver what you promise.
Taurus (Apr. 20-May 20): Be as organized as possible so you can get your work done today.
Chapter 35: Degree—Complements and Superlatives
809
Exercises
Test your understanding of what has been presented.
1. Provide original sentences that illustrate the following terms. Underline the pertinent
word(s) in your examples.
a.	a comparative used in a superlative d. a marked superlative
sense	e. absolute use of too
b.	the negative implication of too	t. comparative and superlative uses of
(much/little)	lesser
c.	intensifying, nonsuperlative use of most
2.	Why are the following sentences ungrammatical?
_ โ boringest 1
a. *She s the 1	. r person I know.
I boredest I
b. *John
lives the fartherest away
is the elderest
of all.
3.	In each of the following cases, decide whether the sentence should be completed with
a comparative or a superlative form or could be completed with either, and explain
why. If both forms are possible, is there a difference in meaning?
a.	Alex has financial problems, but Joe and Robert don’t because they have
_______________money.
(more, the most)
b.	Of the five candidates for president, I voted for Sheila because I definitely think
she’s._______________
(the best, better)
c.	After examining several books I finally bought this novel because I felt that it was
____________________________________________________
(the most interesting one, more interesting than the others)
4.	What’s the difference?
a.	She’s very young to be a pro tennis player.
b.	She’s too young to be a pro tennis player.
Test your ability to apply what you know.
5.	ESL/EFL students have produced the following sentences. What would you tell them?
a.	*Joe is the older child in a big family.
b.	*February is the most cold month in my country.
c.	*The first and important thing of all is studying English.
d.	*1 was worst than my roommate at making friends.
e.	*This food is too tasty.
6.	If you are using an ESL/EFL textbook that presents comparatives and superlatives to
beginning-level learners in the same lesson, what will you do?
The Grammar Book
7.	You are using an ESL/EFL textbook that tells your advanced students to use the
comparative for two persons or objects and the superlative for three or more persons
or objects. One of your students asks you if this rule always works. What will you say?
8.	In a newspaper article entitled ‘‘The ‘Usefulest’ Adjectives, ” William Satire (1980)
quotes two famous authors:
"Surely of all the 'rights of man' this right of the ignorant to be guided by the wiser...
is the indisputablest."—Thomas Carlyle
"... the confoundedest, brazenest, ingeniousest piece of fraud."—Mark Twain
What point do you think Satire was trying to make?
Bibliography
REFERENCES
________________________________________________________________________
Ariel, M. (2004). Most. Language, 80(4), 658-706.
Carter, R., & McCarthy, M. (2006). Cambridge grammar of English. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Celce-Murcia, M., Brinton, D., & Goodwin, J. (with Griner, B.). (2010). Teaching pronunciation: A course book
and reference guide (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Celce-Murcia, Mi, & Hilles, ร. (1988). Techniques and procedures in teaching grammar. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Finz, ร. (2010, June 27). Whoopie pies becoming a West Coast sensation. San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved
from http://www.sfgate.com/recipes/article/Whoopie-pies-becoming-a-West-Coast-sensation-
3183577.php
Greenberg, J. H. (1966). Language universals. The Hague, Netherlands: Mouton.
Huddleston, R., & Pullum, G. K. (2002). The Cambridge grammar of the English language. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Jespersen, o. (1924). The philosophy of grammar. London, England: Allen and Unwin.
Kalpakian, L. (2005). Romance in the blue bathroom. Good Housekeeping, 241(2), 175.
Neuman, R. A. (1977). An attempt to define through error analysis the intermediate ESL level at UCLA
(Unpublished master’s thesis). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, ร., Leech, G., & Svartvik, J. (1985). A comprehensive grammar of the English language.
London, England: Longman.
Safire, พ. (1980, June 22). The “usefulest” adjectives. Nev) York Times, Sec. 6, p. 10.
Solomon, G. (1994). A more closer look at comparatives and superlatives (Unpublished paper). University of
California, Los Angeles, CA.
Stateva, p. (2003). Superlative more. In R. B. Young & Y. Zhou (Eds.), Proceedings of semantics and linguistic
theory (SALT) XIII (pp. 276-291). Ithaca, NY: CLC Publications.
Taylor, J. B. (2012). The mental corpus: How language is represented in the mind. Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press.
Chapter 35: Degree—Complements and Superlatives
811
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
For useful descriptive information about degree words and the English superlative, see:
Bolinger, D. (1972). Degree words. The Hague, Netherlands: Mouton.
Carter, R., & McCarthy, M. (2006). Cambridge grammar of English. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Huddleston, R., & Pullum, G. K. (2002). The Cambridge grammar of the English language. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Jespersen, o. (1964). Degree. In Essentials of English grammar (pp. 219-229). University, AL: University of
Alabama Press.
For corpus-based descriptions of degree complements and superlatives, see:
Biber, D., Johansson, ร., Leech, G., Conrad, ร., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and
written English. Harlow, Essex, England: Pearson Education Ltd.
For a generative grammar analysis of most of the degree complements discussed in this chapter, see:
Celce-Murcia, M. (1972). A syntactic and psycholinguistic study of comparison in English (Unpublished doctoral
dissertation). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Matushansky, o. (2008). On the attributive nature of superlatives. Syntax, 11(1), 26-90.
Sharvit, Y., & Stateva, p. (2002). Superlative expressions, context, and focus. Linguistics and Philosophy, 25,
453-504.
For a good discussion of the degree complements formed with so, such, too, and enough, see:
Gary, E. N. (1979). Extent in English: A unified account of degree and quantity (Unpublished doctoral
dissertation). University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
For ESL/ EFL textbooks that offer good suggestions for presenting and practicing superlatives, see:
Badalamenti, V., & Henner-Stanchina, c. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 1 (4th ed.).
Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Firsten, R. (2008). Grammar connection: Structure through content 2. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
For exercises integrating the use of comparatives and superlatives, see:
Carlisi, K. (2008). Grammar connection: Structure through content 3. Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
For good suggestions on how to present and practice degree complements, see:
Wisniewska, I., Riggenbach, H., & Samuda, V (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form-, meaning, and use 2
(4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage Learning.
Thewlis, ร. (2007). Grammar dimensions: Form, meaning, and use 3 (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle, Cengage
Learning.
Houck, N.J & Hilles, ร. (2009). Grammar connection: Structure through content 4. Boston, MA: Heinle,
Cengage Learning.
Endnotes
1.	This notation (i.e., < >) indicates that a given noun (i.e., noun x) may occur either before or after enough,
but not in both positions at the same time.
2.	There is one fixed expression where we find enough modified by little: e.g., "I have little enough time as it
is, and now they tell me to do more!" เท this idiomatic usage, little enough means something like too little.
There is also the adjective little, meaning "small," which should not be confused with the quantifier that
we are discussing here:
Adjective: She was little enough to climb through the window.
Quantifier: We have too little time to finish the work.
812
The Grammar Book
3.	We use the term absolutely in a very guarded sense here because these too's are not like very in that there
is always an infinitive complement implied, and this implied complement generally expresses a negative
implication:
1 โ to have good health 1	_________ ______
He drinks too much 1,	1	k (ะ= He is not in good health.)
[ for his own good	J
They study too little (to succeed academically). (= They are not succeeding.)
4.	This rule is adapted from Celce-Murcia, Brinton, and Goodwin, with Griner (2010, pp. 405-406).
5.	There are a few one-syllable adjectives that are exceptional in that they take only periphrastic more or
most: real, right, wrong, and like (= similar to).
6.	Syllabic [I] in this context generally becomes consonantal when the inflection is added, often changing
the syllable structure (gen-tle; gent lest).
7.	Note that in most such cases, it does not seem to make much difference whether and or or is used as the
conjunction following than, although a difference in meaning is possible, and additional modifiers are
sometimes used to suggest an additive rather than an alternative meaning; for example:
Jill and Ann have more A's than B's and C's put together.
8.	Another related meaning of the form most that is not strictly superlative is the meaning of the quantifier
most when used to express the notion of majority; e.g.,"Most (of the) voters were เท favor of the measure"
(i.e., more voters were in favor than those who were not in favor).
9.	The forms one and ones are the noun substitutes that occur most frequently with superlatives; for
example:
Jane bought a pound of tomatoes. She selected only the best ones.
I ate the biggest one.
10.	The only case where it is difficult to reconstruct an underlying noun is with adverbial use of the
superlative; for example:
Roger behaves the most politely (of all the boys).
Ultimately, one might perhaps argue that such a sentence is related to one with a noun paraphrase, and
that this relationship accounts for the presence of the:
Roger exhibits the most polite behavior (of all the boys).
However, exploring such an analysis in detail is beyond the scope of this textbook.
11.	Adverbs or adjectives that use un- or some other negative prefix to derive their negative polarity form
are different from adjectives and adverbs that have pre-existing polar opposites that are lexically distinct
(e.g., big—little). Whenever such overt negative prefixes are needed, the tendency is to avoid the derived
negative and to use /east with the stem form (e.g., least important) rather than most with the derived
negative (e.g., most unimportant); however, the latter pattern does occasionally occur with negative
connotations:
, ._____1____________..	„___.._______. โunimportant 1 ■ -1..
Lester always seems to dwell on the most ร ’โ-โ. 1 ’ ’โ.’ > details.
[ uninteresting J
12.	There are some other examples that also appear to be candidates for adjective constructions that
compare:
to be unlike NP
to be like NP
NP1 and NP2 be alike
However, an adjective requires a preposition to take an object (e.g., to be similar to NP). Thus, it may be
better to analyze unlike and like as prepositions while alike appears to be a special reciprocal form that
substitutes for"like each other." เท any case, we called attention to one of these in Chapter 34, and they
may be useful phrases for your students to learn.
13.	The phrase differentthan is acceptable in colloquial American English. เท formal situations, different from
is preferred. Many speakers of British English do not find differentthan grammatically acceptable and
some use different to, which is ungrammatical to American ears. All dialects seem to accept different from.
Chapter 35: Degree—Complements and Superlatives
813

One of our concerns in writing such a lengthy book is that we run the risk of overwhelming
readers with the level of grammatical detail that we have included here. However, we felt
that we needed to take this risk for two reasons. First, readers of previous editions have told
us that after being students in courses where The Grammar Book was the course text, they
would refer to it again and again as grammatical questions arose while they were teaching.
In other words, although we had not originally intended the book to be used as a reference
grammar, that is indeed what many teachers were using it for. We have kept this in mind
in our revisions for this edition. Second, one of the not-so-subtle, implicit messages of our
text is that language· is complex. We felt that we would neither be honoring the complexity
of English nor contributing to the professionalization of English teachers if we were to
oversimplify our treatment of grammar. Sometimes it surprises people to learn that research
regarding English grammar is being actively pursued, the fruits of which are elucidating (and
at the same time sometimes stultifying) in their detail.
What we would like, therefore, is for our readers to appreciate the complexity without
feeling discouraged by it or developing eyeball glaze. Perhaps it helps to know that we do
not expect mastery of all the material that we have presented here. As we have written in
Chapter 1, it is our intention that you come away from your reading of The Grammar Book
having gained a way of looking at language, a knowledge of some facts concerning English
grammar, and the awareness and the basic level of skill necessary to be able to analyze its
forms, meanings, and uses. You will learn the details about English grammar as you teach
English. Indeed, those of you who are just beginning or in the early stage of your teaching
career should derive comfort from an old adage with which experienced teachers are well
acquainted—that you learn as you teach.
As we also have stated at the beginning of this book, we believe that the aim of language
instruction should be additive bilingualism or multilingualism (Ortega, 2013). Consistent
with this position, we endorse multilingual classroom practices (Hornberger, 2005). We do
not believe that correctness is equivalent to nativeness (Cook, 2002), nor that learner language
is incomplete and deficient (Larsen-Freeman, 2014). Further, language is not a self-contained
finite system, which has an end state (Larsen-Freeman, 2006), and any language, including
one’s native language, cannot be said to be fully “acquired” (which suggests a boundedness).
In its place, we prefer to think in terms of a language being continually “learned” and
“developed” (Larsen-Freeman, 2007; 2011).
We also recognize that English learners these days are likely to participate in many
different usage situations where different norms are in play. We have, therefore, called
attention to the differences between spoken and written grammar wherever we could. It may
815
also be true that there is a general reduction in formality in the use of Standard English (Carter,
2014), perhaps spurred by the widespread use of digital media, which allow for an immediacy
and intimacy of communication that accompany informality. It is well known, for instance,
that the type of writing that is done on social media sites is not consistent with previous
norms that have governed the written and oral modalities in the language (Crystal, 2001).
Nevertheless, at least one research study has demonstrated that the language used in instant
messaging is not unique, in the sense that it reflects the variation and the ongoing process of
language change that is happening in other contemporary varieties of English (Tagliamonte
& Denis, 2008). As we have noted, even in the absence of technological developments, change
is inherent in any dynamic system, and language is certainly one of those systems. To cite
one dramatic example, the word nice meant “ignorant” in an earlier form of English. In any
case, standard language is not invariant, although it is often presented in an idealized way,
nor do we think that Standard English is in any danger of disappearing, especially given the
reinforcement that it receives from standardized examinations.
It is true, though, that different norms are appropriate for different occasions, and for
some learners, occasions to use Standard English is one of them. However, whether to use
it or not does not represent a binary choice (Curzan, 2014). The medium, the audience, and
the context are always crucial to language choices. Our goal is to make you, and thus your
students, more conscious of the choices they have and what exercising a particular choice
means, not only in terms of ideational meaning, but also in the construction of their identities
as individuals and social beings.
Further, we believe that language is learned in contexts of use; thus, as each learner’s
starting point and experience differs, so, too, will the language resources that emerge from
diverse situations of use (Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 2008). Moreover, no matter what we
do or what we encourage our students to do, they will learn according to the time and effort
that they are prepared to invest or to the extent that their needs are satisfied. It is important
to remember that at a group level, the learning challenge for students with different language
profiles may vary due to cross-linguistic influence (Jarvis & Pavlenko, 2008). Thus, where
possible, we have included contrastive information about language typology. It is our hope
that such information will help you to better understand what linguistic background your
students are bringing with them to class and what the nature of their linguistic experience will
be as they strive to master English.
As we have made clear, for US, grammar is more than a formal system. It is about
making meaning in context-appropriate ways. We need to teach grammar as a resource for
making meaning (Liamkina & Ryshina-Pankova, 2012). One way to do this (as we have
said many times in this book) is to help students understand the reasons why speakers of a
language make the (usually unconscious) choices that they do. Another recurring theme in
this book has been that grammar is organic, evolving in a nonlinear way (Larsen-Freeman,
1997), which is why traditional rules don’t always work. The rules are general abstractions,
and yet there is a great deal of variation in the constructions they purport to cover (e.g.,
Taylor, 2012). In the best of all worlds, ESL/EFL students would have sufficient exposure
to English in order to figure out the generalities and particularities of the language for
themselves, just as those acquiring a first language do implicitly. However, most students do
not have the luxury of time, and thus, they are helped by teachers who can give them the
necessary guidance, even when the rules of thumb are incomplete.
Of course, another reason that the rules don’t always work is that the perspective that
led to their formulation was not sufficiently inclusive. We have tried to provide a very wide
perspective on grammar, continually reinforcing the need to seek explanations at all levels of
The Grammar Book
language, most definitely including the level of discourse. While it may make good science
to limit the scope of one’s investigation, as teachers, we need to use whatever knowledge and
tools are at our disposal. As such, we have drawn upon many different schools of linguistic
thought, and especially for this edition, more cognitive, usage-based, systemic-functional,
conversational analytic, and corpus-based linguistics, for the insights they afford.
Since it is in the nature of any linguistic inquiry to evolve, doubtless the findings and
analyses that we have reported here will be challenged or expanded by additional research.
Such challenges are welcome; we certainly do not claim to have written the last word on
English grammar. Indeed, as we have indicated many times in this text, there is much yet to
be discovered, and we welcome the contributions of researchers working within all schools
of thought. We also hope that we have dispelled the myth that all linguistic research is
complete and that all is known about English grammar. Much remains to be learned, and
we welcome you to that quest. Indeed, encouraging you to conduct your own original
research is one of the reasons that we have given you a framework and provided practice in
investigating grammar, rather than simply supplying you with a compendium of facts about
English.
Finally, it is our sincere wish that you have developed the skill of being able to apply what
you have learned in guiding your students’ learning, helping them to use grammar accurately,
meaningfully, and appropriately—in other words, encouraging their “grammaring.” We also
hope that you will feel more confident in your ability to answer your students’ grammar
questions. Perhaps most importantly, through your adaptations of our teaching suggestions
and through your own creative endeavors, we hope that you feel prepared to work with your
students on English grammar in pedagogically useful and satisfying ways, and that together
with your students, you will find grammar fascinating.
REFERENCES	___________
Carter, R. (2014, April 26). Internet English: The changing English language and its implications for
teaching [Webinar]. IATEFL.
Cook, V. J. (2002). Background to the L2 user. In V J. Cook (Ed.), Portraits of the L2 user (pp. 1-28).
Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters.
Crystal, D. (2001). Language and the Internet. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Curran, A. (2014). Fixing English: Prescriptivism and language history. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Hornberger, N. (2005). Opening and filling up implementational and ideological spaces in heritage
language education. Modem Language Journal, 89, 605-612.
Jarvis, ร., & Pavlenko, A. (2008). Crosslinguistic influence in language and cognition. New York, NY: Routledge.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (1997). Chaos/complexity science and second language acquisition. Applied Linguistics,
18(2), 141-165?
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2006). Second language acquisition and the issue of fossilization: There is no end and
there is no state. In z. H. Han & T. Odlin (Eds.), Studies offossilization in second language acquisition
(pp. 189-200). Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2007). Reflecting on the cognitive-social debate in second language acquisition.
Modem Language Journal, 91,773-787.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2011). Saying what we mean: Making a case for “language acquisition” to become
“language development.” Plenary address at AILA, Beijing, China, August 28. Published in 2014 in
Language Teaching, Available on CJO 2014 doi: 10.1017/S0261444814000019.
Chapter 36: Conclusion
817
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2014). Another step to be taken—Rethinking the end point of the interlanguage
continuum. In z. H. Han & E. Tarone (Eds.), Interlanguage. Forty years later (pp. 203-220). Amsterdam,
Netherlands/Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Larsen-Freeman, D., & Cameron, L. (2008). Complex systems and applied linguistics. Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press.
Liamkina, o., & Ryshina-Pankova, M. (2012). Grammar dilemma: Teaching grammar as a resource for
making meaning. Modern Language Journal) 12, 270-289.
Ortega, L. (2013). Ways forward for a bi-multilingual turn in SLA. In ร. May (Ed.), The multilingual turn:
Implications for SLA, TESOL, and bilingual education (pp. 32-52). New York, NY: Routledge.
Tagliamonte, ร., & Denis, D. (2008). Linguistic ruin? LOL. Instant messaging and teen language. American
Speech, 83(1), 3-34.
Taylor, J. R. (2012). The mental corpus. How language is represented in the mind. Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press.
18
The Grammar Book
Suggested Answers to
Chapter Exercises
Chapter ใ: Introduction
(No exercises)
Chapter 2: Grammatical Terminology
1. a.	noun	This book	is good.
b.	verb	I walk to school.	
c.	adjective	Have a nice day!	
d.	adverb	They work quickly.	
e.	pronoun	She is a teacher.	
f.	determiner	The world	is round.
g·	preposition	The book is on the table.	
h.	conjunction	The weather was rainy but warm.	
£	phrase/clause	The quick	brown fox is lumping over the lazv dog.
			clause	phrase
1.	subject/predicate Studying grammar is lots of fun.		
		subject	predicate	
k.	simple sentence	I like ice cream.		
1	coordination	I like ice cream and so does Tohn.	
m.	subordination	David doesn’t eat ice cream because it is fattening.	
ท.	genre	Chop the onions finely, (genre: recipe)	
o.	register	Why don’t	you come over for a drink? (informal)
		We would like to invite you to join US for drinks, (formal)	
p.	given-new	The book is very comprehensive.	
		given	new
2.	Word	Part of Speech	Criteria
a.	John	noun	semantic (name of a person); functional (part of a phrase that forms the
			subject of a verb); structural (position in sentence—part of the phrase
			that precedes the verb)
	and	conjunction	functional (coordinates “John” and “Paul”)
	Paul	noun	same criteria as for “John”
	were	verb	structural (position in sentence—after a noun; inflections for number and
			past tense)
	fighting	verb	semantic (describes an action); structural (verbal inflection -ing)
b.	John	noun	same as for “John” in 2a.
	gave	verb	semantic (an action); structural (position—after a noun; inflection for
			past tense)
	Paul	noun	semantic (name of a person); functional (indirect object of a verb)
	a	determiner	structural (precedes an adjective and noun)
	black	adjective	semantic (describes a quality); structural (between a determiner and a noun)
	eye	noun	semantic (name of an object); structural (follows a determiner and
			adjective); functional (direct object of a verb)
c.	The	determiner	structural (precedes a noun)
	principal	noun	semantic (name of a type of person); structural (position—after a
			determiner); functional (subject of the verb)
	sent	verb	semantic (an action); structural (position—after a noun; inflection for
			past tense)
	them	pronoun	semantic (replaces a noun); structural (same position as a noun— after a
			verb; inflection for number and person)
	to	preposition	structural (connects a following noun phrase to a verb)
	his	determiner	semantic (refers to a person, possession); structural (inflection for number,
			person, and gender; precedes noun)
	office	noun	semantic (name of an object); structural (preceded by a determiner);
			functional (object of a preposition)
	immediately	adverb	semantic (manner); structural (derivational inflection of manner -Zy);
			functional (modifies a verb)
819
3.	declarative (indicative) e.g., My dog has fleas.
interrogative	e.g., Are you rich?
imperative	e.g., Go to your room!
4.	A pragmatic function (e.g., request) does not always correspond to a particular sentence type because there are
many different linguistic means of performing a pragmatic function with varying levels of politeness, formality,
directness, and so on, which utilize different sentence types. For example:
Open the window, please, (imperative)
Could you open the window? (interrogative)
I'd like you to open the window, (declarative)
5. reference:	The woman entered the room. She looked around.
ellipsis:	A: When did you arrive? B: Yesterday. (= I arrived yesterday.)
substitution:	A: I’ll do all my homework this evening. B: I hope so.
conjunction:	I haven’t done my homework yet; however. I plan to do it soon.
lexical cohesion:	I have been applying to grad schools. I have been spending all my evenings writing essays. (We understand that applying to graduate school usually requires writing essays to accompany an application.)
6. The theme is less important than the rheme in terms of its information-bearing status: the theme only identifies
what the sentence will be about, while the rheme contains what the speaker wants to say about the theme and thus
carries more information. Also, the theme contains old information, the rheme new.
7.	Do on your own. Answers will vary.
8.	Do on your own. Answers will vary.
9.	a. Out of nowhere is the theme of the sentence, making the unexpectedness of the event the focus of the sentence.
This unusual (rather literary) word order (PrepP V ร) makes it a marked sentence, since the subject of the
sentence is not the theme and, in fact, follows the verb.
b.	The passive voice is used to make the recipient of the action (7) the theme, not the agent fyny parents).
c.	The phrase “concerning homework” has been used to place the object of the sentence in the theme position,
thus achieving a topic-comment structure similar to that found in some Asian languages. The object of the
sentence (homework) is then repeated as a pronoun (it) in the main clause. In this case, the passive voice would
sound very unnatural as a means to achieve this effect.
10.	Do on your own. Answers will vary.
Chapter 3: Lexicogrammar
1.	a. verb requiring a locative prepositional phrase
b.	determiner requiring an uncountable noun
c.	conversion
d.	change-of-state verb
e.	compound word
f.	derivational affix
g.	inflectional affix
h.	transitive adjective
i.	semantic field (education)
). transitive verb
k.	verb with three arguments
l,	irregular plural
m. lexical phrase
ท. dura tive verb
o.	verb-direct object collocation
p.	co-occurrence with a preposition
q.	quotative verb
r.	polysemy
I placed the cup on the table.
He doesn’t have much patience.
I already salted the vegetables.
The stores close early on Saturday.
(Sam closes the stores on Saturday.)
We saw a horse race last night.
David could use some excitement.
He likes me.
Susan is fond of Jim.
The university students helped the local elementary
school pupils with their homework.
We enjoy spicy food.
Jane sent a letter to her mother.
There are millions of sheep in New Zealand.
I teach English as a second language.
I sleep in the same room as my sister.
I was given advice on how to apply.
She is married to Henry.
And he goes. “I don’t care!”
She’s too soft with the students. This is a very soft pencil.
The Grammar Book
2.	a. Lurk is a verb that requires an adverb of location (e.g., in the alley)—a syntactic problem.
b.	Fascinate requires an animate object (a higher-order animal or human)—a semantic problem.
c.	The determiner these modifies plural nouns only—a syntactic problem (agreement).
d.	The plural ending has been attached to the part of the compound word that can be a noun on its own (break).
Once a compound is formed, it should be treated as a single unit; thus, tire plural ending should be attached as
usual to the end of the word.
e.	An adjective from the verb trust has been generated by attaching the suffix -fill. While -fill is an adjectival suffix
that can be used with trust, it is inappropriate in this context. Adjectives with the suffix -ful usually mean that
the noun described by the adjective is the agent associated with the verb that forms the base of the adjective.
However, in this example, the noun described (friend) would be the object in the intended meaning (i.e., “can be
trusted,” rather than “trusts”). Trustworthy would be the correct choice.
f.	This is an attempt to create a new noun from favorite in a sentence structure where preference would be the
correct choice. Although favoritism is a correct noun form, it carries a strong negative connotation and belongs
to a different semantic field (concerning the treatment of humans).
3.	a. Information is a mass noun in English and therefore does not take the plural -r or the determiner many.
b.	From my point of view is the usual idiom. However, in my opinion may also be used. These are fixed lexical phrases.
c.	Remodeling is questionable here since it is usually used in the context of houses, rooms, or buildings, but not
streets.
d.	Firecrackers is the correct word, since “pyrotechnics” is referred to here. Although crackerftres follows the rules
of compounding, it is not a word in English. If there were such a word, it might refer to fires made by people
burning crackers, since for noun/noun compounds, the first noun usually functions as a descriptor of the
second noun.
e.	The student may have been trying to form a verb from the noun passion. The only verb that can be so formed
is impassioned, which may be too strong for the context. Fascinated may be a better choice (and may have been
intended but phonologically confused). Rephrasing is another alternative: Photography has been a passion of mine
since I was a child.
f.	Solutions collocates with found, not met.
g.	The correct preposition collocation for aware is of not to.
h.	By pure charfce would be the more idiomatic lexical phrase, but fortune is a close synonym of chance, making it
marginally acceptable.
4.	These verbs are all in the same semantic field but have distinct differences in their exact meanings. For example,
look is more intentional than see, which can be nonvolitional. Look also differs grammatically since it co-occurs with
the preposition at. Watch implies some duration; stare also does, but often with a negative connotation. A simplified
semantic feature analysis in the form of a chart would be useful to summarize the differences for students. These
particular words also lend themselves well to mime to illustrate the differences.
5.	Pretty is polysemous, and therefore students need to know that this same word can have different meanings in
different contexts. While pretty is often used in the semantic field of beauty, it can also be used as an intensifier with
words like soon, quickly, or good. It is not as strong as very but belongs to the same semantic field.
6.	Both owing to and due to have the same meaning, being used to give a reason. Both can be used in initial position in a
sentence; for example,
Owing to unforeseen circumstances, I will not be able to make the meeting.
Due to unforeseen circumstances, I will not be able to make the meeting.
However, only due to can be used following be in a sentence; for example,
My failure was due to laziness.
*My failure was owing to laziness.
7.	Keyboard- the letters and numbers used to write messages on a typewriter or computer; the black and white notes
used to make music (piano or other keyboard instrument).
Whiteboard- a board on a wall with a white surface used to write or draw on with colored markers.
Chessboard- a board with alternating light and dark squares used for playing the game of chess.
Ironing board- a flat padded surface raised on legs that is used for ironing/pressing clothes.
Snowboard- a special board that one stands on with both feet to go down snow-covered hills.
Clipboard- a flat board with a clip at the top to hold papers.
Chapter 4: Copular Verbs and Subject-Verb Agreement
1. a. copula be	Marina del Rey is an attractive harbor.
b.	a copular verb other than be	She seems nice enough.
c.	an auxiliary function of be	David was allowed to conduct research on the patients who
were in a coma.
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
821
d. collective noun subject	The committee is composed of three employers and three employees. The committee are all against the bill.
e. noncount noun subject	Oil floats on water.
f. third person singular present inflection Fiona likes Philip to walk her home.
g.	the proximity principle h.	the nonintervention principle	Either Tom or you are to sign this contract. The discrepancy found in his pilot studies was ascribed to a computer bug.
i. subject-verb agreement with a clausal subject	What we need to do is to choose a qualified director for the project.
2.	(1) Unlike other non-copular verbs in English, the copula be may be followed by adjective phrases. (2) Copula be
behaves differently from all other verbs in question formation and negation in that it behaves like an auxiliary verb
and does not require the use of a do auxiliary.
3.	Subject-verb agreement applies to all the forms of be. For all other verbs, only third person singular forms in the
present tense show an overt inflection.
4.	The traditional subject-verb agreement rule is often not maintained in the following cases:
(1) the neither. .. nor construction with personal pronouns; for example,
Neither you nor she were (rather than was) supposed to contact them.
(2) in informal sentences beginning with there; for example,
There is (rather than are) a desk and two chairs in the room.
5.	a. Be often poses difficulties because it is an irregular verb. The form are is used to agree with both singular and
plural second person pronoun subjects in English and thus should be used here.
b.	There should be subject-verb agreement in the present tense with a third person singular subject. In this
example, the third person singular present tense morpheme is realized as -es in spelling and, phonetically, as the
sound [z].
c.	All English sentences have a copula before a predicate adjective phrase. In this case, the first person singular
verb am is needed.
d.	Subject-verb agreement does not apply to modal auxiliaries. Delete -s on 'พนI.
e.	Only third person singular subjects agree overtly with present tense verbs. In this example, the subject is third
person plural and thus does not take -s.
f.	In negative sentences the copula be eliminates the need for the auxiliary do. Thus this sentence should be I am
not angry anymore.
6.	An ESL/EFL student who claims that this sentence breaks the proximity rule for the use of is instead of are would
be correct in terms of the prescriptive rule. However, especially in informal English, native speakers do not always
follow prescriptive rules, which often do not reflect the actual use of language as it changes over time. Nevertheless,
students might be well advised to stick to the prescriptive rules in their written English since written forms of a
language tend to be more conservative, and rules are followed more strictly when one is writing than when one is
speaking.
7.	After having established that uncountable noun subjects take singular verbs and that plural subjects take plural
verbs, while collective noun subjects take either singular or plural verbs depending on the meaning, you can then
introduce fractions and percentages. Explain that the number of the verb agrees with the noun that is modified by
the ffaction/percentage (if there is such as noun); for example,
Half of the tomatoes are rotten.
Ninety percent of the water was contaminated.
Almanacs are good sources of contexts for working in this area. Recipes are good contexts for fractions and
census data for percentages. If students are taking other courses, problems in their math books or tables/diagrams/
charts in social studies texts may be consulted. Remember also that if arithmetical operations are being done
without a specific head noun in the context, subject-verb agreement is third person singular; for example,
Ten percent of 50 is 5'.
Two-thirds of 9 is 6.	-*·.
L. It is a good idea to review a list of count nouns that show the same transformation for plurals. For example, you
can begin with nouns that end with/'in the singular form and change into -ves in the plural form. Maclin (1981)
contains many rules for forming irregular plural nouns along with examples. After a brief review of the form, you
can provide contexts where students can practice plural noun formation. For example:
My closet has one shelf, but yours has two. (shelves)_______________
9. Since majority refers back to “the students,” most English speakers would probably choose the second option, which
views the students as individuals. However, if the speaker/writer views the students as a unified whole (the student
body), then the first version is also acceptable (i.e., majority behaves like a collective noun).
The Grammar Book
Chapter 5: Word Order and the Phrase structure Rules for the Subject of a Sentence
a.	noun phrase
b.	prepositional phrase
c.	subject
d.	predicate
e.	adjective phrase
f.	adverb modifying adjective
g.	singular determiner
h.	plural determiner
A short, sharp knock is usually sufficient.
The captain of the team is Ralph.
The student completed the work at home.
The student completed the work at home.
The bashful little girl entered the room.
A very little girl entered the room.
This example is better.
Several boys didn’t come to class.
surely
next	Monday
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
823
2. d.
ร
SUBJ
NP
det	AP		N
			
the	ADV	ADJ	child
	very	young	
z. a. The order of the noun and the adjective has been reversed. It should be ‘black ink’ not ‘ink black.’
b.	After the conjunction because, a complete clause or a prepositional phrase (such as of the rain) is required. In the
absence of a preposition, a subject (such as it) is needed to make a complete clause following because.
c.	The plural determiner those can precede only a plural noun, and the verb also has a plural inflection; therefore,
the noun woman should be in the plural form, women.
4.	a. My name is Alison is unmarked. The marked version Alison is my name could be used to correct what someone
else just said, Alison is my name, not Alice.
b.	I drink coffee, but I don y drink tea is unmarked. The marked order Coffee 1 drink, but tea, I don ’t could be use to
state in strong contrastive terms the beverage that the speaker does drink versus the one he does not drink.
c.	I live in a yellow house is unmarked. The marked word order in I live in a house yellow like the รนท allows for an
expansion of the adjective phrase to describe the house’s shade of yellow somewhat poetically. Note that *1 live
in a house yellow would not be acceptable. Nor would *1 live in a yellow-like-the-sun house.
5.	Two orders are possible for these three words in English:
Everyone likes chocolate, svo (unmarked)
Chocolate everyone likes, osv (marked)
Other languages might permit SOV:
Everyone chocolate likes.
Or, VSO:
Likes everyone chocolate.
The Grammar Book
Chapter 6: More Phrase structure Rules: The Predicate of a Sentence
1. a. imperative
b.	modal
c.	verb with two objects
d.	adverb clause
e.	phrasal modal
f.	perfect aspect
g.	progressive aspect
h.	adverb phrase
Leave it alone!
I might stay home and study tonight.
He showed me the basement.
I came because you asked me.
I have to return the book to the library.
Sue has worked here for seven years.
We are talking about the accident.
She dances very gracefully.
b.
Sunday
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
825
2.
ร
hungry
>6
The Grammar Book
2. f.
ร
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
827
2.
3.	Do on your own. Answers will vary.
4 a. Verbs in sentences with modal auxiliaries are tenseless.
b.	Perfect aspect consists of two components: a form of have and the past participle. The have auxiliary is missing
from this sentence.
c.	Progressive aspect consists of two components: a form of be and the suffix -ing, which should be attached to the
main verb here: {jump —»jumping).
d.	Put is a verb that requires an adverbial of location after the direct object. For example, Sarah put the books
on the table.
e.	Adverbs of manner cannot precede direct objects in English; Lou speaks French fluently is the correct order.
f.	Modal verbs cannot be inflected for tense; Megan can speak Arabic is the correct form.
5.	Both learners need to learn that the progressive has two parts: be A-ing. The required form of be precedes the verb,
and the -ing is attached to the next verb in the sentence. Learner (a) needs to have the use of be emphasized, and
learner (b) needs to have the use of the -ing suffix emphasized.
6.	English can, of course, express future time, but has no “future tense” in the structural sense since verbs are not
inflected in English for future as they are for present {ร or zero) and past {-ed). English has a number of ways
to express the future, including wilI, be going to, and the simple present or present progressive with future time
adverbiais (e.g., tomorrow).
7.	The -en inflection for the past participle occurs with many highly frequent verbs (e.g. seen, written, given, spoken,
etc.). Thus a native speaker might misspeak and use -en to form a past participle on an irregular verb that doesn’t
actually take the -en form but forms the past participle another way.
8.	All three time adverbiais are derived from prepositional phrases. The difference is the presence or the absence of
the preposition. In (a) it is obligatorily present, in (c) it is optional (see d), and in (b) it is obligatorily absent. We
discuss reasons for these differences in Chapter 21.
9.	The locative noun home as well as some other locative nouns like uptown, downtown, and overseas are not preceded by
a preposition when they follow a verb of motion or direction such as go, walk, drive, etc. Such nouns may, however,
take a preposition when they occur after a verb of state (e.g. John is at home.).
Chapter 7: The Tense-Aspect System
1. a.	simple future	I will stay here until I find a permanent apartment.
b	present perfect	He has tried every means possible to get the door open.
c.	past progressive	Stella was making a lemon pie when I called her.
d	past perfect	I had finished typing the documents one hour before my boss came to check them.
e.	stative verb	This smallpox contains all the jewelry that she has.
£	simple present	I smell garlic in this salad.
ร'	accomplishment verb	He has written two novels in two months.
h.	present perfect progressive	She has been making the opening speech at the association’s annual meeting for four years.
2. No. Both sentences have the same ordering of events. The use of before makes the order explicit without necessitating
the use of the past perfect. It is in the absence of such clear temporal markers that the past perfect becomes essential
to express the order. Used here, it does place more emphasis on the prior nature of “-finishing homework.”
8
The Grammar Book
3.	The use of since implies that something started at a definite time in the past and has continued until now. This
notion of such duration is what the present perfect expresses and is what distinguishes it from the simple past:
*1 did this since 1960.
I have done this since 1960.
4.	a. The first sentence with the present perfect talks about an experience that was completed, but the second one
with the present perfect progressive implies that the action of reading is still an ongoing process.
b.	The present tense here is used for a permanent situation—that is, this is Stan’s permanent job—while the
sentence with present progressive suggests that Stan is doing the job only on a temporary basis.
c.	The question in the past tense is a definite query and requires some shared knowledge of the timeline on which
the event in the question occurred. For example, such a question could be asked of somebody who was speaking
about the time when they were in New York.
The second question uses the present perfect of the same verb (go) and could thus be assumed to be the
indefinite equivalent of the same question without presuming shared knowledge. However, go behaves
irregularly in this respect; in fact, the appropriate indefinite question would be Have you been io...? In contrast,
the question Have you gone io...? implies that the person is still in New York and thus is unlikely to be asked of
the person who may have gone. Compare the following sentences, which could appear in written notes:
I've gone to the mall. (I haven't returned yet; I am still there)
I've been to the mall. (I went and returned)
In another interpretation of Have you gone/beenone can also be asking if the addressee has ever (in his or her
life) gone/been to Yankee Stadium.
5.	a. Present perfect is incompatible with a specific past time adverbial like last Saturday, which should go with the
past tense since it reports a specific action at a specific time in the past.
b.	Stative verbs do not normally take the progressive unless the verb implies agency on the part of the subject,
such as in You’re being a fool, or a gradual change of state, such as Pm hearing the music better now.
c.	This sentence sounds strange because will expresses future intention at the moment of speaking. In this case,
the speaker has.mo control over the action. The use of be going to would be correct since it refers to an imminent
action related to the evidence available at the present time.
d.	Even though it may not seem logical, the present tense is conventionally required (i.e., When Larry comes ...) in
subordinate clauses of time or condition when the main clause contains a future time verb.
e.	It is difficult to know what the student intended here, but in any case, the intransitive verb live has incorrectly
been used in a passive construction (was lived). The correct structure depends on the meaning intended: if
Phyllis is still living with her parents, the present perfect (has lived) should be used.
If Phyllis no longer lives with her parents, the past progressive (was living) or the simple past (lived) could be
used; the past progressive would make it sound more temporary and the simple past more permanent.
6.	In the first sentence, now may refer to the time when he habitually goes to the store or a time previously mentioned
in the discourse. In the second sentence, the present perfect entails a resultant state: you did something that has
relevance now, hence the use of now, which has emphatic meaning in initial position here.
7.	By definition, stative verbs do not involve change; they imply a stable situation that is assumed to last more or less
indefinitely. The four verbs mentioned here, however, usually refer to a limited duration of time and commonly
occur with progressive aspect, as shown in the following two examples, which convey the same proposition:
[A: What's wrong?]
B: My nose itches, versus My nose is itching.
While the first response describes the situation more objectively and the second one sounds more interactive,
personal, and affective, there may be no real difference in terms of time duration, which is why these four verbs
cannot be classified as stative verbs in the strictest sense.
s. For some speakers of American English, these sentences are synonymous; however, other speakers feel that the first
sentence reflects the speaker’s point of view (i.e., the speaker just heard the news and wants to know if the listener
just heard it too). On the other hand, the second sentence is more likely spoken with the listener’s perspective in
mind (i.e., the listener looks surprised or shocked, so the speaker tries to show empathy and asks if the listener has
just heard the news). A discourse analysis would have to be conducted to determine whether such an analysis is
supported and whether there are other differences.
9. In the first example, the two forms both express the meaning of surviving or overcoming. In the second example, has
got signals stative possession (=has), whereas in the third, has gotten means has obtained and conveys the sense of an
accomplishment.
10.	The first sentence uses the stative verb hear and thus implies that the perception of the melody is not the result
of any action on the part of the person but something that has been happening to the person involuntarily. For
example, it may be a popular melody that is playing on every radio and in every store. The unusual use of the present
progressive with a stative verb emphasizes the repetitiveness of the state rather than reporting a current state.
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
829
The verb listen is the active counterpart of hear and thus implies that the person has made a point of listening
to the melody repeatedly—that is, has taken some action so as to hear it. For example, the person may have
bought a new CD, or may have been studying the melody, and for this reason is intentionally playing it over
and over.
Chapter 8: Modal Auxiliaries and Related Phrasal Forms
1. 3. phrasal modal	I am about to go now.
Would you close the window?
This bridge may collapse in an earthquake.
You may have to arrive early.
Could you drop me off at my apartment?
Are you able to read that sign?
b.	social use of a modal
c.	logical probability meaning of a modal
d.	a combination of more than one modal
or phrasal modal
e.	polite form of a request
f.	literal question with a phrasal modal
2.	The sentence is ambiguous since may could mean either that his mother has given her permission for him to go or
that his mother was commenting on the possibility of his going.
3.	a. Must be makes a present inference; must have been makes a past inference.
b.	Would you is a softer, more polite form of the request than will you, which could also be a literal question (i.e.,
are you willing to help?).
c.	The first sentence implies that the action took place; the second implies that it did not.
d.	May expresses possibility. Must expresses strong inference—the speaker is sure of the conclusion drawn.
e.	Should implies advisability. Had better is more insistent, almost a threat, with overtones of unpleasant
consequences if the suggestion is not complied with.
4.	That might not be important expresses low probability of the truth of the negative assessment (as do both the
affirmative sentences); in contrast, That couldn't be important expresses high probability that the negative assessment
is true.
5.	a. A modal verb followed by a modal verb is not a grammatical sequence in Standard English (although some
modal + modal combinations occur in some regional dialects in the United States).
b.	In questions, may is used to ask for permission. If the pronoun were changed from you to I, the sentences would
be grammatical because the speaker is seeking permission to do something. As it stands, can (asking about the
possibility of performing the action) and will (asking about the willingness of the person to perform the action)
are possible modals to use in this request. Use of could or would makes the request polite.
c.	Should is used to give advice for future action. The perfect form, should have studied, is needed here because the
past time adverbial last term indicates the advice is “hindsight”—referring to past time.
d.	The common co-occurrence of modal verbs with be leads some students to overgeneralize and to insert be after
every modal. In addition, the main lexical verb reach must follow the modal, without to, although an adverb may
be interposed (easily), unless the passive, perfect, or progressive is used; for example, “They could easily reach
the goal.”
e.	A modal verb must be followed by the main lexical verb without to.
f.	A modal verb must be followed directly by a verb. The copula be needs to precede the adjective good.
g.	The choice of register is the problem here. With the polite markers of excuse me and Mr., the choice of gotta is
too informal. The modal should or the phrasal modal need to would be more appropriate.
h.	Would is used in the question as a politeness marker, but it cannot take this meaning in a declarative response
(where it carries a conditional meaning). The correct response would be simply Of course or Of course I will, if a
modal is used.
6.	Both (a) sentences are polite requests for information, but in the first question, the speaker is asking whether the
addressee is able to fulfil the request, whereas in the second, s/he assumes the addressee is able to comply and is
querying his or her willingness to do so.
The first sentence in (b) is ambiguous in the same way as was the sentence in Exercise 2 above (probability or
permission) whereas the second is unambiguously expressing logical probability referring to the past (i.e., that it is
possible that Joe went).
The first sentence in (c) is the speaker’s own suggestion that Sam introduce the guest, whereas the second
presupposes that Sam has already been asked or has even agreed to introduce the guest but expresses some doubt
that he will actually do so.
7.	Could is not used to refer to ability or possibility with a human agent performing a specific punctual action with a
specific recent past time adverbial, such as last night. It is possible, however, to use it if the subject is a perceiver or
experiencer:
I (could/was able to) see many stars in the sky last night.
Moreover, it is possible to use cottld with both specific and general time adverbiais in the remote past:
I could read when I was 3 years old.
Note that where a preceding main clause clearly establishes past time, cotild can function like was/were able to in an
embedded clause in a way that it cannot in an independent clause:
The Grammar Book
Compare: *1 could visit him last week.
I was able to visit him last week.
with:	I was glad that I could visit him last week.
I was glad that I was able to visit him last week.
In the negative, these distribution problems are not as complicated. In all the contexts, couldn’t and wasn’t/weren’t
able to are possible paraphrases. We can say "I couldn’t pick up the tickets last night” because the specific, punctual
action referred to was not accomplished.
Chapter 9:TheTense-Aspect-Modality System in Discourse
1. a. historical present
b.	backgrounding tense
c.	past time axis
d.	future time plus progressive aspect
e.	interactive use of present perfect
f.	frame-elaboration pattern for
... and suddenly, I fall down an open manhole.
I went to the Grand Canyon last year. Ià immense.
Cynthia had worked on her thesis for two years before she finally
finished it. Then, she got a good job almost immediately.
I will be staying there for three years.
I saw Gone with the Wind last night. Have you ever seen it?
(i.) present habitual narrative
(ii.) past habitual narrative
(iii.) future scenario
I’ve studied piano for four years. My playing is
pretty good now. I practice every day.
I used to talk on the phone for hours. I’d phone all my friends and
talk for an hour with each one. Daveld get really angry.
I’m going to take night classes next year. I’ll enroll for two classes.
I’ll have to get my husband to do the cooking.
2. I see him in sentence (a) expresses present habitual activity, whereas in (b) it is the historical present and thus
expresses a specific event in the past.
3.	Present description
Change to simple past to describe past event
Change to past habitual
Present perfect frame for previous past sequence
Return to present description
Change to simple past for past narrative
Change to past continuous to provide
setting for past narrative (backgrd)
Return to simple past to continue past narrative
There’s a man ... It is five years to the day
since he began hitting me on the head....
At first I couldn’t stand it;
now I’ve grown accustomed to it.
(signalling change from past to present)
I don’t know his name. I know he’s an ordinary man ...
I met him one sultry morning five years ago.
I was sitting peacefully on a bench ...
All of a sudden I felt something touch my head. It was this
same man
who now ... keeps striking me blows with his umbrella.
That first time I turned around full of indignation
(I become terribly annoyed when I’m bothered while reading
the paper);
he went right on, calmly hitting me.
Return to present description (background)
Change to simple past to continue past narrative
Change to generic present tense to describe
writer’s general stance (background)
Return to simple past to continue past narrative
4.	There is a greater feeling of intimacy when the simple past is changed to the historical present, which would reflect
a closer relationship between the mother and daughter than is expressed in the original, where the simple past
indicates psychological distance, which is not surprising given that the mother deserted her.
5.	The first instance of the past perfect (Nobody had seen one) is the basic use of the tense to signal something in the past
that occurred prior to something else in the past; namely, the event the author is narrating. The second instance
(Id rediscovered the Lotana blue) is a rhetorical use of the past perfect by the author to signal something of great
significance to the reader. This second use can only be understood at the discourse level whereas the first use can be
understood at the sentence level.
6.	The text begins firmly grounded in the past axis. The first sentence is a modal in the past (could have been) but the
relative clause gives background in the simple present (stands). The next sentence gives results occurring prior
to 1982 in the past perfect tense (had left) and is followed by elaboration in the simple past (wandered), modified
by an adverbial participle (living). The next sentence starts with “In 1969” and is once again in the simple past
(determined, had). The quotations that follow and the reporting verb recall are also in the simple past (was, recalled,
was, stayed). Then there is a bit of background in the simple present (We’re situated in a basin) followed by a return
to the simple past narrative in the passive voice (was trapped). The following quotes all continue in the simple past
(was, said, was, was, had, was). The final paragraph moves us back into the present axis with a change marked by the
present perfect (All that has changed now.). The remainder of the text continues in the present axis with the simple
present tense alternating with the present perfect (is, have been tom down). There is, however, one use of the past
perfect in a relative clause to give background in past time about the waterfront (had once been used for slag heaps).
However, this situation has since changed, with the change once again being expressed in the present axis (is now
lush and green).
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
831
7.	a. The use of had in the first clause is awkward; has would be better so that the entire sentence is in the present axis.
b.	There is no reason to use the past perfect (had affected) in the relative clause. The simple past tense should be
used for each verb in this sentence (พ/?.ร·, affected, thought).
c.	This sentence is problematic because it starts with simple past (learned), then shifts to present tense (realize)
and then goes back to the past (was). Since the entire sentence is about the past, the second verb should also be
simple past (realized). The first verb could have been past perfect (had learned) but this is not necessary because
of the presence of “after.”
d.	There are several problems here: with a specific date, 1991, the first verb should be simple past (came), not
present perfect. Then the second verb should be present perfect to show temporal duration over time (have
been), not simple present. The next verb (have) continues the present but if we consider the entire text, it is clear
the writer wants to refer to the past, so the verb should be simple past (had). Once the writer uses “used to”
in the final sentence, it is much better to elaborate on this in the next clause with “would” (but I wo'tild hate it)
instead of repeating “used to.”
8.	Her tense usage is correct here. She needs to understand the justification for the different tenses she has used
so that she can feel more confident. The details of the first sentence are correctly given in the past tense since a
specific past time (the period following 1978) is referred to. The present perfect tense in the second sentence signals
a change from the past that is still in progress (has become) and provides a frame for the present tense narrative that
follows (are oppressed, do not need, do not have to be).
9.	Be going to in the second clause of (b) expresses more personal engagement; will in (a) seems to express the purpose,
while be going to in (b) seems to express more confidently the outcome expected by the speaker.
Chapter 10: Negation
1. a. sentence-level negation
b.	phrasal negation
c.	affixal negation
d.	do support
e.	not contraction
f.	no determiner
g.	negative equative
h.	negative indefinite pronoun
I was not sure about the outcome.
Fiona decided not to call Richard again.
The reasons for the accident are unimportant.
She doesn’t care about her appearance.
The experiment wasn’t satisfactory.
They had no hope of success.
My book is not as thick as yours.
Her performance leaves nothing to be desired.
The Grammar Book
2.
ร
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
833
3.	a. All three sentences are examples of sentential negation and convey the same proposition—"It is not the case
that Sam is working these days,”—but the uncontracted version is used mainly in formal contexts, such as in
written English, and gives prominence to the negative. On the other hand, the contracted ones can be heard in
more informal contexts, such as in spoken English, where sentences with uncontracted not (like the second one)
give emphasis to the negation.
b.	The first sentence with a negative polarity adjective in a comparative sounds more direct than the other with
a positive polarity adjective in a negative equative, which can be used by writers/speakers wishing to be more
indirect or tactful.
e.	Sentences with -rot-negation (like the first sentence) are more prevalent in speech, while wo-negation appears
more often in formal or written contexts.
d.	The first sentence is more prevalent in writing than in speech. In speech the nonaffixal (i.e., sentential) negation
in the second sentence is more common.
4.	a. Do support is required in this negative sentence, and the negative particle should be not instead of no, i.e. That
boy doesn't like me.
b.	The correct negative particle, not, is used here, but operator addition (do), inflected for the tense intended, is
required before the particle.
c.	The wrong prefix has been selected for lexical negation; that is, impatient should be changed into impatient.
d.	The sentence contains a double negative, which is ungrammatical in Standard English. In Standard English,
some —» any, changing something to anything (rather than to nothing).
e.	Not any cannot occur at the beginning of a sentence to negate a noun phrase, since -rot-negation is used to
negate verbs. No is needed here to negate a noun.
5.	The difference is extremely subtle in this case. In the first sentence, not negates might have tried before, whereas
in the second sentence not is narrower in scope, negating only tried before. Thus, the first sentence negates the
possibility that they tried, whereas the second sentence expresses the possibility that they didn’t try.
6.	Some changes to any in the environment of a negative like not only if the some refers to an indefinite nonspecific
entity. When the entity that some refers to is an indefinite quantity but a specific entity (i.e., identifiable), then
some —> any does not take place. Thus, I can't recall any of their names means the teacher has forgotten all of them,
but I can’i recall some of their names means the teacher has forgotten only some of the names.
7.	Perhaps making your students aware of the frequency with which native English speakers use contractions would
encourage them to use them in informal speech and writing. In an ESL context, students might be given an
assignment to canvas native speakers with a list of questions that would be likely to elicit negative responses. They
could be instructed to listen not only to the content of the answers but also to the frequency of contracted forms
versus uncontracted forms. For demonstration of the use of contracted forms in written informal language, the
teacher could bring in a blog entry and have the students look for the contracted forms. Students could also be
assigned to look for the contractions in a page of comic strips or to listen to an informal recorded conversation
between two native speakers.
8.	An inherently negative verb such as fail, which occurs with an infinitive phrase, can be paraphrased with sentential
not when the infinitive is rephrased as a complete sentence. For example:
He failed to do it.
He didn't do it.
Chapter ใ 1: Yes/No Questions
1. a. unmarked yes/no question
b.	negative yes/no question
c.	some in a yes/no question
d.	uncontracted negative yes/no question
e.	yes/no question with do
f.	statement-form question
g.	focused yes/no question
b. standard short-form answer
i.	formulaic short answer
j.	yes/no question with phrasal modal and do
k.	echo question (showing surprise)
l.	elliptical yes/no question
Did you like the recital?
Weren’t you going to say something to me?
Would you like some biscuits?
Does it not make reference to the law of gravity?
Do you like to go swimming?
You hit the bicycle?
Did YOU turn on the computer?
[Is she from China?] No, she isn’t.
[Will he take the risk?] I doubt it. / I’m afraid so.
Do you have to pay for the brochure?
[Nancy is leaving L.A. tonight.] She’s leaving L.A. tonight?
(Are) You going out for lunch?
The Grammar Book
2.
ร
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
835
3.	a. The past tense in the auxiliary was not inverted with the subject and was therefore mistakenly attached to the
main verb. The operator do has to carry the past tense (i.e., “Did she go?”).
b.	The subject-operator inversion rule was violated. Only the first auxiliary verb and tense (if present) should be
inverted with the subject (i.e., “Could he have gone?”).
c.	The do support rule must be applied when a sentence has no auxiliary verb and no be copula. Also, the tense
should be separated from the main verb and attached to the operator do (i.e., “Does he run fast?”).
d.	Do support should not be applied when a sentence has a be copula, which serves as the operator in the subject-
operator inversion rule (i.e., “Are they happy?”).
4.	The first auxiliary verb or copula be verb—and the tense constituent if there is one—is involved in both of them.
These elements are either followed by not in the case of the not placement rule or inverted with the subject in the
case of the subject-operator inversion rule. If there is neither an auxiliary verb nor a be copula in the sentence, both
require do support.
5.	a. The main verb (other than a be copula) is not inverted with the subject in English question formation. Do
support gets applied in this case (i.e., “Did you see ... ?”).
b.	Tense should be marked only once. In sentences with a do operator, the do acts as the tense carrier, while the
main verb takes the base form without tense.
c.	If not comes before the subject in the sentence, it should be contracted with the verb (i.e., “Isn’t she
intelligent?”); if not comes after the subject, it is uncontracted (i.e., “Is she not intelligent?”).
d.	If there is no auxiliary verb or copula be in the sentence, then the do operator is used in short answers to yes/no
questions:
Do you like ice cream?	Yes, I do.
Alternatively, since like is a transitive verb, if a full-form answer were given, like must be followed by an NP:
Do you like ice cream? ί 11'ke
[ Yes, I like ice cream.
6.	First of all, you want your students to be able to answer questions truthfully using affirmative and negative answers.
Then, since subject-operator inversion in negative yes/no questions is done differently depending on whether
the not has been contracted, it makes sense to introduce negation first and cover the syntactic variation with the
full form/contractions there because this simplifies the explanation of subject-auxiliary inversion: when not is
contracted with the operator, it inverts with the subject. When not retains its full form, it remains after the subject
and does not invert.
Getting learners to ask questions requires special activities such as pairing students to eliciting information
from each other (major, hobby, favorite color/food, etc). Another activity is a game in which students have to ask
questions to guess someone else’s favorite actor/singer, etc. Can you think of other ways to get students to ask
questions?
7.	He is correct because native speakers do produce uninverted yes/no questions. You should point out, however, that
native speakers do so only when they have certain expectations about the answer they will receive. Since inverting
yes/no questions is the norm, this student’s uninverted questions will often seem inappropriate (i.e., aggressive,
presumptuous, and rude) to his listeners.
8.	This humor in this exchange arises because the function and the form of utterances do not always go together.
Here, B has treated A’s indirect request for the time as if it were a literal request for information as the form
suggests (i.e., whether B has a watch).
Chapter 12: Imperatives
1. a. imperative
(i.) affirmative
(ii.) negative
b.	inclusive let- imperative
c.	diffuse imperative
d.	let imperative as an expository
e.	elliptical imperative
f.	you retention
g.	imperative with please
h.	emphatic do to add politeness
Get something to drink.
Don’t touch the light bulb.
Let’s go roller-blading this afternoon.
Somebody help me!
Let us now consider the issue of how to revise the budget.
(Get me) Three coffees.
Mike, you read the first half.
Please pass the salt.
Do join our group tomorrow.
device
The Grammar Book
2. a.
ร
ADVL
3.	a. Pronouns other than the second person pronoun, you, cannot be the subjects of imperatives.
b.	A negative imperative requires the verb do along with a negative particle before a main verb. In this sentence a
main verb such as be or get is missing.
c.	Imperatives are tenseless—which means they never take an inflection.
d.	If not is uncontracted in à negative imperative, you must be omitted.
4.	Evidence for the fact that imperatives are tenseless is that there is never any inflection even for the third person
diffuse imperative:
Somebody help (*helps) me.
One piece of syntactic evidence for the argument that a subject of an unmarked imperative is you is that the form of
the reflexive pronoun in object position in imperatives is always yourself or yourselves·.
Wash yourself/yourselves.
Wash *myself/*himself/*herself/*itself/*ourselves/*themselves.
5.	These other subjectless utterances occur only in highly informal contexts, whereas subjectless imperatives are much
more frequent and conventionalized than are imperatives with subjects. Additionally, the other elliptical utterances
often need more context to be properly interpreted: enough clues must be provided to easily identify the deleted
subject (different contexts can force an interpretation different from the ones provided in the parentheses). On the
other hand, deleted subjects of imperatives are easily identifiable since they always refer to the addressee.
6.	Show students various contexts where imperatives are appropriate. These would include situations where
imperatives are polite, such as offers and invitations, especially with please and emphatic do; and situations where
cooperation is assumed, such as requests for items at the table (Please pass the butter!); and warnings (Watch out!).
In addition, it can be a good idea to illustrate some situations in which they may want to be forceful to counteract
rudeness or attempts to take advantage of them.
7.	Adding please to an imperative or using the emphatic do are the ways already mentioned. In addition, embedding
an imperative within a conditional can make it sound more polite—for example, “If you have the time, bring me
the files.” Adding tags may also increase politeness: “Bring me the files, would you?” Another way is to use tags that
imply that the recipient is already aware of the need for the action expressed in the imperative, such as “Watch that
bar line, OK?” or “Snatch a breath there, right?” Using a personal form of address may increase politeness (i.e.,
Answer the phone, Mary.). Intonation is crucial in determining exactly how polite these imperatives sound.
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
837
Chapter 13: Wh-Questions
1. a. ๗-question focusing on the subject
b. ๗-question focusing on an object of a preposition
c.	๗-question focusing on a determiner;
(i.) possessive
(ii.) demonstrative
(iii.) quantifier
d.	uninverted ๗-question
e.	negative ๗-question
(i.) contracted
(ii.) uncontracted
f.	formulaic ๗-question (lexicalized unit)
g.	๗-question with ellipsis of the auxiliary
Who wrote this poem?
formal—To whom did you send this report?
informal—Who did you sent this report to?
Whose pen is this?
Which color do you like better?
How many articles did you find on that topic!
You went there with whom?
Why didn’t he answer you?
Why did he not answer you?
How are you doing? / How’s it going?
Who_____you going with? (are)
2. b.
Q-wh รบBJ
ADVL
prepp
The Grammar Book
2
ร
3.	When a determiner is the focus of a ^-question, the head noun constituent it modifies must be moved, along with
the determiner (e.g., which car, whose handbag).
4.	More specific w/j-questions can be:
What street do you live on?
Which shelf is the sugar on?
How far back is it?
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
839
5.	a. Subject-operator inversion should be applied when the wh-question focuses on something in the predicate (i.e.,
Where are you going?').
b.	This question lacks do support, which is necessary if a question has no auxiliary verb or copula and it focuses on
something in the predicate. (This could, of course, also be an elliptical question if used appropriately as such
and generally pronounced Whatcha want?)
c.	The preposition to should either be fronted with the wZ>-question word (i.e., To whom did he say that?) or it
should remain behind when the ^-question is fronted (i.e., Who did he say that to?). It should not occur in
both places.
d.	English sentences require a verb. In this sentence, the copula be (correct form: is) has been omitted.
6.	Structure: With why, the normal rules for wZ?-question formation apply. They also apply for the what. . .for
structure, except that for cannot be fronted with the what; it must stay behind. For example,
*For what did he say that? (What did he say that for?)
With how come, the word order of the following elements is the same as for an affirmative statement—that is, there
is no subject-operator inversion.
Meaning: All three can be used to ask for a reason; however, unless questions with why are given a particular
intonation pattern, they appear to be more neutral than do what. . .for and how come. One can imagine the latter
two being used as challenges; for example,
What did you do that for? (surely there was a better alternative!)
Another difference may be that why and how come can be used to ask about the cause of something, whereas what...
for seems to ask about reason or purpose; for example,
Why is the sky blue? (cause)
How come the sky is blue? (cause)
What is the sky blue for? (reason/purpose)
Register: Why questions appear to be the most formal, with how come and what.. .for being used informally. How
come is probably the least formal of the three. In addition to these differences, another instance where they cannot
be paraphrases of each other is in the formation of negative questions. What ...for cannot be used as a negative
paraphrase of the other two:
Why didn't he say that?
How come he didn't say that?
*What didn't he say that for?
7.	In the questions with did [i.e., (a), (b), and (e)] the question focuses on information contained in the predicate. In
these questions, the subject and operator must be inverted, and the do operator has been added to carry the tense.
In the questions without did [i.e., (c) and (d)], the question focuses on information contained in the subject. In such
cases, no inversion and, therefore, no do operator are required.
8.	The second do is lexical and, therefore, meaningful. The first do is added only to allow subject-operator inversion in
the question form; it does not carry any meaning.
Chapter า 4:Tag, Alternative, Exclamatory, and Rhetorical Questions
1.	a. tag question
(i.) unmarked, confirming
(ii.) idiosyncratic
(iii.) marked
b.	alternative question
c.	alternative w/j-question combination
d.	exclamatory “question”
e.	rhetorical question
You’re going to give me back that money I lent you, aren’t you!
I’m subtle, aren’t I?
So you’re going to pay me back next week, are you?
Do you want to go to a movie tonight or the concert?
What do you want to do tonight—a movie or the concert?
Aren’t you lucky!
Are you here to worry about grades or to learn something?
2.	a. The tense should be,the same in both the main verb and the tag. The main verb and the tag should be either
both present {wants and doesn't) or bothjaast (wanted and didn't).
b.	Since the main clause is negative (negated by the preverbal adverb never), the tag needs to be affirmative
(i.e., does she).
c.	Just as with negative yes/no questions and negative wÃ-questions, the not in a negative tag question must be contracted
if it is to precede the subject in the tag (i.e., didn't he). Otherwise, not should follow the subject (i.e., did he nof).
d.	The exclamatory question follows tlie.same grammatical rules as other negative questions (as in (c) above);
when the not is placed before the subject (i.e., that), it must be contracted (i.e., isn't that wonderful!).
3.	a. Is Janet blue-eyed or is she not blue-eyed?
b.	You’re looking forward to vacation, aren’t you?
c.	Was it Bill who wrote this letter, or was it Bob who wrote this letter?
The Grammar Book
4.	a. If there is an auxiliary verb in the main sentence, the tag question is formed using the same auxiliary verb.
The subject in the main sentence and the tag must refer to the same entity as well, although the latter is
pronominalized if necessary. Thus, the tag must be aren't roe rather than isn't it.
b.	Yes is not an appropriate tag question in English, although native speakers will sometimes use no as a tag with a
rising intonation in informal situations.
c.	This has the intonation pattern of an alternative question; the listener is being asked to make a choice between
two alternatives. Since it is not a yes/no question, the response	is inappropriate, as would be no.
5.	a. These two utterances differ with regard to the presupposition of the speaker. Sentence (2) would be uttered by
the speaker if he or she did not expect it to rain, whereas (1) signals that rain is expected by the speaker.
b.	Analysis of the wider discourse context, including intonation, would be needed to be certain of the difference.
It may be that (2) is more formal than (1) or more emphatic; for example, one can imagine (2) being uttered by
a speaker who is losing patience with his or her listener.
c.	The speaker of (1) expects that the listener has carried out the action. In (2) (depending on stress and
intonation), the speaker may be expressing displeasure or annoyance that the action was performed; or the
speaker may be trying to ascertain whether or not the action was performed. The second interpretation for (2)
is more characteristic of British than American usage.
d.	In (1), the speaker is raising a genuine question about the truth of the proposition and either has no
presuppositions about the listener’s thoughts or suspects the listener may disagree. In (2), the speaker is seeking
confirmation and expects the listener to agree with the proposition.
e.	The speaker in (1) expects disagreement with the proposition or has doubt about the listener’s position (the
listener may have given some indication—verbal or otherwise—of disagreement), whereas the speaker in (2) is
expressing an exclamation, not asking a question.
f.	(1) is able to be used to express doubt or certainty, as in (d), depending on the intonation used. (2) can be used
only in seeking confirmation from the listener (i.e., expecting agreement). Also, (2) puts greater pressure on the
interlocutor to respond than does (1).
6.	Ad writers sometimes use such rhetorical questions to engage readers, who [hopefully] will answer silently, “Of
course not!” to the first question and “Of course!” to the second. Once readers have mentally responded to such a
rhetorical question, it is more likely that they will read on in the advertisement and become interested in whatever
is being advertised.
7.	Both are fairly informal requests. The first is more polite because it is the usual (i.e., unmarked) use of the tag
question (i.e., the tag is negative when the main clause is affirmative). The second is less common (marked) and
more direct; it can imply some impatience, which might also signal rudeness or irritation. We have been told that
the second option is more common in British than American English and been reminded that intonation plays a
crucial role in the interpretation of such tag requests.
Chapter 15: Articles
1.	a. common count noun
b.	common noncount noun
c.	proper noun
d.	definite article (situational use)
e.	definite article (textual use)
f.	definite article (cultural use)
g.	definite article (structural use)
h.	indefinite article (classification)
i.	0 article (generic)
j.	shifting countability
2.	a. Milk is a noncount noun here and takes either zero article or some. A milk means a serving/cup of milk. If the
milk were spilled, it would no longer by contained within a cup and therefore could not take the indefinite
article, a.
b.	Information is a noncount noun in English. As such, it cannot take a plural ending or the determiner many. In
this context it would take either zero article or some.
c.	Examination is a singular count noun and must therefore take an article. The indefinite article an is required if
the speaker is referring to a specific exam that the listener knows nothing about.
d.	Computer is a singular count noun, so it cannot occur without an article. A generic statement is intended here, so
the student should be advised to use the zero article with a plural noun, computers (this being the most flexible
pattern for generic use) and to make the necessary number adjustments to other words (i.e., aren't and luxuries).
e.	Europe, the name of a continent, is a proper noun and does not take an article.
f.	Here poetry is a noncount noun used non-specifically. No article should be used.
g.	Singular predicate nominais that classify the subject noun are preceded by an indefinite article (a/ari).
This is a book.
I like rice.
Our neighbor is Mr. Jensen.
There’s a book on the table, (table is visible to interlocutors)
A large gray cat walked ahead of US. We followed the cat for a block.
Look at the moon!
The first of the applicants got the job.
We need a new car.
Dreams are free.
I said I wanted some coffee, so he brought me a coffee.
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
841
3.	An indefinite article in object position may be ambiguous with regard to whether it modifies a specific or
nonspecific noun in the speaker’s mind. A car could be nonspecific for both speaker and listener—that is, any car; or
it could be specific for the speaker—that is, a particular car that John has in mind.
4.	a. structural use (the relative clause provides information that allows the listener to identify the film)
b.	situational use {the check is visible to the speaker and listener)
c.	textual use {the course in sentence 2 refers back to “a grammar course” in sentence 1)
d.	structural use {last suggests one unique position within an ordering or ranking)
e.	situational use (although the listener may not have known that there were Wide fans in the stadium, use of the
definite article alerts him or her to this possibility)
f.	textual use, or associative anaphoric use {the traffic refers to a unique entity associated with a previously
mentioned referent New York)
g.	cultural use (the speaker and listener are presumably in a state where there is one governor and both share
knowledge of this fact)
5.	In the first sentence, the conceptualization of coffee is probably of a generic mass-like substance. In the second
sentence, a coffee is conceptualized as a cup of coffee. In the third sentence the speaker most likely conceptualizes
coffee as a substance that the listener is able to distinguish from other beverages or foods served at the cafe where the
conversation is taking place. In the last sentence, the speaker conceptualizes different types of coffee.
6.	a. The speaker should use the blue pen because the referent is singular and definite, i.e., it can be identified by the
listener in the immediately perceptible situation.
b.	The speaker should say homework with the zero article, since it is a noncount noun in English and thus cannot
appear with the indefinite article a.
c.	The speaker should say a good joke because the listener is unable to identify the referent as unique against any of
the various backgrounds discussed in the use section of this chapter. While the joke is specific for the speaker, it
is not so for the listener.
d.	The speaker should say water with zero article, since this is a generic statement. The pattern [the 4- mass noun]
is not acceptable for generic reference in English.
e.	The speaker should say the Mediterranean Sea because this is a cultural use of the definite article, where the names
of seas take the. The Mediterranean Sea can be conceptualized as unique among a background of other seas.
7.	Do on your own. Answers will vary.
8.	Do on your own. Answers will vary.
9.	Do on your own. Answers will vary.
Chapter 16: Reference and Possession
1.	a. subject pronoun
b.	object pronoun
c.	possessive pronoun
d.	possessive determiner
e.	demonstrative pronoun
f.	demonstrative determiner
g.	reciprocal pronoun
h.	reflexive pronoun
i.	indefinite compound pronoun
j.	singular “they”
She loves the man.
The man loves her.
I thought the car outside the apartment was theirs.
Their apartment was small and cluttered.
The last exercises were harder than these.
These exercises are easy.
We bought each other presents.
I bought myself a new dress.
No one likes a poor loser.
Anyone using the beach after 5 P.M. should know that they do so
at their own risk.
Erin’s voice was the loudest in the room.
The title of the story was “The Lottery.”
k.	'ร possessive
l.	o/possessive
2.	a. Although the head noun is human {stranger), the adjective modifiers make the noun phrase long, thus indicating
that the of possessive is preferred here (i.e., He checked the ticket of the mysterious and handsome foreign traveler.).
b.	Him is an object pronoun being used where the subject pronoun he should be used.
L. Mines is the incorrect form of this possessive pronoun. It should be mine. This is perhaps an overgeneralization
error since the other possessive pronouns end in ร.
d.	The last pronoun in the sentence should be*the object pronoun me since it is the object of the preposition besides.
3.	Other pronouns in English that can also mean “everyone in general” are:
you- You gotta study hard to get good grades nowadays,
we-We have to study hard if we want to get good grades,
everyone (everybody)- Everyone should learn a foreign language.
4.	Two ways of avoiding the usage of he, his, and him when these forms are used in a general sense are:
a.	to use plurals
A student should plan his schedule wisely.—»Students should plan their schedules wisely.
The Grammar Book
b. to use one
A person should not reveal his deepest thoughts to total strangers.^
One should not reveal one's deepest thoughts to total strangers.
Of course, both these ways also have drawbacks. Sometimes using the plural will not work, such as when you
simply want to discuss an individual’s doing something. And the use of one can easily be overdone, resulting in
stilted (or overly formal) language.
5.	a. Because of post modification in the modifying noun phrase, the of construction should be used: The house of the
friend 'who helped me organize the picnic....
b.	The third person singular masculine reflexive pronoun is himself This is perhaps an overgeneralization error,
since other reflexive pronouns are formed with the possessive determiner followed by self or selves, such as myself
or ourselves.
c.	The student neglected to use the ’ร possessive form to mark Mary as the possessor.
d.	The subject Everybody, like all the other compound indefinite pronouns, requires a singular verb
{Everybody...is going.).
e.	The reflexive pronoun themselves has been used, implying that Leo hit himself and Hugo hit himself, when
presumably the reciprocal pronoun each other is what was intended (i.e., Leo hit Hugo and vice versa, unless
self-flagellation was the intended meaning!).
6.	Since the Ϊ morpheme and the plural morpheme are both suffixed to NPs, and since both pattern the same way
phonetically, their similarity may cause some confusion. Also, ’5 is unstressed and may not therefore be perceived by
students. (In other words, ’ร has low perceptual saliency.) On the other hand, some students may perceive ’ร but not
be able to produce it because their native language has few or no final consonant clusters.
7.	Spanish speakers may use the of possessive incorrectly in place of the ’j possessive:
*the garden of Milly
They may also omit the ’j possessive altogether by analogy with nouns modifying other nouns:
*Milly garden (cf. stone wall, summer garden)
8.	Native speakers sometimes do violate the prescriptive rules of pronoun usage and use subject pronouns where object
pronouns are calfed for; for example, *The book is by she and Professor Hansen. Native speakers also sometimes use object
pronouns where the prescriptive rule says subject pronouns are necessary: for example, *Me and Mark are going to the store.
You can explain to your ESL/EFL students that they won’t be wrong in following the prescriptive rules, even
though not all native speakers abide by them all the time.
Chapter า 7: Partitives, Collectives, and Quantifiers
a.	partitive noun
b.	idiomatic partitive noun
c.	collective noun
d.	collective noun derived from adjective
e.	quantifier
f.	quantifier with negative connotation
g.	quantifier for count nouns
h.	phrasal quantifier
a bowl of rice
an ear of corn
The jury brought in its decision.
The disabled are well cared for here.
I’ll have to give this a little thought.
They had little success in solving the problem.
There are many questions one could ask.
A lot of people love grammar.
2.	a. Chalk is a mass noun. It can be used without any preceding determiner in sentences that express a general
characteristic with a singular verb (e.g., Chalk is dusty f However, when used specifically, as here, it is necessary
to use a determiner such as the definite article, the partitive :(s) piece(s) of (e.g., a piece of chalk, three pieces of
chalk), a quantifier, or a demonstrative determiner. The verb then agrees with the number of the partitive noun
(a/the piece of-singular verb; (the)tbree pieces of-plural verb).
b.	A lot of and lots of always take the of unless they are functioning as nouns (A lot is riding on this proposal.),
pronouns (A: How much money is that painting worth? B: A lot!), or adverbs (He loves her a lot.).
c.	Few is a quantifier with a negative connotation. Since although signals a contrast, you would expect a quantifier
with a positive connotation to be used. Here, the correct quantifier is a few; alternatively, the logical connector
because should replace although iffew is truly intended to convey a negative connotation.
d.	The quantifiers a great deal and a good deal always occur with the adjective good or great as part of them.
e.	Almost can be used with the quantifier all, but it is not by itself a quantifier. The quantifier needed here is most
or, alternatively, almost all.
3.	a. Many is followed by of only when the noun it quantifies is definite, as in (i). In (ii), workers is not definite so there is no of
b.	Class is a collective noun. In (i), class refers to a unified whole, while in (ii), it refers to the individuals that make
up the collective whole.
c.	Lots seems more informal than a lot. It also seems to signify a greater amount, perhaps because it can be
reduplicated (i.e., lots and lots and lots) whereas a lot cannot.
d.	Speck is the usual idiomatic partitive for dust. Piece is not ungrammatical; however, it implies an unusually large
bit of dust.
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
843
4.	a. Problem is a count noun and must have the ร ending for plural. Much is used before noncount nouns, not plural
count nouns. Many is the correct form; that is, the correct NP is many problems. (.Much difficulty—a noncount
NP—would also be correct.)
b.	A dozen is a special numerical expression (—12), rather than a quantity such as pound. It therefore does not take of.
c.	Information is a noncount noun and cannot take -s. Some is still correct because it can be used with either count
or noncount nouns.
d.	A lot of is preferred over much in positive assertions, especially in informal language and short utterances.
e.	When followed by another determiner such as my, which makes the head noun specific, some takes of
f.	Noun-based numerical words remain in the singular even when modified by a number greater than one. The
correct phrase would be “Five Hundred Miles.”
g.	The student would appear to be relying on aural evidence, since the phrase a couple of minutes is often
pronounced as written in the example. The student needs to learn the nonspecific quantifier a couple of as a
chunk, although in North American English it is increasingly common to hear people say (and even see them
write) a couple minutes. In addition, the difference between a dozen and a couple of may be noted—a dozen is a
precise numerical expression (—12), whereas a couple of is more imprecise, which explains the use of of with
couple.
h.	When some is used with of the definite article is needed before the noun phrase to make it specific, which would
seem to be required in this case (i.e., some of the books).
5.	It is grammatical to use the plural when the number-based noun is used with a general rather than specific number
reference. In this case, the number of centuries is not specified. However, it would be ungrammatical to say
*a Five-centuries-old Framework
because the number is specified. The same pattern occurs with phrases likQfour million dollars (specific) but millions
of stars (general).
6.	Quantifiers are used with of only when the noun being quantified is definite. In this case, several offspring is the first
mention of the offspring, and offspring is specific but not definite. In the second mention, the offspring are now both
specific and definite, and stating several of the offspring denotes that only a subset of the group is now being referred to.
7.	When the definite determiner is before the partitive noun, it specifies the exact identity of the item(s) referred to.
When the definite determiner is before the following noun, it specifies the set of such things. For example, this
carton of milk refers to only one possible carton (e.g., the one in my hand), whereas a carton of this milk could refer to
any carton of the specified type of milk (e.g., any one from a shelf of nonfat milk cartons).
Chapter 18: The Passive Voice
1. a. active voice
b.	passive voice
c.	passive voice with agent
d.	the ger-passive
e.	a verb that is always passive
f.	a verb that is never passive
g.	middle voice (with ergative verb)
h.	an intransitive verb with a nonagent subject
Two million people watch the program every week.
The mail is delivered daily.
“The Road Not Taken” was written by Robert Frost.
The dog got hit on the way home.
Jonathan was born in Japan.
Water consists of hydrogen and oxygen.
Temperatures are increasing everywhere.
The keys to the car disappeared!
ร UBJ
NP
det N
the	report
PRED
T prog pass V
I NF-L
PrepP
be-ing study -en
prep
by
NP
det N
the	committee
The Grammar Book
2. b.
ร
ADVL
Prep p
prep	NP
on	N
sm	SUBJ
ADVL
PrepP
prep	NP
by	N
O’Neill

NP
N
John
ADVL
3.	a. The student has confused the order of the auxiliary elements, and inflected have for a past form incorrectly.
The be ... en of the passive follows all the other elements of the auxiliary and, unless it is the first element in the
auxiliary, have is always the correct form within such an auxiliary; for example, “Horace will have been tested on
his Spanish.” Alternatively, the intended sentence may have been “Horace will be tested on his Spanish.” In this
case, the had is unnecessary and should be deleted.
b.	Contain is one of those verbs like weigh and have that normally do not occur in a passive form. Quirk and
Greenbaum (1973, pp. 359-360) indicate that there are four such categories of verbs:
(i.) “Reciprocal” verbs (e.g., resemble, look like> equal, agree with)
*Her sister is resembled by Nancy.
(ii.) Verbs of “containing” (e.g., contain, hold, comprise, lack)
Confidence is lacked by him.
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
845
(iii.) Verbs of “suiting” (e.g., suit, fit, become)
*1 am suited by this arrangement.
(iv.) Verbs of measurement (e.g., 'Weigh, cost, contain)
*$15 is cost by the shirt.
Many of these categories overlap with the stative verbs discussed in Chapter 7. Thus, many verbs that do not
take progressive aspect also do not occur in the passive.
c.	Unlike as in some languages (such as some Bantu languages) a locative expression, such as in the bus, cannot be
the subject of a passive clause in English. The object of the action must precede the verb in subject position;
that is, in this case a sandwich must precede the verb was eaten.
d.	The use of the definite article before customer makes this NP the known information in the sentence, whereas
some cars (lacking such a marker) is the new information. The active word order would thus reverse the order of
these NPs, putting them in the more acceptable order where the new information comes second (The customer
bought some cars.).
4.	The second be in a sentence with two be verb forms in a row is the passive. The passive be takes the -en ending (here
on prepare), i.e., (perf + prog + pass) is the sequence in the AUX.
5.	“A deck of cards that has been shuffled,” “both cards are turned face down again,” and “until all the pairs have been
matched” all use the passive and all maintain the focus on the patient (the cards) rather than on the agents (the
students playing the cards).
6.	a. To be born always occurs in the passive. The student has omitted the obligatory be auxiliary.
b.	The student has used sang, the simple past tense of the verb sing, instead of the correct (irregular) form of the
passive participle—that is, sung.
c.	Argentina is the agent, and active word order is used, so the passive voice is incorrect. An active verb form
should be used, such as Argentina has slowed down its inflation. Another solution is to use a change-of-state verb
and focus more on the happening than on the agent: Inflation has slowed in Argentina.
d.	The incorrect participle has been used (it should be simply hurt). This is an instance of main verb get being
followed by an adjective in its past participle form, which is irregular for hurt. This is not passive voice.
e.	Die is always intransitive and therefore can never occur in the passive. The transitive verb kill is probably
intended here, since an agent is expressed.
£ Disappear is an intransitive verb, and thus the receiver of the action is the subject without the use of the passive.
Given the absence of an expressed agent or patient, deleting was is the best way to correct the sentence rather
than changing the verb (to lose, for example).
7.	Rise, lie, and sit are all intransitive verbs and therefore can never occur in the passive. They each have transitive
counterparts given here (which can occur in the passive), however, the two forms are very similar and thus are easily
confused.
8.	Although the differences are not glaring, English speakers tend to use the be “passive when the agent is at least
understood:
Sheila and Steven were married on August 28 (by the rabbi).
The get-passive tends to be used informally when there is no expressed or understood agent:
Sheila and Steven got married on August 28.
In addition, the ^-passive is used whenever the speaker or writer wants to express a stative passive:
Sheila and Steven are married, (i.e., they are not single)
The get-passive can never be used in this meaning.
The active form, have married, is punctual and can be used to express repetitive action, as in
Sheila and Steven have married each other seven times.
or to express the action of the officiator:
The rabbi has married'many couples this year.
Have been married (like are married) is a be + adjective construction (present perfect):
Sheila and Steven have been married for seven years.
or
Sheila and Steven have both been married before.
9.	A lengthy agentive by phrase will presumably mean that there is important information contained in it. When this
is the case, the passive is a good choice because it means that the important information will come later in the
sentence, in the comment (rheme) position.
The Grammar Book
Chapter ใ 9: Sentences with Indirect Objects
1. a. direct object
b.	eliciting indirect object
c.	benefactive indirect object
d.	dative indirect object
e.	passive with indirect object
as subject
f.	dominance
g.	indirect object alternation
He gave her a diamond ring.
Debbie requested a favor of Penny.
She bought a valentine for her boyfriend.
The teacher read the children a story.
The expectant parents were given a shower.
Wait! You’re giving the money to the wrong person. Give that money to me.
The kindergarten teacher read the story to his class.
—> The kindergarten teacher read his class the story.
h.	verb that requires an indirect Peter gave Ann a birthday gift. / Peter gave a birthday gift to Ann.
object
i.	verb that requires both direct and I handed John the document.
indirect objects	*1 handed John. *1 handed the document.
j.	verb of transfer	She rolled the ball to her friend.
k.	double-object construction	Sara baked Tim a cake.
l.	prepositional construction	She baked a cake for Tim.
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
847
2. d.
ร
3.	a. The direct object is a pronoun, while the indirect object is a noun. Under these conditions, the rules of
dominance tell us that indirect object alternation shouldn’t take place (especially if the direct object is it). This
sentence should be:
John hasn't sent it to his brother.
b.	When indirect object alternation takes place (i.e., the dative meaning is intended), the preposition is deleted:
Mary bought me the book.
Alternatively, if the proxy meaning is intended, the prepositional phrase would not move forward, since the
direct object is not long and complex enough to merit movement of the PrepP:
Mary bought the book for me.
c.	With eliciting verbs, the preposition of precedes the indirect object, not the preposition to.
active
with indirect object alternation
passive (direct object as subject)
with no agent expressed
passive (indirect object as subject)
with no agent expressed
active
Mother sent the parcel to Bob.
Mother sent Bob tire parcel.
The parcel was sent to Bob by Mother.
The parcel was sent to Bob.
Bob was sent the parcel by Mother.
Bob was sent the parcel.
Bill brought some flowers for Agnes.
5. a.
b.
with indirect object alternation
passive (direct object as subject)
with no agent expressed .
Bill brought Agnes some flowers.
Some jflowers were brought for Agnes by Bill.
Some flowers were brought for Agnes.
(Note: Some dialects allow “Agnes was brought some flowers (by Bill).” This is awkward for many speakers of
American English.)
Explain is a verb that does not allow indirect object alternation (i.e., explain that rule to me).
With indirect object alternation, the preposition is deleted (i.e., give me an answer).
Open is a verb that allows indirect object alternation only when die deleted for is benefactive, not when it is the
proxy for. Thus one can say:
Open him ล can of beer. (benefactive: the can of beer is for him)
*Open him the door. (proxy: the door is not for him, but being opened on his behalf)
d.	Since ask is an eliciting verb, the underlying preposition in this sentence is of:
We asked something of Harry.
But even if the student had used of he or she would have been incorrect here since no preposition can be used
if the direct object is deleted (We asked Hany.).
The Grammar Book
e.	Excuse does not take an indirect object. Either me or my poor English may function as the direct object, but one
cannot use both.
Please excuse me.
Please excuse my poor English.
6.	With the exception of the verb say, Fraser is correct in stating that one-syllable verbs that take indirect objects may
optionally undergo indirect object alternation. They can do this whether their indirect objects are marked by to,
for, or of Although Fraser did not explicitly mention this, it is also important to note that no verb of three or more
syllables may take indirect object alteration:
"Educate US these children. "Evaluate NSF this proposal.
"Communicate your father this message.
The real problem arises with two-syllable verbs. Except for the two-syllable eliciting verbs, which never take
indirect object alteration, it appears that neither the stress pattern nor the co-occurring preposition is a perfect
predictor of indirect object alternation:
	to "dative"	for "benefactive"	of "eliciting"
stress on first syllable stress on second syllable	"mention offer "explain award	open (not'proxy') scramble (i.e.,the eggs) "perform reserve	the two-syllable eliciting verbs do not take indirect object movement: "demand; "request
We hope that future research will reveal some system in what now appears to be rather arbitrary behavior.
7.	In conversation, giving is usually reduced to giving making the present and passive participles hard to distinguish.
You would therefore want to have your students concentrate on listening for the differences in the prepositional
phrases. The by phrase always marks the agent, and the whole phrase is often deleted. On the other hand, the to
phrase is obligatorily present with many directional or dative verbs.
8.	Beg can take an'indirect object only when it is an eliciting verb:
I beg this favor of you.
When it is used in this way, it cannot undergo indirect object alternation:
"I beg you this favor.
For other uses, beg does not take an indirect object. It does, however, take a direct object which could be an NP
(e.g., I beg your pardon), containing within itself an indirect object. If the direct object is an infinitive phrase, it
might also have an indirect object embedded within it:
I beg you to do something for me.
But here, the benefactive indirect object phrase (for me) belongs to the verb do, not beg.
A few eliciting verbs also occur in another frame with for. For example:
He begged/asked for money/help (of someone).
In this case, for is neither benefactive nor proxy, but a prepositional phrase, and the main verb is still eliciting.
Chapter 20: Adjectives
1. a. attributive adjective	What a beautiful day it is!
b.
d*
£
2. a.
b.
predicative adjective
postnominal adjective
The sky is blue.
Jack accepted the only job offered.
present participle adjective Jurassic Park is a thrilling movie.
past participle adjective We were thrilled to see you there.
gradable adjective	She is a very skillful musician.
Asleep functions exclusively as a predicate adjective and thus can never occur in attributive position as it does here.
Main is a “reference” adjective that can occur only in attributive position, not in predicate position as in this
sentence.
c.	The adjective phrase “overly fond of chocolate” is complex and is therefore restricted to postnominal or
predicative position, not prenominal position as in this sentence, (i.e., A person overly fond of chocolate..I).
d.	When number specific measure phrases are used as modifiers, the singular form of the measurement noun is
always used rather than the plural; thus thirteen-year-old is the correct form. The exception to this is when more
general expressions are used, such as centuries-old as in Chapter 17, Exercise 5.
e.	The adverb completely does not collocate well with the gradable, unbounded adjective nice, which works better with
adverbs like very or extremely. Completely collocates better with ungradable, bounded adjective like true or false.
3.	The -ing participle here can be interpreted either as a verb, in which case the sentence is elliptical for what Hazel is
trying to do (e.g., Hazel is trying to open the jar.), or as an adjective, in which case trying describes Hazel (i.e., Hazel
tries one's patience.).
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
849
4.	When 'white is in the postnominal position, it refers more to the action and thus implies that the fence was not
white before it was painted. In the attributive position, white refers to a more permanent state and therefore implies
that the fence was white before it was painted.
5.	a. Opinion adjectives normally come before size adjectives. Nice should therefore precede big in this sentence.
b.	The -en participle form haired is the correct form of the adjective here (i.e., white-haired), although it is never
used as a verb form.
c.	The -cn participle, rather than the -ing participle, is needed to express the idea that the subject (“I”) is the
experience!· of the boredom. The -ing participle implies that “I” am the cause of the experience of boredom,
which is unlikely unless “I” is the instructor.
6.	Speaker A uses good as an unmarked gradable adjective and inquires where on the scale (which presumably could
run from “not good” upwards) the Red Sox should be placed. However, speaker B interprets good as an opinion
adjective, and the response implies that the Red Sox would not even get onto the scale denoted by the word good,
proposing a separate negative scale (bad) that they could be placed on.
7.	The word order is derived from a relative clause, things that are unfamiliar, and is a rare (marked) but grammatical
word order. This particular example sounds rather poetic and emphasizes the adjective by placing it at the end of
the sentence where new information is typically placed.
8.	Quite can be used adverbially to intensify predicate adjectives in the same way as the other adverbs. However, when
used to intensify an attributive adjective, it is placed before the indefinite article instead of after the indefinite article
like the other adverbs so there is an important syntactic difference.
9.	In be used to, the -en participle can be viewed as an adjective. The test for this would be to place the adverb
intensifier very in front of used to·.
?l am very used to spicy Indian food.
This sentence is marginally acceptable, but in the second sentence it would be impossible (*/ very used to eat spicy
Indian food.). In this case, used to is a phrasal modal modifying the verb eat.
Another test is to look at what follows each expression: be used to is followed by a noun phrase (since to is a
preposition), whereas used to is followed by a verb, as other phrasal modals are.
Chapter 21: Prepositions
1. a. complex preposition
deletable preposition
(i.) optional
(ii.) obligatory
literal spatial meaning of in
metaphorical extension of in
collocation with preposition
preposition-noun-preposition construction
co-occurring verb and preposition
co-occurring adjective and preposition
trajector the computer, landmark the desk
trajector time, landmark healing
trajector lessons, landmark managing one's anger
trajector a large piano, landmark our house
trajector (the beginning of) the game, landmark (the sound of) the referee 'ร whistle
Discuss takes no preposition (unlike talk about, argue about). One might say that the meaning of about is already
part of the meaning of discuss.
On is used for the street alone (on Western Avenue)·, at is used for the number and street together because they
indicate a specific point (at 160 Westen?).
Because of must be followed by a noun phrases not a clause as here. Thus the sentence could be changed to
Because of all the homework'I have, I can't go. Alternatively, the of could be deleted, leaving because correctly
followed by a complete clause. In this case"the because is an adverb subordinate!·, not part of the complex
preposition because of.
Locative nouns, such as home, downtown, and overseas, are never preceded by to when they occur with a verb of
motion or direction (like go, walk, drive, etc.) So the second clause should be 1 went home.
e.	When here or there occur with stative verbs and with in, they do so only when in is interpreted in its core
meaning of being enclosed by something—for example, It's in here (meaning “in this room” or “in this
cupboard”). Used in a more metaphorical senses, such as in this city, here or there are used alone, even
when substituting for a locative phrase using in, such as in Washington, D.c. So the second clause should be
I like living here.
The tree is in front of the house.
2.
3.
b.
d.
Softball practice began late (on) Thursday.
Most of us wanted to go (*prep) home.
The soup is in the bowl.
He was in a bad mood.
We got a loan for the purpose of buying a computer.
One by one, the ants came out of the hole.
I have adapted to life in this country now.
We are very happy for you.
d
f
g
h
a
b
d
b
4.	In this sentence, of is used to integrate or relate a part with its whole.
The Grammar Book
5.	Do on your own. Answers will vary.
6.	For under, the trajector is at a lower vertical point than is the landmark (e.g., The troll lives under the bridge.). One
nonspatial meaning extension for this preposition is connected to power or control (e.g., The prince was under the
witch spell.).
7.	The ambiguity lies in the two possible temporal interpretations of in. It could be used in the sense of “after five
minutes has elapsed” (i.e., the storytelling will start after five minutes), or it could be used to mean that the telling
of the story will be completed within a span of five minutes (i.e., the storytelling will start now and be finished after
five minutes).
8.	Do on your own. Answers will vary.
Chapter 22: Phrasal Verbs
1.	a. verb + preposition
b.	transitive phrasal verb
c.	intransitive phrasal verb
d.	separable phrasal verb
e.	inseparable phrasal verb
f.	phrasal verb plus preposition
g.	literal phrasal verb
h.	aspectual phrasal verb
i.	idiomatic phrasal verb
j.	phrasal verb that is always separated
Alice fell down the hole.
Lois is always making up stories.
Last night I just fooled around.
We put our coats on.
I’ll go over those problems in class tomorrow.
I am really put off by a pushy salesperson.
Please pick up your clothes.
I burned up lots of calories.
I thing I’m going to freak out.
The little girl cried her eyes out.
SUBJ
NP
N
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
851
2.
SUB]
NP
N
Deidre
ร
the	cart
This sentence is ambiguous. A literal reading would be V 4- prep via the adverbial option.
A phrasal reading (i.e. she looked the tree up in a book) would be a phrasal verb (V + Prt), as above.
3.	a. If call on means “to pay an informal visit,” it is an inseparable phrasal verb and on should come after called.
Alternatively, the wrong form of the particle may have been used. For example, if the meaning of “to telephone”
was intended, up should have been used instead of on.
b.	Even though the particle over can be separated from its verb look, the direct object is very long and complex; in
such a case, the particle should follow the verbMirectly.
c.	Indirect object alternation has already been applied to this sentence, implying that the indirect object (Larry)
is nondominant. In such a case, the verb audits particle will not occur together because it would be in conflict
with the fact that the indirect object is nondominant and is being moved forward in the sentence to indicate
this. Thus, I gave Larry back the money would be correct, as would I gave Larry the money back, although the
latter reduces the dominance of the direct object slightly since it is no longer sentence-final; it increases the
dominance of the phrasal verb since the particle is in final position.
d.	Show is occasionally used in this sense (meaning “to appear”), but is potentially ambiguous with the transitive
verb show, which has another meaning, “to make visible.” Using the completive phrasal verb show up is more
common in the sense of “to appear.”
e.	Put would be a more likely verb for this sentence than place. (She put back...)
4.	a. Put up is a phrasal verb that can occur with the preposition with, which in this case needs to be inserted after up,
in order to express the meaning “cannot tolerate.”
The Grammar Book
b.	Discontinued is a rather formal way of expressing the idea, which would be more typically expressed with a
phrasal verb: broke off.
c.	The problem here is the particle. We turn off (or put off, switch off, flick off) lights, but a candle bums out or is put
out or is blown out. A candle can also bum down, but it does not bum off.
d.	Work out is an intransitive phrasal verb. Thus the sentence could be Kim worked out at the gym, or, if the muscles
were important to mention, the noun form should be used: Kim gave her muscles a workout at the gym.
e.	A pronoun always goes before the particle of a separable phrasal verb because of its nondominant status (it must
refer to something previously mentioned in the discourse), i.e., The child ate it up (after being given a piece of cake).
5.	The term “two-word verb” is somewhat inaccurate since some phrasal verbs have three components: a verb,
particle, and preposition.
6.	Tests for whether it is a verb + preposition:
*We came quickly across that issue yesterday.
*	Across that issue we came yesterday.
*	Across what did we come yesterday?
preposition.
The issue was come across yesterday.
We encountered the issue yesterday.
*We came the issue across yesterday.
adverb insertion
phrase fronting
wh-fronting
Come across fails all these tests and thus is not a verb
Tests for whether it is a phrasal verb:
passivization
verb substitution
NP insertion
Given that come across does not pass any of the tests for being a verb + preposition but passes one of those for a
phrasal verb.
If we focus on the two tests recommended on pages 446^147, come across does not pass the first test (NP insertion),
meaning that it may be either an inseparable phrasal verb or a verb + preposition (since this test does not
distinguish between the two but only eliminates separable phrasal verbs). Come across also does not pass the second
test (^-fronting) and thus must be an inseparable phrasal verb.
Fight over passes the adverb insertion test,
My brother and I always fought furiously over the prize.
the phrase fronting test,
Over the prize we fought.
and the fronting test
Over what did you fight?
so fight over is a verb 4- preposition.
7.	In some poetic or archaic phraseology, it is possible to place certain prepositions after the NP object when the
particle is adverbial in nature. In such unusual usage, it could be said that English has something resembling
postpositions.
8.	Library routine: I want to take a book out of the library. I finish off my coffee before going into the building.
I look the book up on the computer catalog and jot down the call number. I look at the library map to find out
where that call number is. I go up in the elevator and look for the book on the shelves. The stacks are dark, so I
turn on the light. It’s hard to pick out the book I want from all the others. After I find the book, I take it to the
front desk and check it out. Before I go out, I decide to visit the newspaper section because I like to keep up with
events around the world. On my way there, I notice there’ร going to be a seminar on using the Internet soon, so I
sign up for it.
9.	check in (to a hotel); grow up (in a place); stand by (your friend); shop around (for something)
Chapter 23: Nonreferential Subjects: Ambient It and Existential There
1. a. ambient it
b.	referential it
c.	deictic there
d.	existential there
e.	narrative use of there
How far is it to the beach?
Have you seen my house key? I can’t find it.
Let’s go to the mountains. It’s so peaceful there.
There are several issues we need to discuss.
Yesterday, there was this really funny man here.
2.	a. Nonreferential it always uses a singular verb regardless of whether a singular or plural noun follows (in contrast
to there).
b.	Pronouns in a list following there are always object pronouns; thus I should be me (although native speakers
who have been admonished to avoid using the object pronouns in such phrases in subject position may
hypercorrect to produce a sentence like this).
c.	There should be it·, ambient it is used when describing the weather with verbs or adjectives. (However, There is
some sunshine today would be grammatical—though less common—since it uses a noun phrase.)
d.	Only locative prepositional phrases can be moved to initial position without the use of there. Thus, There are
28 days in the month of February or In the month of February there are 28 days would be more accurate.
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
853
3.	While the transformation works for the example given, it does not always work. For example, there is no
corresponding sentence that could have undergone transformation for a sentence like:
There is no need for that.
*No need forthat is.
Moreover, while such transformations would work for such a sentence if the verb was exist (No need for that exists),
such an option does not exist for the use of there in lists or suggestions. For the following example:
Where's he going to sleep? Well, there's the couch.
The couch exists is not a suitable paraphrase. Besides the paraphrase problem, the sentences have different uses. This
evidence all suggests that existential there should be placed directly in subject position.
4.	a. This sentence lacks a surface subject, which every nonimperative, nonelliptical sentence in English requires.
Ambient it is needed here as the subject.
b.	This word order is possible in certain contexts for more concrete descriptions, such as A pen is on the table.
However, since A lot of noise is more abstract, existential there is required, in accordance with Bolinger’s
observation that “The less vividly on stage an action is, the more necessary [existential] there becomes.”
c.	At first glance, it appears that there is a missing relative pronoun who, and indeed the sentence could be
corrected in this way. However, if this is produced by a speaker of a topic-comment language, such as Mandarin
Chinese, it is possible that the student is using there as a topic introducer. Since it is not necessary in English to
have a topic introducer, another way to correct the sentence would be to omit there are altogether, leaving only
Many tourists visit there.
d.	There are a lot of people in my family would be more appropriate. This sentence may have been produced by a
native speaker of Japanese as a way to maintain topic-comment word order.
By way of comparison, when the object of the sentence is a noun phrase that does not include all members
of the subject NP, the construction is more acceptable; for example,
Our company has a lot of employees.
e.	There and it are used in different contexts. It is the nonreferential term used in time expressions and should be
used in this sentence instead of there.
5.	a. The difference here is one of discourse context: both (i) and (ii) could be one piece of information in a
longer description where the writer is setting the reader up to expect something to happen. Both sentences
are marked; (i) places more emphasis on the street and (ii) places more emphasis on the ball by placing it in
sentence-final position, (iii) also achieves this latter effect through the use of there with “ball” as the logical
subject and may simply be a description without any accompanying expectation being aroused in the reader.
It is the most common structure of the three.
b. The first sentence is more formal than the second and is more likely to be heard on radio or TV than in other
contexts. The second sentence, especially in its contracted form, occurs far more frequently and represents the
typical usage. (Contraction of it is to it's would make it more informal.)
6.	This is an area where the language seems to be changing. Many native speakers will accept and even produce there is
in contracted form (i.e., there's) regardless of whether the logical subject of the sentence is singular or plural. This is
particularly true in informal speech.
7.	In sentences in (a), where both sentences are literally locative in meaning, referring more to the “here and
now,” make this word order variation possible; the second sentence could be used as a stage instruction. For
this type of utterance, either form expresses the meaning grammatically. However, the sentences in (b) are more
abstract since is could conceivably be replaced by exists. The only way to retain is and express this proposition
grammatically is to start with existential there. This is further evidence against the transformational analysis of
existential there.
8.	The there in the first example is exclamatory. It could be paraphrased by a word like Hallehlia!, which would
admittedly be more intense than there, but which would serve the same function.
The second example uses existential there for a dramatic contrast, used in all likelihood to introduce a really good
bread to the listener/reader. Sometimes the contrast is general versus specific (There were jazz singers, and (then) there
was Ella Fitzgerald.), which is probably an introduction to a discussion of Ms. Fitzgerald.
Chapter 24: Conjunction
1. a. coordination
b.	coordinating conjunction
c.	correlative conjunction
d.	respectively
My friends bought me dinner and paid for my movie ticket.
Tohn and Mary wanted to visit the ocean.
My friends bought me dinner and paid for my movie ticket.
John and Mary wanted to visit the ocean.
Both lohn and Mary wanted to visit the ocean.
My friends both bought me dinner and paid for my movie ticket.
Elizabeth I and Peter the Great ruled England and Russia, respectively.
The Grammar Book
e.	ellipsis
f.	gapping
Harry isn’t going to the movies, and Fred isn’t going (_) either.
She bought a cappuccino, and he____an espresso.
She left in a Ford, and he____in a Mercedes.
2. b.
รบBJ
NP
PRED
N and N
Paul	Paulette
3.	The ambiguity lies in the fact that the sentence may be interpreted either as phrasal conjunction: Pam drinks
[coffee and milk] (i.e., mixed together):
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
855
or as sentential conjunction (she drinks them separately):
ร
รบBJ
NP
I
N
-pres drink N
coffee
In this second case, ellipsis of the redundant elements in the second clause is required to bring the tree into line
with the surface structure.
4.	Do can be used to stand for an entire VP, not just a verb, in sentences like the following, where the do refers to
everything inside the brackets, not just to the verb believe:
She [believes the reports that the politician was lying about his involvement with space aliens during his first term
of office], and I do too.
5.	a. Since the conjunction or presents alternatives, the sentence will be true as long as one of the alternatives enters
into a true statement. In this case, each alternative is a singular proper name. Also in this case, the meaning of
the sentence makes it fairly clear that or will be interpreted exclusively—that is, it cannot be the case that both
Helen and Judy will be the president this year.
The student who produced this sentence might be told simply that when he/she uses or to coordinate NPs
and when agreement is an issue, or should be accompanied by a singular verb in the sentence as long as the
final of the two (or more) conjuncts appears as a singular NP. (Recall that in cases where singular NPs are
coordinated with plural NPs, the proximity principle makes the verb plural if the plural NP is closest: Either my
mother or my cousins are taking me to the malll)
A supplementary, meaning-based teacher response to this particular error would be to ask the student how
many presidents a club or a company is likely to have in one year. Getting “one” as the response, the teacher
can then point out that the student has used a plural verb form, which suggests more than one actual president.
b.	The error here lies in the fact that Í00, an adverb that accompanies coordinated affirmative clauses, should be
replaced by its negative counterpart, either. Students need to become aware that the patterns are “Yes —> too,”
and “Not —»(ท)either.”
The error is somewhat though not completely parallel to what happens to some when it appears in a negative
sentence and becomes any. Since students at the intermediate level are likely to have a fairly good mastery of
some/any environments, the teacher might exploit the parallel in giving feedback to a student at this level.
c.	Ellipsis here has eliminated not only the VP (as it normally does) but also the AUX (since could is not repeated
in the second clause). The sentence would sound much better if the second clause were the nurse couldn't either,
with the not following (and contracted to) the AUX and the adverb either completing the negative conjunct.
d.	Nor can act as a simple coordinating conjunction, while neither cannot. The proper form here is 720r, which then
requires subject-operator inversion and do support: nor did I ask you. Students might be given this information
and presented with a few examples in spoken use, where nor will be heard to coordinate after mid-sentence
rising intonation or after a full stop (falling intonation); neither will generally be heard only after falling
intonation, as in You didn ’i ask me. Neither did I ask you. In contexts where both neither and nor can be used, nor is
more formal.
e.	The error is simply that where ellipsis of this sort occurs in the VP, there must be some form of adverbial—too
or as well—to complete the proper coordination.
f.	The student has identified the wrong set of relations holding between multiple sentence elements that permit
the addition of respectively. This adverbial requires the relationship [A & B ... X & Y, respectively], where the
first and second items mentioned in the second conjoined set of constituents apply in that order to the first and
second items mentioned in the first set of constituents: Fred and Bill paid Jim and Paul respectively (i.e., Fred paid
Jim and Bill paid Paul). The sentence produced by the student probably should be expressed as: Fred and Bill
paid each other. The students need contextualized practice in the use of respectively and of reciprocal pronouns.
6.	Yes, they can. For example:
They cleaned both inside and outside the house.
They looked up and down the street.
This is a government of, for, and by the people.
Drinks will be served before, after, and during the show.
I've been in and out of the house all day.
The Grammar Book
a.	The following categories can all be co-ordinated with not only ... but alsoะ
พ + VP
AP + AP
prep + prep
PrepP + PrepP
AdvP + AdvP
N + N
NP + NP
They not only hiked in the Ardennes but also skied in the Alps.
The hotel was not only very expensive but also hard to reach.
The guests were not only inside but also outside the house.
The guests were not only in our house but also on the veranda.
The guests left not only very quickly but also very quietly.
We have visited not only Chicago but also Boston.
We have not only a truck but also a sedan.
Sentences/clauses may not be coordinated in this way without additional changes, as discussed
under (b) below:
ร + ร
*Not only you helped me out but also you gave me some new ideas.
b.	An example that is truly clause-to-clause requires subject-operator inversion because of the presence of
negation in the first correlative; moreover, the also follows the subject in the second clause:
Not only did you help me out, but you also gave me some new ideas.
Not only did she get a scholarship, but she also got a teaching job.
s. In this sentence, it appears that two unlike constituents are being coordinated. It looks as if an AP in the first clause
is being coordinated with a pp.
Recall that our PS rules will permit VP to expand with a copula followed by one of three types of constituents:
VP—»cop
NP
AP
PrepP.
Example: Mary is an architect.
Example: John is penniless.
Example: John is without visible means of support.
It seems possible to place any two of these three constituents side by side when followed by a copula and get a
fairly good-sounding sentence as a result because they all refer back to the subject of the sentence. There can be
conceptual parallelism rather than structural parallelism in cases like this sentence.
9.	The most reasonable explanation might be to say that since and alternates with or in affirmative/negative structures,
native speakers already take the or here to be negative and tend to reserve nor for more formal discourse contexts
such as writing. Such substitution of or for nor occurs frequently in informal speech.
10.	For a student at the intermediate level of instruction, a teacher might not want to respond at all to issues of
cohesion, since the entire text is quite clearly written. However, for a student in a writing class who is planning to
go on to higher levels of writing instruction, the student should know that the stringing together of multiple uses of
and from sentence to sentence does not produce normal-sounding academic prose. At the very least, there are many
other cohesive devices more specific than and to the functions that the writer is trying to perform in the narrative.
Specifically, these include relative clauses. The sequence
We began our bicycle trip from my brother's house, and he lived not so far from the mountains...
can be changed to
We began our bicycle trip from the house of my brother, who lived not far from the mountains...
Likewise, the sequence
... after about one half-hour we reached the mountains, and it was cooler there...
can be changed to read
...after about one half-hour we reached the mountains, where it was cooler...
The teacher can explain to the student that while the prose is grammatical, it is difficult to derive the full effect of a
word such as and if it is repeated endlessly. Several instances of and were not even necessary. They could have been
deleted with a semicolon or a period and new sentence with capital letter used instead:
... we felt the warm breeze on our faces and bodies, and after about one half hour we reached the mountains,
and it was cooler there.
This very oral-sounding narrative could be better restated in writing as:
...we felt the warm breeze on our faces and bodies. After about one half hour, we reached the mountains; it was
cooler there.
Chapter 25: Adverbiais
1. a. sentence-initial
(i.) adverb phrase	Very reluctantly. I went through the records.
To please Henry. I went through the records.
When no one else agreed to do so. I went through the records.
(ii.) prepositional phrase
(iii.) adverb clause
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
857
b.	sentence-final
(i.) adverb phrase	I went through the records very methodically.
(ii.) prepositional phrase	I went through the records in the office.
(iii.) adverb clause	I went through the records when I was asked to.
c.	specific or general adverbial of frequency
specific	Lorraine jogs five miles every week.
general	Lorraine jogs on occasion.
d.	preverbal adverb of frequency
(i.) positive	I often see her brother on campus.
(ii.) negative	He rarely comes to visit.
e.	phrasal preverbal adverb of frequency
(i.) positive	Beth is almost always on time.
(ii.) negative	She is not usually late.
f.	adverbial participle	Having been up all night. Beth was late this morning.
2.	a. It should be Isn’t he ever ... or Is he not ever .... Not ever placement patterns like not placement; only if contracted
does the not stay together with the operator in subject-operator inversion.
b.	The preverbal adverb of frequency can separate only an auxiliary verb or the be copula from not. Since in this
case neither of these underlying forms is present, only two orders are possible:
Marvin does not often dance.
Marvin often does not dance.
c.	The answer is not given in a full sentence; rather, it occurs in a reduced clause. In such cases, preverbal adverbs
of frequency cannot be the final constituent. The order should be I never am. Alternatively, the response could
be even further reduced to “No, never” or simply “No” or “Never” without the subject pronoun and copula
being present.
3.	a. If the sentence contains an unstressed auxiliary verb, place the preverbal adverb of frequency after it. Thus, this
sentence should be:
José can sometimes play handball after work.
b.	If a negative preverbal adverb of frequency has been fronted, subject/auxiliary inversion must take place:
Rarely can we eat outside in the garden!
Alternatively, the preverbal adverb of frequency could be placed after the first auxiliary verb in the sentence:
We can rarely eat outside in the garden.
This second form should be used if emphasis (i.e., exclamation) is not intended.
c.	Adverbs of manner cannot precede direct objects in English. A correct sentence would be either I speak French
fluently, or I speak fluently.
d.	Adverbiais of direction or goal (to seafood restaurants) come before adverbs of position (in Boston).
e.	This is the classic “dangling participle” since the subject of the adverbial participle is not the same as the
subject of the main clause (presumably, it is the little girl who is crying hysterically). Since the main clause of
this sentence cannot be very easily expressed in the passive, the adverbial participle would have to be changed
to a more explicit adverb clause such as As the little girl was dying hysterically, the mother tried to calm her down.
Alternatively, the main clause would have to be changed to a different proposition to enable the little girl to
become the subject: Crying hysterically, the little girl resisted all attempts by her mother to calm her down.
4.	a. The second sentence emphasizes the absolute 100% frequency with which Alice uses dental floss, although
both sentences indicate her use of dental floss is habitual.
b.	There is no difference in meaning between these sentences since adverbs of frequency modify the whole
sentence regardless of their position, but there is a subtle difference in emphasis and likely use. The
sentence-initial position makes sometimes more salient since it more often occurs medially, especially in
conversation. The sentence-initial adverb cân also create a link to previous text.
c.	Again, there is little if any difference in meaning between these two sentences, with the sentence-initial position
for the adverb clause giving more salience-to it. The sentence-final position is more common in conversation.
The sentence-initial position can also be used to tie the utterance back to previous discourse or to signal a shift
in topic.
5.	a. Probably speaker A expects more specific information about the frequency of B’s trips to the beach. B should
preferably use an adverb expressing specific or at least general frequency. For example:
(best) specific B: Every weekend.
(acceptable) general B: Whenever I have the time.
b. Speaker A is asking a yes/no question. Appropriate answers would be:
No, but I hope to go there some day. / Yes, I've been there twice.
The Grammar Book
6.	In sentence (b), the preverbal adverb of frequency precedes the auxiliary verb, which means that the auxiliary carries
emphatic or contrastive stress. There would have to be context to justify this use, e.g., They said that I didn't tell the
truth, but that's wrong because I always HAVE told the truth.
In sentence (a), the auxiliary verb has reduced stress, and the sentence is in the unmarked form; that is, it is not
emphatic. It is a regular declarative utterance.
7.	Time adverbiais (at 10 P.M.} usually come before adverbiais of frequency (every day) so sentence (a) is the more
common. Sentence (b) is not incorrect, however, but it is more unusual and makes the time adverbial sound more
like an afterthought. The student should be advised to keep to the order in sentence (a) if in doubt.
Chapter 26: Logical Connectors
1. a. adverb subordinator
b.	linking adverb
c.	concessive connector
d.	time connector
e.	purpose connector
f.	causal connector
g.	inferential connector
She attends dance class because she likes the exercise.
Sara dances well; however. Naomi is more graceful.
Although she is late, I still believe she’ll be here.
Whenever vacation comes, I get a cold.
He went to summer camp so that he would learn to play basketball well.
Consequently, he got a basketball scholarship.
They had a lot in common so they became good friends.
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
859
2. b.
ร
NP	AdvP AUX	VP	ADVL
pro	ADV Μ V	PrepP	AdvP
you	never will get	prep NP ADV
------O' pro however
The Grammar Book
2. d.
ร
PRED
SUBJ
NP
pro
they
3.	a. The error is one of meaning/use. On the contrary is not appropriate here since it most often signals that there is
a contradiction between the truth of the proposition expressed in an initial sentence and the truth of that in the
following sentence before which the adverbial occurs. What is expressed here is a simple contrast between
“...lots of trees in Oregon” and “few trees in Arizona,” so on the contrary should be replace by in contrast.
b.	The error is one of punctuation, specifically, the comma after the word class suggests that there is rising
intonation at the end of this clause, but in fact the normal reading is one with falling, end-of-sentence
intonation. The comma should be replaced by a period (full stop). A capital A should begin the next sentence.
Alternatively, a semi-colon could replaced the first comma.
c.	The error is inappropriate punctuation. No commas should be used before and after although because it begins
a subordinate clause in final position.
d.	The error is misuse of nevertheless, which suggests that there is a denial of expectations created in the first clause
by the content of the second clause. However, no expectations are reasonably created by the first clause: to say
that crystal glasses break very easily suggests nothing about the fragility of plastic glasses. This is once again
best expressed as a simple contrast: Crystal glasses are very fragile; in contrast, plastic glasses are stronger.
e.	The error is one of form. While is an adverb subordinator, and thus the clause that follows it is a subordinate
clause, which can’t stand alone. The while clause should simply follows the preceding clause without any
punctuation or capitalization.
4.	In the two examples given, plus cannot be an adverb subordinator, since the period at the end of the prior sentence
marks falling intonation, and adverb clauses do not normally stand alone as full sentences. Moreover,
we could not reverse the order of the two clauses, beginning the sentence with plus, and get an acceptable sentence
as a result.
It is also doubtful thatplus is a conjunctive adverbial. This is so because it does not seem that we can insert the
plus at any point other than S-initial position and get an acceptable sentence as a result:
They had to drive five miles out of the way.
?They, plus, had to drive through the mud.
?They had to drive through the mud, plus.
(However, if native speakers actually judge these sequences as acceptable, that would constitute evidence of
conjunctive adverbial status.)
If plus fails these two tests, we are led to classify the word as a coordinating conjunction.
5.	a. A student who produces this sort of sequence may be told that there are both form and meaning reasons to
avoid it. Structurally, an although-danse is grammatically subordinate to the other clause; structurally, a but-
clause is grammatically equal to the other clause. There is, therefore, a structural contra- diction when although
and but are used together in this way. One should use one or the other but not both together.
As far as meaning is concerned, the student can be told that while one can express simple additive
relationships with correlative conjunctions, one cannot express contrastive relationships in this way. The effect
of juxtaposing although and but is a highly confusing for native speakers, since it seems as if two contrasts are
somehow involved, when only one is actually intended.
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises	861
b.	It might be worthwhile to explain orally to a student that commas are regularly associated with a single kind
of intonation in most structural positions—specifically a rising intonation, which is not used with as a result by
native speakers. If the student is fairly fluent in the spoken language, a teacher can model the sentence with
a somewhat exaggerated intonation contour and then ask the student if they actually hear this intonation in
this context (just prior to as a result). If the student is not very fluent in the spoken language, the teacher can at
least explain and model the relationship between intonation and punctuation and point out that a semicolon or
period is needed before as a result.
c.	The error here is that the wrong connector is used. The student can be told that when on the contrary is used,
we expect some overt marker of negation to occur in the first clause, and we also expect there to be some
implication of falsehood associated with the first clause. If the student simply wants to contrast two people or
things, a proper connector would be in contrast or however.
d.	Changing so to then would solve the problem since if and then can be used together in such contexts, but not if
and so.
e.	The student seems to understand the contribution of even to the sentence but may not be aware that when it
occurs before a clause, even must appear in the combination even if even when, even after, even before, prefacing
an adverb clause. It may simply be pointed out that there is a syntactic difference between even and even if and a
few contrastive model sentences may be shown to the student:
Even my friend is here.	We work even on Sundays.
(ieven + NP)	(even + PrepP)
Even before you left, I was worried about you.
(even before + adverb clause)
Even if my friend is here, I won't be happy.
(even + subordinates + adverb clause)
6.	It is not necessarily easy to explain to a student why advertisers, novelists, or news columnists may take
liberties that student writers are not supposed to take in academic writing. One reason for punctuating
sentence fragments in this way may be to highlight or stress both clauses for dramatic effect. In the deodorant
ad, both the product and the reason for using it are stressed by means of short, pointed statements; one does
not feel that the reason-clause is subordinated in the same way as because-ciauses are normally subordinated.
Why is it not possible for a writer of formal academic discourse to follow the same pattern of writing adverb
clauses? It simply seems to be the case that effecting a sense of equal stress in this way is not a prescriptive
option in formal academic writing.
Another reason for punctuating in this way may be to achieve the effect of an afterthought clause, a clause which
was not originally planned for when the clause prior to it was written. In such cases, a teacher might point out to
students that in highly planned academic discourse, writers do not usually present clauses with the intention of
signaling to the reader that a certain clause was intended as an unplanned afterthought.
7.	Such student writing, overfilled with cohesive expressions, is commonly seen where teachers have overstressed
the need for such devices to mark meaning relationships among sentences. One way to begin would be to
ask the student to eliminate exactly half of the expressions, asking with each eliminated expression whether
the intended meaning relationship is adequately conveyed without the expression. (Of course the teacher’s
personal judgement will be of great value here.) It would also be worthwhile to point out to the student that
one does not normally use the expression moreover in simple lists of items; there must be a more complicated
relationship, one most often involving evidential support, for this expression to be used effectively.
Another possibility would be to present the writer with a page or two of fairly formal expository prose and
ask the student to locate all of the linking adverbs in the sample text. After underlining them, the student might
calculate the relative frequency-per-number of words of these expressions and see that it is quite possible to be an
effective writer without using linking adverbs to excess.
Chapter 27: Conditionals
1. (often the entire sentence is the example—not a specific word or words)
a.	factual conditional
(i.) generic
(ii.) implicit inference
b.	future conditional
(i.) weakened result clause
(ii.) weakened if clause
c.	counterfactual conditional
Water freezes if the temperature gets below o°c.
If it’s 9 o’clock, the library is closed.
If the snow keeps melting so fast, there may be a flood.
If it happens to be nice on Friday, we can always go sailing.
If there had been less snow cover, the bulbs would have suffered
greater damage.
The Grammar Book
d.	contrastive use of a conditional
e.	subjunctive use of were
f.	//deletion with subject/
auxiliary inversion
g.	conditional clause pro-form
h.	sarcastic use of conditional
i.	hypothetical conditional
I’ll let you off this time, but if you do it again, you’re really in for it.
If that dog were here now, you would know it.
Had we known, we would have been there.
Do you have a reservation? If so, go right in.
If you had any brains, you’d be dangerous.
If I felt more energetic, I would weed the garden.
prep	NP
to	N
Europe
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
S63
2.
ร
2. d.
ร

3.	a. Implicit inferential factual conditionals should have the same tense and aspect or modal in both clauses. This
should be:
If she was there, she did the work.
Alternatively, this sentence may be a counterfactual conditional referring to past time, in which case it should be:
If she had been there, she would have done the work.
where the main clause should contain would + perfect.
b.	The normal pattern for future conditionals is to have a present tense in the if clause. Thus, this sentence
should read:
If John is free, I'll invite him.
Alternatively, the conditional clause could be weakened by using should, not might·.
If John.should be free, I'll invite him.
4
The Grammar Book
c.	The if clause almost always precedes the result clause in tautologisms. The sentence should be:
If Sally's bringing Harry to the party, she's bringing Harry to the party.
d.	This if clause really does not mean “on the condition” so much as “on the assumption.” In such cases of
“strong deductions,” the if clause precedes the then clause. Even if the if clause is not fronted, then does not
typically begin a conditional sentence. The only circumstance in which this sentence might be acceptable is a
conversation in which the speaker is trying to elicit a deduction from the other person, and in this context the
sentence would be an uninvertedyes/no question (i.e, then is being used much like so in this position):
Then he'll keep his word if he made a promise?
4.	a. If the sentence is a present factual conditional, then the simple present should occur in both clauses:
What happens if I push this button?
If the sentence is a future conditional, then Ml is needed in the result clause:
What will happen if I push this button?
If the sentence is present hypothetical, then would is needed in the result clause:
What would happen if I pushed this button?
b.	The same tense should be used in both clauses of this factual conditional. Since this is a habitual factual, and the
“habit” still obtains, present tense should be used:
Why do some Americans say, "Gesundheit,"if someone sneezes?
c.	There are three possible ways to correct this sentence:
(i.) Since the only if adverb clause has been fronted, subject/operator inversion is necessary in the main clause:
Only if you help me, will I study for the quiz.
(ii.) Do not front the only if adverb clause:
I will study for the quiz only if you help me.
(iii.) Weaken the condition by dropping only.
If you help me, I will study for the quiz.
5.	Both of these sentences are colloquial variants that are not consistent with what traditional grammar prescribes.
Prescriptive usage would call for subjunctive were to be used in the if clause in the first sentence, since it is a present
counterfactual conditional clause.
The second sentence is a hypothetical conditional. Prescriptive usage would lead one to expect a simple past
tense in the if clause, rather than the modal would the use of which results in a “double would construction.”
Thus, your answer to your student’s question depends upon a definition of correctness. The sentences your
student reports are not prescriptively correct—that is, they do not adhere to the rules in a grammar book—but they
are produced by, and acceptable to, native speakers in informal conversation.
We have encountered this discrepancy between grammar book rules and native speaker usage many times.
Which rules you teach and whether you present or allow any variation from these will presumably depend upon
how you use the language and who your students are and why they are studying English. For example, if you are
uncomfortable with the colloquial variants, which we claim many native speakers use, and if you are teaching in an
EEL context where your students are concerned with obtaining a high score on a standardized language proficiency
examination, then perhaps only the prescriptive rules should be presented and practiced. On the other hand, if your
students are adult immigrants in an ESL situation, perhaps you would choose to teach both the prescriptive rules
and colloquial variants.
6.	This is a future conditional. It is more complicated than those described in this chapter since the main clause
contains both the will modal to signal future time and the have to phrasal modal to signal necessity. Phrasal modals
may be used in the main clause of a conditional to express additional meaning—in this case, the phrasal modal
expresses the necessity of Father’s mowing the lawn.
7.	Do on your own. Answers will vary.
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
865
Chapter 28: Introduction to Relative Clauses
1. a. restrictive relative clause
b.	relativized object of a preposition
c.	relativized subject
d.	relative pronoun substitution
e.	relative pronoun deletion
f.	relativized possessive determiner
She’s the one who has the books in her arms.
Isn’t she the one about whom you asked?
The teacher who left was unhappy.
The package (the package arrived yesterday) is for Christmas.
—> The package (which arrived yesterday) is for Christmas.
Sally raved about the sale that they are having downtown.
—- Sally raved about the sale___they are having downtown.
Julie is the student whose birthday we’ll be celebrating next week.
SUBJ	PRED
2. b.
NP
AUX
NP
NP
det
the
N
brother
AUX	VP

The Grammar Book
2.
รบBJ
NP
2. d.
SUBJ
NP
N
Ann
PRED
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
867
2.
ร
3.	a. Who is a relative pronoun that substitutes for NPs marked (+ human). Which or that would be appropriate
relative pronouns to substitute for the (- human) subject river.
b.	The relative pronoun that cannot be used to replace the relativized object of a preposition if the preposition
is fronted with, and thus precedes, the relative pronoun. Whom should be used as the relative pronoun in this
sentence since the antecedent is (+ human) and the relative pronoun is the object of a preposition.
c.	The head noun story must be fronted along with the relativized determiner whose when relative pronoun
fronting takes place since whose modifies the head noun story (I thought about the man whose story we heard.).
4.	a. Whom should be who or that, since the relative pronoun that is being replaced in the embedded sentence is the
subject {The woman is walking towards US.). Whom replaces (+ human) NPs only in object position.
b.	The pronoun him should be deleted since who (or more formally, whom) was substituted for the boy and was then
fronted within the embedded sentence. Several languages can retain a pronominal reflex of a relative pronoun,
and so this sentence may be the result of interference from the student’s first language.
c.	The relative pronoun who, which is the subject of the embedded sentence, has been deleted. Subject relative
pronouns are not deletable in English; however, relativized objects are.
d.	The embedded relative clause that she is wrapping must be placed after the noun that it is modifying (i.e., the
package). Not all languages have the relative clause following the noun it modifies as is the case in English.
e.	They are friendly could be an embedded relative clause, in which case, its subject is preferential with the object
of the main sentence, people. Thus, the pronoun they should be replaced by the relative pronoun who or that.
Another possibility is that an adverb subordinate»- is missing: I like people if they are friendly.
5.	In the first sentence, the person (the stranger) called you; and in the second sentence, you called the person
(the stranger). Structurally, this means that in the first sentence, the relative pronoun replaced the subject of the
embedded sentence; in the second sentence, the relative pronoun replaced the object of the embedded sentence.
6.	That can be used with either human or nonhuman antecedents, although in formal written English, who may be
preferred for humans. Some confusion may also h^ve arisen here due to the fact that the newspaper is quoting (in
writing) what Smith produced when speaking; thus, while his use of that probably escaped notice during the actual
interview (since it is common oral usage), onc^it is in the written form, it becomes subject to an overly prescriptive
editorial standard. In fact many publishing houses (in their style sheets) say that for restrictive relative clauses
writers should use that to refer to non-human antecedents and who to refer to human antecedents. Such a rule has
its own problems because it ignores cases where relative pronouns occur after prepositions, and the choice is whom.
or which.
Chapter 29: More on Relative Clauses: Nonfestrictive and Relative Adverb Clauses
1. a. relative adverb substitution
b.	free relative substitution
c.	relative pronoun + be deletion
If we only knew the place (in which -4 where! we were staying, I would
rest more easily.
I had to think about (the thing that —> what) she had told me.
The boy______doing handsprings is my son. (who is has been deleted)
The Grammar Book
d. head noun deletion
ะ. relative adverb deletion
f. appositive
I’m trying to remember_____where we met each other, {the place has
been deleted before where)
By the time_____I arrived, the excitement was over, (when has been
deleted)
Amherst, a center of higher education, is a home for several major
colleges.
A-
nonrestrictive relative clause
(i.) appositive type
(ii.) evaluative type
Chris, who is a Beethoven fan, appreciates classical music.
He also likes jazz, which we didn’t expect.
ร
SUBJ
PRED
NP
NP
AUX
det
N
SUBJ
the

NP
2. b.
NP
ร'

PRED

be
ADJ
AUX
unknown
PrepP
pro
ร
SUBJ
PRED
NP
AUX
ร

AP
det
the
ADJ
athletic
the
marathon
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
869
2.
SUBJ
NP
PR ED
det
the

3.
a.	The relative adverb when is supposed to substitute for the preposition + relative pronoun. When relative
adverb substitution is properly applied, the following sentence results:
Christmas is the time when he's busiest.
If relative adverb substitution does not occur, the preposition + relative pronoun would be retained:
Christmas is the time at which he's busiest.
One could have a sentence without either form (i.e., Christmas is the time he’s busiest) but not one with both!
b.	A nonrestrictive clause may not modify a head noun preceded by the generic determiner any. A restrictive
clause should be used. Delete the commas.
c.	There are three possible reasons for the ungrammaticality:
(i.) Relative pronoun deletion took place, and the preposition was incorrectly deleted along with the relative
pronoun. If the preposition had not also been deleted, the following would have been produced:
This is the office I work in.
(ii.) Of course, if relative pronoun deletion had hot occurred, a grammatical sentence would also have resulted:
This is the office which I work เท.This is the office in which 1 work.
(iii.) Finally, this sentence may be ungrammatical because the relative adverb where, which replaced in + which,
was incorrectly deleted. If this had not occurred, the sentence would have been:
This is the office where I work.
d.	The inanimate relative pronoun which has been used to refer to human engineers; whom should be used instead.
e.	When the head noun {the time) is the object of a preposition {by), the relative adverb (when) is ungrammatical.
That can be used here (or no relative pronoun):
Burt will have raised $20,000 by the time (that) the fund-raising drive ends.
Alternatively, the relative adverb when could be used to replace the entire PrepP:
Burt will have raised $20,000 when the fund-raising drive ends.
The Grammar Book
4.	a. Which is a relative pronoun that substitutes for NPs marked (- human) or for entire clauses. Since Mr. Hall is
the antecedent for the relative pronoun, who, the relative pronoun marked (+ human), would be the correct
substitution.
b.	If the relative adverb substitution rule replaces the preposition + relative pronoun with how, which is a special
case, then the head noun deletion rule must be applied:
That is how he drives.
Alternatively, the head noun could be retained if the relative adverb substitution rule was not applied:
That is the way in which he drives.
Or, the preposition 4- relative pronoun could be deleted to produce:
That is the way he drives.
c.	The head noun deletion rule replaces the thing (that/which) with what. The student would have been correct if
the head noun the thing had been retained with that or which as the relative pronoun:
Cooking is the thing that he enjoys.
Another correct sentence would have resulted if the relative pronoun had been deleted:
Cooking is the thing he enjoys.
Finally, the sentence would have been correct if the student had deleted the head noun and used the free
relative what·.
Cooking is what he enjoys.
5.	The first sentence implies that the speaker has only one sister (or at least only one sister relevant to the discourse);
the fact that she lives in Chicago is incidental information. The second sentence implies that the speaker has more
than one sister relevant to the discourse, one of whom lives in Chicago; the fact that she lives in Chicago is a way of
distinguishing her from the other sisters, rather than just giving extra incidental information.
6.	The last sentence (with the reason fir which) appears to be the most formal. The next most formal is the second
sentence (with the reason why). The other two seem the least formal, with the first sentence (with why) occurring
more frequently than the third (with the reason).
What we want is complete compliance.
More environmental oversight is what this town needs.
It's the coach who calls the shots.
Up the hill they ran.
You’re wrong. The Mets did win the game.
The author himself was surprised by the acclaim his book received.
She drew on her own assets to run for election.
Chapter 30: Focus and Emphasis
1.	a. wh-cleft
b.	reverse ๗“cleft
c.	fr-cleft
d.	fronting of a directional adverbial
e.	emphatic do
f.	emphatic reflexive
g.	emphatic possessive
2.	a. The adverbial of position on his car has been fronted in this sentence, but the copula be is ungrammatical in
sentence-final position. Thus subject/auxiliary inversion must take place to produce:
On his car is a bumper sticker:...
b.	A wh-cleft requires some form of be after the wh -phrase; thus, the sentence should read: “What we meant to
say was/is we are sorry.”
c.	He cannot be used in fronting a cleft construction. Only it can be used as a pronoun in an zt-cleft construction.
3.	a. This could be either a cleft sentence or a sentence with a relative clause. If it is a cleft sentence, we understand
that the speaker is underscoring the fact that the graduate student corrects the papers; the professor doesn’t. If
it is a sentence with a relative clause, we understand that we are singling out the graduate student who corrects
the papers in our class from all other graduate students.
b. The ambiguity involves the antecedent of himself. Does himself emphasize our chairman (acting on his own)
or the dean (someone presumably above reproach)? Of course, if the dean were known to be a woman, the
ambiguity would not be there.
4.	a. This is a sentence with a free relative. In ๗-clefts, the ๗-word requires a form of be after an intial wh-cleft or
before a reverse wh-cleft. Free relatives do not require an extra be form and the wh-word can be paraphrased as
“the thing that” or “the person who.”
b.	This is a reverse ๗-cleft. The emphasis is on the NP that follows the extra form of be. Notice that this is an
emphatic counterpart to the neutral sentence: He told a big lie.
c.	This is a sentence with a free relative. What follows the be does not identify “what he said” but merely is part of
the predicate for the relativized subject. Furthermore, this could not come from the neutral sentence:
*He said of little concern to US.
Also, “the thing that” is a good paraphrase of “what.”
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
871
d.	This is a wh-cleft. What follows the extra form of be is emphasized. We can easily reconstruct an equivalent
neutral sentence:
He said that you are a good friend.
5.	a. When a negative preverbal adverb of frequency is fronted, subject-auxiliary inversion must take place. This
sentence should be:
Never have I tasted such a delicious sandwich!
b.	This is an incorrect form of a wh-cleft. The emphatic constituent following the extra be form is not a person;
therefore the wh-พord should not be who. The wh-word should be what instead:
What you mean is that Oscar did it.
c.	When a participle phrase is fronted, subject-operator inversion is required:
Sitting on the front porch was my long-lost brother.
6.	Do on your own. Answers will vary.
7.	a. Sentence (1) is the emphatic or ๗-cleft equivalent of sentence (2). One could imagine (1) being said after the
speaker had already said (2), and the listener then asked for repetition.
b.	In sentence (2), the adverbial has been fronted as compared with sentence (1). In sentence (2) the delayed
subject receives more focus than the normal subject does in sentence (1). Gary (1974) suggests that a sentence
like (2) would be more apt to be chosen when the speaker or writer has made the listener or reader expect that
someone other than the missing child would be standing in the corner.
c.	Sentence (1) is a normal affirmative imperative; sentence (2) is an imperative with emphatic do. The do receives
strong stress and gives positive emphasis to the invitation.
d.	Sentence (2) contains emphatic own before the object NP; sentence (1) is unmarked in this respect. One
could imagine sentence (2) being uttered in a context in which the speaker was annoyed that Jim was always
borrowing the speaker’s (or someone else’s) book rather than having his own book.
Chapter 31 ะ Complementation
1.	a. complement
b.	complementizer
c.	tensed àt-clause complement
d.	subjunctive complement
e.	infinitive complement
f.	gerund complement
g.	subject 4 participle construction
h.	purpose infinitive
i.	the Bolinger principle
(for gerunds vs. infinitives)
2.	a.	ร
John thinks that Bob is fiinny.
John thinks that Bob is funny.
Everyone knows that the earth is round.
I demanded that he go there.
He wanted to see them.
I enjoy reading spy novels.
I saw Tohn crossing the street.
We stopped to see my cousin.
I remembered to tell him that he didn’t pass,
[remembering occurs before telling]
I remembered telling him that he didn’t pass,
[remembering occurs after telling]
N
John
The Grammar Book
2.	b.
ร
SUBJ
NP
PRED
suggest
comp
that
attempt-type infinitive (same subject)
tensed that-clause
tensed thak-clause
advise-type infinitive (รา object = S2 subject)
object +prep./n + gerund
3.	a. The verb.2Dant requires an infinitival complement; it cannot take a àt-complement. (i.e., I want my brother to
come home for New Year's.)
b.	The verb insist requires a àt-clause complement—in this case, a subjunctive complement, (i.e., My friends
insisted that I come with them.)
c.	The verb force, although it is a semantically highly manipulative verb, requires a ίο-infinitive as its complement,
(i.e., The teacher forced US to drink hot chocolate.)
d.	The verb understand falls into the believe-typs class of verbs, not the want-class. It requires either a tensed that-
complement or an infinitival complement with myself instead of for me. (i.e., 1 understood that I was the winner./l
understood myself to be the winner.)
e.	The word over is a preposition that requires an NP object. Only a gerund can appear as the object of a
preposition; therefore, the required form is going, not to go. (i.e., They disagreed over going to the movies.)
4.	Agree:
She agreed to make a salad.
She agreed that she would make a salad.
Argue:
They argued that nothing could be done.
Assist:
They assisted me to climb the stairs.
They assisted me in climbing the stairs.
Beg:
They begged Mr. Day to give easier homework.	advise-type infinitive (SI obj = S2 subject)
They begged to enter the castle.
Dare:
Will you dare to jump over the canyon?
Keep:
They kept me waiting.
They kept making me wait.
Notice:
John noticed that Mary was running.
John noticed Mary running.
attempt-type infinitive (same subject)
attempt-type infinitive (same subj)
subject-participle construction
gerund complement
tensed that-clause
subject-participle construction
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
873
Resist:
He couldn't resist eating more chocolate. gerund complement
Suspect:
The police suspected that John was guilty. tensed that-clause
5.	The essential informational difference between try to + V and fry v+ -ing is that with the infinitive, the action
referred to is generally thought not to actually happen, while with the gerund, it does—even if for only a short
duration. Teachers can exploit these differences within single sentences by juxtaposing situations where someone
tried to + V but did not try v+ -ing. For instance,
I tried to learn bungee jumping, but I never actually tried doing it.
Since listeners will not wish to accept a contradiction in meaning here—and many will think there is, in fact, a
contradiction—they will likely seek the only interpretations of try in which the entire sentence could be true.
Other sequences can be presented to students where two clauses are coordinated, and where the second clause
clearly indicates whether the action was hypothetical or fulfilled:
You can try to open this lock, but you won't succeed.
You can try opening this lock; then you can see what's inside the box.
I tried to work on my car, but I just couldn't get started.
I tried working on my car, but I got tired halfway through the job.
After looking at such examples, students can get together in groups and make lists of things which they have tried to
do but not actually tried doing. This may be largely a list of their own heroic failures! It will include (perhaps) schools
to which they have applied but at which they have not been accepted, sports that were too formidable to engage
in, long-term projects that either were or were not ever begun, and so on. It may also simply be a recent school
assignment. The students can then read their lists to the class as a whole.
6.	From the first sentence, most native speakers get the idea that the students in question engaged in a discrete
act with a beginning and an end—the act of drawing pictures from beginning to end, i.e., the pictures were
finished. From the second sentence, we get instead a picture of students in the process of drawing pictures, with no
commitment as to whether the pictures necessarily were completed. The student can be told that the difference is
mainly one of what is focused on—the completed act or the process.
7.	In I expect to leave by 4:15, a speaker may be focusing on the exact moment of four o’clock and intends to convey,
“When the clock strikes four-fifteen, I will leave.” It might also be possible to mean, “At the point when the clock
strikes four-fifteen, or at some point before that, I will leave.” In I expect to have left by 4:15, a speaker conveys the idea,
“When the clock strikes four-fifteen, you will not find me there: I will already be gone.” Thus the crucial difference
lies in the question of whether the speaker may be leaving, or will definitely have left a certain place at 4:15.
8.	This strategy may have some value as a heuristic strategy at lower levels of instruction to get students using a large
percentage of verbs with the correct complements. The reason is that -ing complements are the least common
type of clausal complement. However, as this chapter has shown, the facts of English complementation are not this
simple. First, many verbs can take either a gerund or an infinitive complement, as with the verb try in Exercise 5
above, and as with continue, begin, like, regret, and many others. Second, many verbs take neither infinitive nor
gerund but instead ito-complements. Finally, there are a variety of infinitive types that may be unnecessarily
confused if infinitive complements are all lumped together in one category.
9.	a. The error in this case is a natural one since there are both syntactic and semantic reasons for adding a to to the
sentences. The student may be following the pattern of verbs like force or cause, both manipulative verbs which
take ίο-complements. But in the case of the verbs make, let, and have, no to is possible. Students might be told
that no to occurs mostly when there is a closely interactive relationship between two persons—where both are
intimately engaged in the fulfillment of an event. Then, verbs like force and cause might be presented as more
the exceptional cases—where close interaction is present, but where to is present (given that make, let, and have
are much more frequent).
b.	This error is very likely a transfer error from certain languages that permit two constituents in the initial
complementizer position of sentences. A student can be told simply that English does not permit two
complementizers (i.e., words of this sort) at the beginning of the sentence and that the student should choose
the more descriptive of the two words—in this case, the word where, which conveys place. (In contrast, that is
more or less semantically empty.)
c.	This is an extremely common error. English has [V T -Zi2g] patterns with go like the following:
We will go swimming.
They went singing through the streets.
English also has purpose infinitive—V + infinitive—patterns like the following:
We will go to the stockbroker to check on our investments.
We will go overseas to visit our parents.
The Grammar Book
The student may be blending these two patterns and producing ungrammatical sentences. In this case,
students can be told that where they are expressing a purpose, theyshould use an infinitive. Also, the use of the
preposition for + gerund rather than to + base form may be due to LI transfer. They might also be told to test
what they are saying by asking themselves whether in order to would fit in the place of the simple infinitive of
purpose.
d.	Such errors might be addressed in terms of the redundancy present in them. By saying that the officer
demanded something, it follows that I had to do something, since police officers are normally authorized to
demand certain types of behavior of people. Deleting the 'had to’ in the complement avoids saying the same
thing twice:
The officer demanded that I show him my license.
Chapter 32: Other Aspects of Complementation and Embedded Clauses		
1. a.	subject raising	(It seems John is sick today) —> Tohn seems to be sick today. [lower subject becomes higher subject]
b.	complex NP	The landlord threw the tenants out due to the fact that they were making too much noise.
c.	adjective complement	She is willing to help US out today.
d.	clausal subject	To do that now would be a mistake. That she couldn’t make the trip disappointed everyone.
e.	extraposition	[That he won’t give US better leads] is too bad -» It is too bad [that he won’t give us better leads].
f.	easy-to-please constructions	(It’s hard to crack black walnuts') —- Black walnuts are hard to crack. [lower object becomes higher subject]
ร-	complex passive	It is believed that the swindler has escaped to France. It would be a shame for this painting to be ignored.
b.	factive verb	We noticed that John had bought a new car.
2. a. This sentence can be corrected by raising John to subject (i.e., John seems to be a successful businessman.).
Alternatively, It seems that John is a successful businessman is the correct form if raising does not take place
(add it as subject).
b.	The prepositional construction due to requires an NP object complement. In this sentence, a full clause
erroneously takes the place of an NP (i.e., due to its cost) would satisfy the structural requirement here.
c.	The problem here seems to be that there are two constituents in subject position—the infinitive and the
semantically empty it. Either the infinitive must be extraposed (It’s interesting to watch Tanya skate.), or the it
must be deleted (To watch Tanya skate is interesting.).
d.	When a tensed ite-clause appears in subject position, it is not possible to delete the complementizer; that must
be present in the surface form of the sentence: That nobody ever complains...
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
875
3. b.
ร
SUBJ
PRED
NP	AUX	VP
NP
det N
the idea
comp
that
ADJ
preposterous
4.	a. The teacher can point out to the student that in English, (i) every clause with a tense has an expressed
subject, or (ii) every main clause has an expressed subject. Since the student will probably recognize that the
word it contributes little if anything to the meaning of the sentence, the teacher can exploit this knowledge
in explaining that the subject requirement is so strong that even where the full meaning of the sentence is
conveyed without a lexical subject, a subject must be “brought in from outside” to fulfill the requirement (i.e., It
is not true that Olivia...).
b.	There is a strong likelihood that the student is producing this pattern along the analogy of grammatical
sentences like I vias happy to see my friend. In view of that, a teacher might set the two types of sentences side by
side and contrast them, asking the following questions:
?was easy to walk that far.
Question: Who or what was easy? Answer: Walking was easy.
?was happy to see my friend.
Question: Who or what was happy? Answer:/was happy.
The semantic differences associated with the two constructions should then be clear.
Part of the reason such sentences are produced may be that English pronouns are nearly always unstressed.
This means that when a nonnative speaker hears native speakers produce the sentence I thought it was easy
to walk that far, the learner may hear I where the native speaker says it. A teacher might then contrast for
the student the phonetic difference between the two words in such contexts: if the word were I, it would be
pronounced quickly as [ai] or [a], while the word it would be pronounced as a quick reduced [it] or [st].
c.	One possibility is for the teacher to point out the similarity of this sentence to what one usually finds in passive
constructions—which makes the student’s error look somewhat logical. Both here and in passives, an NP that is
not an agent—not a performer of an action—is being put in subject position. However, the subject constituents
originated in different types of syntactic construction. The student can be shown the equivalent paraphrase
without the object-to-subject raising: It is boring to watch this kind of movie·, the student will probably recognize
that it is not possible to say *It is boring to be^watched this kind of movie. Then the student can be told that
whenever he/she produces this construction, he/she should also be able to produce the other.
5.	One other way would be to try to substitute the relative pronoun which or who(m) for that. Compare:
We saw clouds that looked like feathers. (... which looked like feathers.)
We heard the news that rain was coming.^...which rain was coming.)
Another way would be to isolate the embedded clause and try substituting a pronoun like it/he/she/they for that. The
results should work for the relative clause but not for the complex NP clause:
They looked like feathers.
(*lt/*He/*She/*They) rain was coming.
The Grammar Book
6.	The verb see, as normally used, in a case like (a), is factive. To consider another case, if someone says, “Today I saw
the president on the White House lawn,” another person who knows of the president’s whereabouts might answer,
“No, you didn’t see him in Washington, because the newspaper says he’s in Japan this week. You thought you saw
him.” This is a standard test for factivity.
However, it is common to speak of drunken or delirious people “seeing things” like snakes, as in sentence (b).
Perhaps because we are not talking of a “normal” state of consciousness, the normal factive quality of the verb
seems to be suspended and the verb is non-factive.
One use of the verb understand, as in sentence (c), seems factive. Consider this case; If someone says, “I now
understand that the earth is flat after all,” a likely answer would be, “No, you don’t understand that, because the
earth isn’t flat.” If the first person later changes his/her mind, he/she would likely say, “I thought I understood that
the earth was flat, but I was wrong.” (It would be far less likely to hear him/her say, “I used to understand that the
earth is flat.”)
At the same time, it is common to report on what one has heard someone say in terms of what one has
“understood,” as in sentence (d). It is a common hedging device to say things like, “I understood Sheila to say that
she was from Houston; did I hear her correctly?” It leaves open the possibility that the speaker may have been
mistaken about what Sheila said. In this use, understand might be taken to be nonfactive.
Chapter 33: Reported Speech and Writing
1. a. reported ito-clause
b.	indirect imperative
c.	indirect ๗-question
d.	indirectyes/no question
e.	backshifting
deictic time-adverbial shift
g.	deictic place-adverbial shift
h.	deictic pronoun shift
I. reporting noun
j.	factive reporting verb
k.	nonfactive reporting verb
l.	emotional-state reporting verb
[ท. free indirect discourse
ท. zero-quotative
f.
The president announced that taxes would be cut this year.
The teacher said to finish the homework by Monday.
My friend wanted to know how much the car cost.
My friend wanted to know if the car had air bags.
(“Do you have time to help me?”)
—> She asked me whether I had time to help her.
(“Do you have time now?”) —> She asked me if I had time then.
(“Can you come over here?”) —> He asked me if I could go over there.
(“Are you busy?”) —> She asked me if I was busy.
The reporter’s claim that the couple was marrying was false.
Most people have understood that the globe is getting warmer.
Meteorologists have argued that the globe is getting warmer.
My friend complained that it was getting hotter every year in the summer.
She said to me, why should she be the one to ask the question first?
“Do you want to meet after class?” “Sure, why not.” “Then where are we
going to go?” “I don’t know, you tell me.”
SUBJ
NP
det	N
this	book
PRED
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
877
2. b.
ร
det
the
SUBJ
PRED
NP
N
AUX
V
NP
author -pres

ร
SUBJ
NP


SUBJ
NP
SUBJ
PRED
NP


AUX

VP
-pres have show -en
NP
NP
ร
ร
PRED
ADVL
N
PrepP
the reason
NP
N
for which
NP AUX
SÚBJ PRED
det N
which

VP
AUX
perf V
PRED


NP
-past have see -en
N
John
NP	1
I ki 1 "
|\ prep
human -pl J dei
The Grammar Book
3.	a. In Standard English, indirect questions require normal, uninverted subject-verb-object word order. The
sentence as written exhibits main-clause question word order, in which subject-operator inversion has applied.
Instead it should be ะ
We were asked if we had the time.
b.	The verb inform requires a àr-clause complement, not an infinitival one. The verb have, therefore, needs to be
inflected (ithat his license has expired).
c.	The choice of infinitive complement is correct, but the speaker/writer has inserted a tense-carrying do into the
infinitive; infinitives are tenseless and do not take do support. The correct form is to not shop at another store.
d.	English permits only one complementizer per clause. Here, two complementizers have been chosen ('whether
and that). The correct one to use here is whether.
4.	The intended interpretation of the first sentence is that Smith believes that no alternative to petroleum exists and
the interpretation of the second is that Smith thinks DNA cannot account for the facts in question. However, in
each sentence two reporting devices are used. This makes it seem as if Smith and he are two different persons and
that Smith is reporting on what the second man believes or has said. Each sentence therefore sounds like a “report-
on-a-report,” but this is not likely to be the intention of the writer of the report.
There are at least two possible explanations for the fact that it sounds more acceptable to see in his opinion
following the say/be/ieve~attribution. One explanation is that the original quotation began, “In my opinion ... in
that case, the expression in his opinion constitutes a paraphrase of his exact words. A second possibility is that this
is an example of “free indirect discourse,” in which case the paraphraser is “taking on the identity” of Smith in a
semi-indirect, semi-direct fashion, and expressing what he believes is Smith's opinion. The final sentence avoids
the problem in the first two by indirectly reporting exactly what Smith said; however, in such paraphrase “in his
opinion” could be deleted or incorporated into the reporting phrase: In Smith's opinion, DNA cannot account for these
facts./It is Smith k opinion that DNA cannot account for these facts.
5.	The difference is that in the first sentence, one is projecting forward from the time of speaking, while in the second,
one is projecting forward from a point in the past that has already been established in prior discourse. Thus, next
week is in the real future from the point of view of the speaker/writer; for that person, next week has not occurred
yet. The nextweek may or may not be in the real future for the speaker/writer, depending on how far distant in the
past the established reference point is; if this point is (say) a month previous to the moment of utterance, then the
next week is already three weeks past.
6.	One possibility is to do recorded interviews of native speakers talking about conversations they have had about their
own or others’ plans, asking them to recount as fully as possible what these plans were. This may elicit the desired
type of structures. A more direct method would be to record news broadcasts of newscasters talking about events;
some of these events should be in the past, and some of them should be projected in the future by the newscaster.
The researcher should then have native speakers watch these broadcasts and have the respondents give as full an
accounting as possible of what they heard the newscasters say. The following time-categories should be looked for:
a.	events in the past for both newscaster(s) and your native-speaker reporter
b.	events in the future for the newscaster(s) and in the past for the reporter
c.	event in the future for both newscaster(s) and reporter
In looking at the data given by respondents, the researcher should see whether the sequence-of-tenses rules are
followed consistently across all three categories. If they are not followed consistently, the researcher should check to
see whether some pattern exists in the inconsistencies. It may be that the respondents exhibit a tendency to pattern
certain tenses with certain types of verbs. It may be that the respondents fail to follow the rules in just those cases
listed in this chapter as exceptions—where general truths are expressed, for example. It may be that the researcher
can detect inconsistencies wherever a respondent seems to exhibit excitement or other emotional involvement in
making a report. It may be that no pattern at all can be detected—that there may seem to be “free variation.” It is
certainly possible that previously undiscovered patterns, together with explanations for them, may emerge from a
data-based study of this type.
7.	a. There are two problems in this sentence. The first is that the predicate be not sure takes a whether/if complement
(I'm not sure /..); the second problem is the missing subject (probably “I”) in the embedded yes/no question,
which should appear after the //complementizer: I can go or not, since it needs to follow statement word order,
i.e., Tm not sure if I can go or not.
b. That introduces an indirect declarative and cannot be followed by a ๗-question word such as how. In addition,
the verb ask must be followed by a subjunctive that complement (e.g., My mother asked that I plan to raise my
grades). If, instead, the learner intended to produce an embedded question beginning with how, that should be
deleted leaving the ๗-พord in the complementizer position. A tense or modal must also be added, e.g.,
My mother asked how I
could plan]
. f to raise my grades,
planned I
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
879
c.	The verb insist takes a subjunctive complement, not an infinitive complement. The correct form is My father
insisted (that) I work harder.
d.	Only indirect quotations are introduced by that. This is a fully direct quotation and so the that needs to be deleted.
e.	The verb tell cannot take an indirect object with io; only a simple NP recipient may follow tell. Sequence-of-
tenses would also seem to dictate that now be replaced with at that time or the like. (I told him that it wouldn't be
possible then.)
8.	This student is careful to indicate that all of the information reported on comes directly from Mr. Walter’s article.
In that respect, it is a competent paraphrase/summary. However, it can be explained to the student that the number
of overt citations can be cut back considerably without losing the sense that citation is taking place. For example,
the third sentence, He tells 'แร that there are several reasons for this, can be simplified as He gives US three reasons. Then,
these three reasons can be enumerated without any explicit reference to Walter; readers of the paraphrase/summary
will properly infer that the reasons are Walter’s, not those of the student, since any alternative interpretation would
be unreasonable in the context of the paraphrase. The writer can then be advised to return to a direct reference to
Walter in the last sentence.
9.	Do on your own. Answers will vary.
Chapter 34: Degree—Comparatives and Equatives
a.
b.
ci.
Sam has more clothes than Evelyn.
He has as many clothes as Ben.
Margaret sings better than her brother.
That’s a beautiful painting.
f.
g·
a.
the comparative construction
the equative construction
irregular comparative adverb
absolute use of an adjective
use of an adverb to express degree The “bullet” train travels faster than any other train in Japan.
correlative comparative	The bigger they are, the harder they fall.
unmarked comparative adjective How old is your daughter?
The ambiguity comes from the fact that there is a reduced clause following the complementizer than. The full
clause could be either;
Phyllis likes Carol more than Sue likes Carol.
or
Phyllis likes Carol more than Phyllis likes Sue.
b. The ambiguity derives from the two possible meanings of the phrase as well as. It could be expressing the
degree of similarity in their teaching ability; that is, both Mark and Ralph teach Sam equally well. As well as
could also mean in addition to, which in turn has two possible readings:
Mark teaches Sam. In addition, Ralph teaches Sam.
Mark teaches Sam. เท addition, Mark teaches Ralph.
3. a. adverb
b.	determiner two
c.	noun oranges
d.	verb costs
e.	adjective interesting
4.	Less is a marked form that often sounds rather awkward. The usual way to avoid it is to use the negative polarity
form with the comparative when such a form is available—in this case, the adverb worse:
Joan sings worse than Sally.
or to use a negative equative in order to soften the message:
Joan doesn't sing as well as Sally.
Another possibility is to make Sally the subject of the sentence and to use a positive polarity adverb (this would be
the least marked form):
Sally sings better than Joan,
5.	a. Since short is a one-syllable adjective, the -er suffix should be used when making comparisons: shorter rather
than more short.
b.	Better is the irregular comparative form of the adjective good. There is no need for more, since it unnecessarily
and incorrectly marks the comparative a second time.
c.	This comparative construction is incomplete. While than is present, the sentence contains neither -er nor more.
Two-syllable adjectives ending in -y, like lucky, take the -er suffix in the comparative; that is, lucky should be luckier.
d.	The equative construction (as Xas) and the comparative (more X than, or X-er than) have been confused. The
negative equative construction here should be not as X as, instead of not as X *than. Thus the construction
should read “not as realistic as.”
e.	The structure of the reduced clause must be parallel to that of the main clause. Adding the demonstrative those
to the reduced clause will bring about the necessary parallelism and thus achieve grammaticality:
The newspapers in Los Angeles have better international coverage than those เท San Diego.
The Grammar Book
6.	Do on your own. Answers will vary.
7.	Form (a), where the comparative construction has been derived from a restrictive relative clause, we understand
that Herbert’s intelligence is being compared with that of certain monkeys. However, sentence (a) does not imply
that Herbert himself is a monkey.
One interpretation of (b) is that the speaker has seen other monkeys that are more intelligent than the monkey
known as Herbert. Another interpretation is that both the speaker and Herbert have seen monkeys but that the
speaker has seen more intelligent monkeys than Herbert has seen. In fact, even the phrase more intelligent monkeys is
ambiguous in (b). It could refer either to the number of intelligent monkeys or to their degree of intelligence.
s. The decision whether to use more or -er is very complicated. The rules outlined in this chapter would lead one to
expect that loyal should be made comparative with a preceding more. However, it is possible that in the interests of
parallelism with smart, the author chose to use the affix -er with loyal. Since there are many two-syllable adjectives
that can take either -er or more, there is considerable variation—and some aesthetic license—involved in such
decisions.
9. In line 2, larger, older, and shorter are all comparative adjectives.
In line 3, sooner is a comparative adverb.
In line 4, more than 30 countries- the determiner 30 is being compared.
In line 6, (a) as effective as is an adjective equative construction, and
(b) smaller is a comparative adjective.
In line 7, smaller is a comparative adjective.
In line 8, (a) as student-centered as is a compound adjective equative.
(b) smaller is a comparative adjective.
In line 9, more explicitly and routinely is a compound comparative adverb.
Chapter 35: Degree—Complements and Superlatives
1.	a. a comparative used in a superlative sense
b.	the negative implication of too (much/little)
c.	intensifying, nonsuperlative use of most
d.	a marked superlative
e.	absolute use of too
f.	comparative and superlative uses of lesser
This is a longer Indian summer than any other on record.
It was such an old bridge that it couldn’t support vehicles.
—- The bridge was too old to support vehicles.
The fireworks made for a most dazzling spectacle.
This is the shallowest part of the river.
I don’t care too much for their attitude.
Comparative: A lesser mind could not have accomplished
Einstein did.
Superlative: The compromise was the lesser evil.
(among many evils)
2.	a. If we wish to say that she is the cause of the boredom, we would say most boring. Boring is a two-syllable
adjective that takes most to form the superlative construction.
But if we wish to say that she is the experiencer of the boredom, we would say most bored. Most adjectives
ending in derivational suffixes use most in the superlative construction rather than -er.
b. The speaker has added the superlative suffix -est to an adverb/adjective that is already in the comparative
form with an -er ending. The -est should be added to base form. Here this would give US farthest and eldest. In
addition, furthest and oldest would probably be used more frequently these days.
3.	a. More should be used here. Even though there are three people involved, Alex is being compared with the other
two together; that is, he has financial problems but they don’t, since they each have more money than Alex.
b. The best would probably be used here. Sheila is at the “top of the scale” of 5 candidates. Notice, however, that
the comparative form would be appropriate if Sheila were being compared with the other candidates as a group:
Of the five candidates for president, 1 voted for Sheila because I definitely think she's better than
the others.
the rest.
c. Either form could be used here. The difference would be whether the speaker found his or her choice superior
to the other books along an interest scale (in which case the superlative form would be appropriate) or whether
the speaker was comparing his or her choice with all the other books as a group for the quality of “interesting”
(in which case the comparative form would be correct).
4.	Very is an intensifier that may or may not have a negative connotation, depending on the intonation. Too is a degree
complement that expresses the idea of “excess” and thus has a firm negative connotation.
5.	a. The error is in the use of the comparative form older, where the superlative form oldest is more appropriate. The
use of the superlative form oldest follows the definite article and indicates that Joe is at the extreme of the scale
for age of the children in his big family (i.e, more than two or three children).
Suggested Answers to Chapter Exercises
881
b.	The periphrastic superlative most has been used where the superlative suffix -est is required on a one-syllable
adjective like cold (i.e., February is the coldest 'month in my country.).
c.	The syntactic context (a preceding the) and the semantic context (an indication that something is first on a scale
of importance) necessitate the use of a superlative form:
The first and most important thing ...
d.	The student has incorrectly used the superlative form of this irregular adjective. The comparative form worse is
required here.
e.	The student has used too, which is used to express excess, when the semantic context (the positively evaluative
adjective tasty) suggests that the intensifier very is what is intended. This may be due to overgeneralization from
the colloquial use of too as a counterpart to very in negative contexts. Note that very exaggerated intonation
could also make the utterance acceptable in some colloquial contexts, but the more common usage should be
emphasized with students.
6.	If you agree with US that comparatives and superlatives are quite different syntactically and semantically, you may
choose to teach the comparative form at one time and then come back to the superlative form at a later time. This
problem is greatest if your students speak languages without morphologically distinct comparative and superlative
forms. Finally, the forms should be contrasted.
7.	As we have tried to indicate, this is an oversimplification of the difference between comparatives and superlatives.
Whether a speaker chooses to use a comparative or superlative to a large extent depends upon the speaker’s
perspective, not upon the number of things/people being compared.
8.	Safire is perhaps making the point that the rules of superlative formation are complicated, variable, and not
universally adhered to and therefore can be violated when an author is striving to achieve a certain effect. Note that
he quotes writers, who did most of their work in the 19th century (the language is changing), and that Twain was a
humorist, who frequently engaged in language play.
Chapter 36: Conclusion
(No exercises)
The Grammar Book
Index of Names
Note: The symbol
Abbott, B., 472,478-479
Abbott, G., 265
Abramson, R., 100
Acldes, N. A., 158
Ahlers, E., 473-474, 478
Ahmad, บ., 236, 244
Aijmer,K., 517-518, 537
Aildienvald, A. Y., 231,243-244, 705
Akmajian, A., 705, 727
Alejo-González, R., 451, 459
Alexander, L. G, 74
Algeo, J., 15,270,277
Allen, J. p. B., 25, 31
Allerton, D. J., 277, 279n2
Amuzie, G., 284, 301
Andersen, R., 119,132,135n7,
326-327
Anderson, J. I., 680, 704
Anderwald, L., 191, 205
Aniya, ร., 479
Ariel,M., 288, 301,312, 327, 348,
802,811
Asher, J., 241, 243 '.-f
Athanasiadou, A., 603
Atkinson, D., 49, 53
Axelsson, K., 278
Baayen, R. H., 382, 384, 389
Baba, Y., 404, 412
Badalamenti, V, 70, 73-74, 132,134,
135n2,153, 157-158,207,244,
329, 348, 391,439,476,478-479,
603,785, 789-790,812
Bailey, c. J., 197,205
Bailey, K.M., 176,407,411,
477
Baker, c. L., 506, 629, 727, 729n6
Baker, M., 393, 411
Baker, z., 762
Balfour, G, 789, 791nl2
Baltin, M., 727
Banks, D, 362, 369
Baratta,A., 364-365, 369
Barbaresi, L., 517, 536
Barber, E.J.W., 357, 369
Barbieri, E, 49, 53
Bardovi-Harlig, K., 120, 132
Barth-Weingarten, D., 562, 571
Batstone, R., 172,180 755-756, 762
Bayer, ร., 505, 5O7nl
Bayley, R., 629
Beckett, M., 229, 230n5
Bedell, M.,325
Beebe, L., 239, 243
Behre, E, 348
Beitel, D. A., 438
"ท" means that the information is in an endnote rather than in the main text.
Belilah, H., 259-260, 264
Bennett, K., 760, 762
Bennett, T. L., 180, 182n3-4
Benor, ร., 55
Benson, B., 348,479, 506
Berg, T., 369
Bergen, B., 467, 478
Bergs, A., 109,132
Berlage, E., 322, 328-329, 330nl6
Berry, R., 298, 301,303
Bevington, G., 217, 228
Bhimiji,E, 172-173,180
Biber, D., 147,151,157,159n8,
193, 205, 268, 277, 292, 296, 301,
312, 314-315, 320-322, 327-328,
330n7, 334-335, 338-339, 347,
384, 389, 394,411, 417, 437, 443,
452,454,459,492,	505, 509-510,
512,514,516-517,519, 521,529,
536, 538n8, 543, 561-562, 571,
578,592,596, 601-602, 604n9,
616-620, 622-624, 628, 642-643,
646-647, 653, 659,663,668-670,
675, 677n8, 681, 690, 697-699,
702,704-705,710-711,719,
727-728,754,762,812
Bigelow, M., 13, 15n4
Binnick, R., 134
Birner, B. J., 472,479, 666-667,
675-676
Bitchener, J., 281, 301
Blake, B., 88
Blakemore, D., 492, 496^-97,
505-506,552,571-572
Bland, ร. L., 537,630,654, 764
Blass, L., 705
Bloch, J., 763
Block,}., 763
Bloom, L., 194,205
Bock, K., 73, 75nll, 334-335, 347,
349n7
Boers, E, 419, 437, 451,455,459
Bolden, G. B., 506
Bolinger, D., 40, 53, 55,216, 228,
233, 243, 264, 285, 301, 340, 347,
395-396, 400-401,411-412,
413n6, 447^4-8,459,461n2,
465,470-472,478,693-694, 698,
701-702, 704, 717, 727, 745, 762,
767,789,812
Bolton, K., 565, 571, 573nl2
Bonner, M., 454,459
Borg, ร., 7,12
Borge, ร., 259, 264
Borsley, R. D., 230
Bouchard, D., 412
Bouscaren, J., 144—145, 157
Bowen, J. D., 158
Boyd, J. K., 411,412n3
Brady, B., 789
Breban, T., 329
Breivik, L·, 468,470,478
Brems, L., 342, 347, 349nl7
Bresnan, J., 382, 384-385, 389,
391, 660,675,677n6-7,
790
Briggs, S.L., 56,638,653, 762
Brindley, G., 210, 229
Brinton, D., 103,174, 180, 269-270,
277-278, 459, 461n6, 770, 789,
811, 813n4
Brown, c., 55,110, 133, 269, 271,
275,277
Brown, G., 329
Brown, J. D., 15
Browne, พ., 774, 789
Brugman, c., 438
Budgell, B., 364, 369
Bull, WE., 161-165,180
Bunting, J., 728
Büring, D., 677
Burrough-Boenisch,}., 174, 180
Burrows, A., 55,103
Burt, M., 326-327
Burton-Roberts, N., 88
Busuttil, p., 158
Butler, Y. G., 284, 292, 298, 301
Butoyi, c., 680, 704
Butterfield, ร., 73, 75nll, 334-335,
347
Butterworth, T, 408
Buysschaert, J., 537
Buysse, L., 497, 505
Buzarovska, E., 354, 358, 369
Bybee, J., 13,33,53,158,207
Bygate, M., 14
Byrd, p., 348, 479, 506
Cabredo Hofherr, p., 412
Cain, J., 630
Cake, c. D., 158, 329, 348, 370,
391,572,603,654,677,705,
728,764
Calude, A., 668, 675
Cameron, D., 281, 301
Cameron, L., 10,12, 816, 818
Campbell, C., 219, 229
Cancino, H., 183, 205
Capelle, B., 774, 789
Carlisi, K., 134, 207, 244, 370, 412,
460,787,789-790,812
Carlson, G.N., 293, 302
883
Carnie, A., 88
Carrell, p., 238-239, 243, 244n3
Carter, R, 31,49, 53, 55, 115, 132,
172,181,329,357, 309, 578, 586,
594, 601-602, 604nl0, 705, 774,
789-790, 807,811-812,
816-817
Carterette, E., 145,157, 269, 277
Celce-Murcia, M., 14, 103, 170-171,
176,180-181,269-270,277-278,
324, 327, 335, 347, 352, 369,468,
478,499-500,505,554,571,
573n7, 768, 770, 789-790, 7911111,
807, 811-812,813n4
Celle, A., 115,132
Chafe, พ, 165,180,200,205,465,
471,478,516, 536
Chalker, ร., 21, 31, 216, 220, 228,
397-398,401,411
Chan, A., 73, 259, 264, 680, 704,
708,727
Chan, M., 57, 73
Chandler,}., 281, 301
Chang, Y-Y, 236, 244
Chapman, D., 207
Chavez, D., 236, 244
Chen, c. พ., 554-555, 563-565, 571,
573n7
Chen, z., 778-779, 789
Cheng, L. L.S., 264, 265n2
Cheshire,}., 166, 180
Chesterman, A., 295, 301
Chiang, D., 629
Chierchia, G., 293, 302
Chik, c., 75nl3
Chisolm, พ.}ท, 264
Chomsky, N., 357, 369
Christiansen, M., 613, 629
Christopherson, p., 285-287, 301,
303
Chuquet,}., 144-145, 157
Cinque, G., 397, 411
Clark, Η. H., 764
Clark, R., 55,103, 244, 459, 461n2
Clarke, D. D., 460
Clift, R., 750, 762-763
Close, R. A., 205, 208n5, 530, 536
Coady,}., 55
Coates,}., 158
Cobb, T., 56, 435, 538n9
Coceram, D., 762
Colieman, T., 3 90	V-,
Collins, L., 105,120,130-132
Collins, p., 158,236-237,243,663,
668,670,675-676
Comrie, B., 133-134, 374, 390, 607,
628-629, 763
Conrad, ร., 147,157,193,205,268,
277,292,301,312,-327-328,
334-335, 347, 384, 389, 394,411,
417,437,443,459,492,	505, 509,
536,543,555,571,578,601-602,
616, 623-624, 628, 642, 653, 659,
675,681, 704-705, 710, 727-728,
754,762,812
Cook, F., 130
Cook, V.}., 815, 817
Coppock, E., 376, 389
Cornell, A., 461
Cornish, E, 327, 330nll
Cortes, V, 317, 327
Corver, N., 264, 265n2
Coulmas, E, 763
Couper-Kuhlen, E., 215, 228, 264,
265nl, 272,277, 562, 571
Covitt, R., 301, 3O3nl, 575, 601
Cowan, R., 14
Coxhead, A., 56
Cran, p. D., 181
Crawford, พ., 69, 73,468,478
Crawford Camiciottoli, B., 223, 228
Crewe,พ}., 555, 563-564,
571-572
Crews, F., 74
Croft,พ, 88, 207, 380, 389-390
Cruse, D. A, 207
Cruttenden, A, 228, 230n3
Crystal, D, 10,12,15n4, 31, 816-817
Csábi, ร, 460
Cueni, A, 382, 384, 389
Culicover,p, 18-19, 31
Cullen, R, 14
Cummins,}, 28, 31
Curzan, A, 15, 816-817
Cutler, A, 73, 75nll, 334-335, 347
Cutting,}, c, 73, 75nll, 334-335,
347
Cuyckens, H, 718, 727
Dabrowska, E, 250, 264
Dagut, M, 442,459
Dahl, o, 207
Dancygier, B, 579, 586, 595-596,
601-602, 604n9-10
Danielson, D, 74, 523, 532, 536, 677
Danks, E, 762
Danon-Boileau, L, 144—145, 157
Darwin, c. M, 446, 459
Dascal, M, 506
Davidse, K, 329
Davies, M, 56,411,442-443,459,
638, 653,762
Davis, p. พ., 14
Day, R. A., 174,T80
De Carrico,}., 602
De Clerck, ECJ90
de Ruiter,}. p., 209, 228
De Smet, H.,718, 727
de Swart, H., 207
Deane, p. D., 420,437
DeCarricoV'}., 33, 39, 54, 201, 206
Deckert, ร., 200,204, 206
Declerck, R., 134,157,159n2, 327,
3301112
DeKeyser, R., 14, 62, 73
Dekydtspotter, L., 629
Del Giudice, A., 230
Delahunty, G. p., 201, 205
Demecheleer, M., 419,437
Denis, D., 816, 818
Depraetere, I., 73, 75nll, 134,
347, 349n7
Deshors, ร. C., 385, 389
di Giovanni, N. T,181
Dickerson, พ., 448, 459
Diessel, H., 316, 327, 516, 536
Diniz, L., 728
Dirven, R., 142,144-146,149,157,
284,286,297, 302,328, 348,
420-421,437,461,603
Dixon, R.M.W., 178-180, 393-394,
411,705
Doetjes,}., 393,411
Donaldson, M., 789, 791nl2
Dorgeloh, H., 492, 505
Downing, A., 517, 536
Dowty, D., 133,135n7
Dryer, M., 88
Dubinsky, ร., 358, 369
Duffley, p., 303, 704, 706n8, 721, 727
Dulay, H., 326-327
Durham, M., 743, 762
Dybas, C., 562
Eberhard, K., 73, 75nll, 334-335,
347
Edmonds, A., 629
Een,}., 153, 157
Egan, T, 704, 706nl
Ehrman,M., 158
Elbaum, ร., 391
Eldridge,}., 56
Eliasson, ร., 442,459
Elliott, M., 229,230n5
Ellis, N. C., 9,12, 33,48, 53-54, 56,
438
Ellis, R., 14
Emonds,}. E., 571, 573n2,676, 727,
729n8
Engel, D. M., 123,133
Epstein, R., 288-289, 292, 302
Erdmann, p., 479
Ernst,T.B., 516, 536-537
Erteschik-Shir, N., 382, 389-390,
391n8, 452,459
Ervin-Tripp, ร., 236, 239, 243
Eskildsen, ร., 40, 53, 183, 205
Espino, M., 519, 536
Evans, V., 416,420,423,425-427,
433,438
Eyring,}., 55, 71, 73-74,158,181,
269,274, 277-278, 303, 317-318,
325, 327, 329, 348, 370,437,476,
478, 506, 572,603,630, 643,
649-651,653-654,677, 701,
705,728
Facchinetti, R., 158
Fairclough, N., 14
Index
Farhady, Η., 68-69, 73
Farid, A., 55
Farr, F., 594, 602
Faulkner, พ., 289, 292, 302
Feak, c. B, 174, 181, 756, 762, 764
Feigenbaum, L, 134
Feist, J., 405-407,411
Ferguson, c. A., 603
Field, Y., 563-565, 571
Fillmore, c. J., 13, 38-39, 45-47, 53,
55,427,437,781
Finegan, E., 147,157,193, 205, 268,
277, 292, 301,312, 327-328, 334-
335, 347, 384, 389, 394,411,417,
437,443,459,492,	505, 509, 536,
543, 571, 578, 601-602, 616, 628,
642,653, 659, 675,681, 704—705
710, 727-728,754, 762,812
Finz, ร., 797, 811
Firsten, R., 14,158, 230, 265, 303,
348,408,411,439,537,603,
790,812
Fleisher, N., 370
Fleischman, ร., 158
Flowerdew, J., 317, 327, 506
Foley, M., 468, 478
Ford, c. E., 521, 536-537, 591,
593-594, 596,602 .
Ford, M., 391	/
Fortanet, I., 311, 327
Fotos, ร., 14
Fox, B.A., 40,250,258,264, 359,
473, 478, 620-624, 628, 630n4-5,
641,648, 653
Francis, G., 38, 53
Francis, พ. N., 420, 437
Frank, M, 664, 675-677, 677n4
Fraser, J. B., 459, 461ท6
Frazier, ร., 579, 589, 602
Fries, p., 31, 32n4
Frodesen, J., 13, 55, 71, 73-74,158,
181,274, 277-278, 303, 317-318,
325,327,329,348,370,417,437,
439,473,476,478-479, 506, 533,
537, 572,603, 630, 643, 649-651,
653-654,677, 701, 704-705, 728,
748,762,764
Fuchs, M., 454, 459
Fukuya, Y. J., 442,459
Fuller, J. พ, 31, 62, 73
Fuller, K., 364, 369
Gairns, R., 47, 53
Gamut, L. T. E, 494, 505
García Mayo, Μ. p., 287, 302
Gardner, D, 442-443, 459
Gary, E. N, 812
Gary, N„ 665-667, 675-676
Gaskill, พ., 145,157,701-702
Gass, ร., 629
Gattegno, c., 86, 88
Gavis, พ, 118,133-134
Gee, J., 49-50, 53
Gehrig, G. H., 764
Gelabert, J., 43, 54
Ghesquière K., 329
Gibbs, R. พ, 438
Gibson, E., 237, 244
Gilbert, ร., 368-369
Ginzburg, J., 264
Gisborne, N., 623-624, 628
Givón,T, 13, 30-31,48, 53,161,
180,198, 205, 208n8, 218, 228,
278, 279n4, 370, 402,411,
413n9, 473, 478, 572, 691-692,
704, 727
Glazier, T. F, 506
Gleason, J. L., 287, 289-290, 292,
300, 302
Glover, B., 791n2
Goedecke, p., 273, 278
Goldberg, A., 13,46, 53, 230, 381,
389, 411, 412n3
Goldman, ร., 556, 571
Goldschneider, J., 62, 73
Goldsmith, J., 382, 390
Goodell, E.'พ., 764
Goodwin, J., 103, 269-270, 277-278,
770, 789, 811, 813n4
Goodwin, พ., 648-649
Gordon, D., 790
Gordon, M., 677
Granger, ร., 563-564, 571
Gray, B, 317, 327
Gray, L, 112,135n6,175,446, 459
Greenbaum, ร., 74,188, 206, 217,
229, 269, 273, 278, 315, 328, 343,
347, 358, 369, 406,411, 509, 516,
536-537, 548, 572, 576, 586,602,
644,653,676, 705, 728, 734, 762,
790,797,811
Greenberg,}. H., 78, 87, 798, 811
Grice, Η. p., 506
Gries, s. Th., 235, 244, 384, 390,
453, 459
Griner, B., 103, 269-270, 277-278,
770, 789, 811, 813n4
Gronemeyer, c., 370
Gross, N, 135nlO
Gruber, J., 30-31
Guinda, c. ร., 537
Gundel, J., 31,62,73,329, 676
Gustafson, L., 628, 630n2
Guy, G., 629
Haccius, M., 164,177,180-181
Hacker, D., 753, 759, 762
Haddican, B., 762
Haegeman, L., 31,88, 134
Hall, N., 14
Halliday, M., 13, 26-31, 33, 39, 53,
285, 302, 305, 308-309, 327-329,
329n4, 33OnlO, 406,497, 505, 509,
516-517, 527, 536, 554, 566, 571,
578,602,658, 675-676, 763, 772,
789
Hall-Lew, L., 200, 204, 206
Hamawand, z, 688, 704
Han, C.-H, 192,205
Han, z., 352, 369
Hancioglu, N., 56
Hannay, M., 479
Hansen, K, 13, 15n4
Harman, I., 763
Harmer,}., 14
Harsh, พ., 602, 604n6
Harwood, N, 311, 327
Hasan, R., 27, 30-31, 39, 53, 305,
308-309, 327, 329, 329n4,
33OnlO, 554, 566, 571, 578,
602,658,675-676, 772,
789
Haspelmath, M., 374, 390
Hasselgard, H., 509-510, 512, 536
Hatch, E., 55,110,133
Hatipoglu, Ç, 57, 74
Hawes, T, 474, 479
Hawkins, B., 598
Hawkins,}., 88, 285-287, 302-303,
453,460
Hayden, R., 74, 677
Hayes, c., 362, 369
Hedberg, N, 215, 228, 329, 661,
675
Hellermann,}., 497, 505
Henner-Stanchina, c., 70, 73-74,
132,134, 135n2, 158,207,244,
329, 348, 391,439,476,478-479,
603,785,789-790,812
Henry, L., 456
Heritage,}., 217, 223, 228-229,
230nl,230n5
Herskovits, A.,438
Hermann, V, 460
Herriman,}., 390, 391nl
Hewings, A., 31, 719-720, 727
Hewings,M, 31, 719-720, 727
Hewson,}., 296, 302
Hidalgo, p, 154
Hilder,}., 259, 264,472
Hill, L. A, 589, 602
Hilles, ร, 14,134,176,180-181,
324,327,329,370,412,479,
506,603,630,705,728,807,
811-812
Hilpert, M, 771, 789
Hinkel, E, 14,138,157,175, 180,
182nll, 352, 369, 537
Hinrichs, L, 323, 327
Hintikka,}, 348
Hirtle, พ, 110,133
Hoffmann, ร, 268-271, 278
Hofland, K, 653, 654n5
Hofmann,T. R, 141,157
Hogg, R, 348
Holisky, D, 14
Holleman, B, 404, 411
Hollmann, พ, 390, 391n2
Holme, R, 14
Names
885
Holt, E., 750, 762-763
Holten, c., 13
HopKins, Μ. E, 744, 763
Hopper, R, 10, 12, 19, 31, 50, 54, 126,
133,447,459
Horie, K., 705
Elorn, L., 185, 195, 198,206-207,
208n6
Hornberger, N., 815, 817
Houck, N., 134, 181,329,370,412,
479, 506,603,630, 705, 728, 812
Houts Smith, L., 163, 180
Hoye, L.E, 145,157-158
Huang, c., 755, 762
Huckm, T., 55, 473, 478, 639, 653
Huddleston, R, 31, 83, 151, 157, 206,
2081112, 272-273, 278, 312-313,
322, 327-328, 329n2, 330118, 347,
3491116, 353, 358, 363, 369, 390,
391114-5, 397, 411, 484, 505, 586,
602,645,653,802,811-812
Hudson, J. K., 468, 478
Hudson, R., 73, 751110, 191, 206, 506
Huffman, K., 174, 180
Hulstijn, J. I-L, 442, 459
Humphreys, K-, 73, 751111, 334-335,
347
Hundt,M., 12,15n3, 115, 133, 370
Hung, J., 565, 571,5731112
Hwang, M., 589-590, 596, 602,
603n2, 603115
Hwang, ร., 520, 537,
Hyland, K., 223, 229, 240, 243,
365, 369, 537, 623-624, 629, 731,
747-748, 752-753, 759-760, 762,
765116
lannuzzi, ร., 705
latridou, ร., 655, 675
Ide, N., 431, 438
Hie, c., 274, 278
Ingham, R. R, 207
Inness, D., 14, 324, 327
Inoue, K, 122, 133
Ionin, T., 282, 294, 297, 302
loup, G., 612, 628
Ishizakí, Y., 460
lyeiri, Y., 207, 404, 412
Jackendoff, R., 417, 437,448,
459,461ท6
Jackson, E, 603
Jacobs, R., 78, 88, 536, 538115, 629,
675-676, 677n3
Jankowski, B., 322, 327
Jarvis, ร., 816-817
Jary, M., 231, 244
Jefferson, G., 219, 229
Jenkins, J., 12, 15, 15113,62,73,479
Jespersen, o., 13, 164, 180, 186, 201,
206, 340, 347, 602, 622, 628, 664,
675,677115,790, 798,811-812
Johansson, ร., 147, 157, 193, 205,
268, 277, 292, 301, 312, 327-328,
334-335, 347, 384, 389, 394, 411,
417, 437, 443, 459, 492, 505, 509,
536, 543, 571, 578, 601-602, 616,
628, 642, 653, 654115, 659, 675,
681, 704-705, 710, 727-728, 754,
762,812
Johnson, D. E., 762
Johnson, M., 44, 54, 422, 437, 450,
459-460
Johnston, M., 210, 229
Jones, M., 145, 157,269,277
Joos, M., 123, 133-134,705
Judson, ๐., 173, 180
Jullian, R, 40, 53
Kallel, A., 184,206
Kalpakian, L., 797, 811
Kaltenbock, G., 728
Kamoen, N., 404,411
Kaplan, D.M., 178,180
Karttunen, L., 718, 727
Katriel, T., 506
Kaufman, M., 244
Kay, R, 38-39, 53, 55, 268, 278
Kealey, J., 14, 324, 327
Keck, c., 14
Keenan, E., 180, 182n3-4, 607,
628-629
Keizer, E., 328
Keller, R., 55
Kellerman, E., 53, 56n5
Kelley, R, 240, 244
Kennedy, c., 412
Kennedy, G., 331, 347,430-431,437,
439n8
Kennedy, K. M., 240, 244
Kesner Bland, ร., 118, 133
Killian, R, 14, 408,411
Kim, K-H, 667-670, 675-676
Kim,Y., 367, 369
Kim, Y-J., 14
Kimps, D., 278, 279n5
Kiparsky, c., 717, 727
Kiparsky, R, 717, 727
Kirsner, R., 696-697, 704
Kissine, M., 231, 244
Kjelhner, G., 149, 157
Klein, พ., 62, <3
Klima, E., 529, 536-537, 538111
KluckhohnjE., 474
Knowles, R L., Ill, 123,133
Ko, H., 294, 302
Ko, ร., 259, 264
Koenig, J. R, 123, 133
Koktova, E., 516, 536-537
Konneker, B., 238-239, 243, 244n3
Kontra, M., 222, 229
Kortmann, B-, 572
Koshik, I, 218, 229, 259, 264, 273, 278
Koustoff, L., 134
Kõvecses, z., 451,455, 459-460
Kramarae, c., 45, 54
Kranich, ร., 114, 133-134
Kreyer, R., 321-322, 327, 330nl5
Krifka, M., 293, 302
Kroell, A., 192, 205
Kruesi, L., 562
Klug, M., 158
Kruse, A., 612, 628
Kruse, D. A., 790
Kruse, พ., 806
Kucera, H, 420, 437
Kuehn, K., 164, 181,234-235,
240, 244
Kuno, ร., 612, 628
Kuo, C-H., 311, 327
Kurtyka,A.,461
Labov, พ., 181, 182115
Lakoff, G., 44, 54, 357, 369, 420, 422,
437, 450, 459-460, 469, 471,478
Lakoff, R., 385, 390, 506
Lam, Y, 419, 437
Lampropoulou, ร., 312, 328
Langacker, R. พ., 13, 33-34, 54,
56n3, 60, 73, 109-110,133, 207,
320,327,337,347,3491114,351,
356, 361, 369, 420, 426, 437, 466,
470, 478, 480112, 483-484, 487, 505
Lantolf, J., 43, 54
Larrivée, R, 207, 303
Larsen-Freeman, D., 6-7, 9-10, 12,
14,15112-3,48, 53,62, 73,164,
181, 182119, 326-327, 554,571,
573n7, 815-818
Lasnik, H., 5, 12
Laufer, B., 442, 459
LeVasseur, R, 807
Leacock, c., 460
LeBlanc, G., 626
Lee, c., 677
Lee, D. K., 517-519, 531, 536
Lee, Η. K., 481, 505
LeeJ.H., 250, 264, 265112
Lee, J. J., 764
Leech, G., 31,48, 54, 74, 115, 126,
133-134, 145, 147, 157-158, 188,
193, 205-206, 217, 229, 268, 273,
277-278,292,301,312,315,327-
328, 334-335, 343, 347, 358, 369,
384, 389, 394, 406, 411,417, 437,
443, 459, 492, 505, 509, 536, 543,
548, 571-572,578, 601-602, 616,
628, 642, 644, 653, 659, 675-676,
681, 704-705, 710, 727-728, 734,
754, 762,797,811-812
Lee-Goldman, R., 199, 206
Lenker, บ., 506
Lerner, G. H., 595, 602
Levey, ร., 166, 181
Levinson, ร., 4, 12, 315-316, 328
Levy, R., 55
Index
Lewis,Μ., 13,48, 54—55, 110,
133-134
Liamkina, ο., 816, 818
Liao, γ, 442, 459
Lieven, E.V., 183,206
Liljestrand, A., 629
LimJ.M.H., 122, 133
Lin,Y.-H., 138, 157,757
Lind, A., 692, 704
Lindner, ร., 450, 459
Lindstromberg, ร., 420-424, 426,
428,433-434,437
Linell, p., 10, 12
Link, G., 293, 302
Lisovsky, K., 719, 727
Littlemore, J., 460
Liu, D., 14, 46, 54, 287, 289-290,
292, 300, 302, 396,411, 443, 452,
456,459, 519, 536, 554-555, 561,
571, 573n7
Lloyd-Jones, M-, 479
Loch, B., 628, 630n3
Lock, G., 26, 31,359-360,369
Lohse, B., 453, 460
Long, Al., 7, 12, 181, 182n9,211,
229,274,278
Longacre, R., 520, 552, 572, 791n2
Loock, R., 644-645, 653
Low, G. D., 460
Lucy, J. A., 763
Lumsden, M., 479
Lunsford, A., 74
Lyons, c., 285, 287, 302
Lyons, J., 516, 536
MacArthur, E, 460
MacDonald, M. c., 629
Macqueen, ร., 40, 54
Madden, c., 14
Mair, c., 115, 133
Malchukov, A., 374, 390
Mallinson, G., 88
Marchena, E., 442, 459
Martin, J. R., 506
Martin, พ., 697-698, 704
Martinez, R., 55
Martinez-Flor, A., 239, 244
Martinez Insua, A. E., 468-469, 478
Master, p., 14, 286, 293, 295-297,
302-303,640-641,643,653
Mathis, T., 744, 763
Made, D., 656, 675-676
Matthews, ร., 624, 629
Matthiessen, c. Μ. I. M., 13, 26-29,
31,33,53,285,302,328,497,
505,509,516-517, 536, 763
Manila, ร., 419, 437
Matushansky, o., 412, 812
Mauck, ร., 231-232, 244
Maxwell, D. N., 630
Mayer, p., 537, 630, 654, 764
Mazzon, G., 207
McCarthy, M., 31,49, 53, 55, 115,
132, 172,176,181,329,357,
369,578, 586,594, 601-602,
604nl0, 641-643, 650, 654,
654n4, 699, 704-705, 734, 743,
746, 750, 756, 762,774,
789-790,807,811-812
McCawley,J. D., 123,133, 790,
791n9
McCoard, R. พ., 123,133
McCreary, c. E, 158
McDonough, K., 367, 369
McKay, ร., 14
McNally, L, 412,479
Meechan, M, 468, 478
Mettinger, A., 790
Meurman-Solin, A., 506
Meyers, D., 791n3
Meyers, G., 751, 762
Millar, N., 158,364,369
Miller, D. o., 513-515, 532, 536
Miller, J., 583-585
Miller, K., 286, 302
Miller, ร., 668, 675
Milsark, G., 479
Milton, J., 563, 571
Mindt, I., 402,411
Mitchell, K., 782-783,790
Mitkovska, L.,354, 358, 369
Montag, J. L., 629
Montrul, ร., 297, 302
Moon, R., 394, 411, 781, 790
Moran, p., 55,103
Morgan, p., 451, 460
Mould, M.,791n3
Mueller, C.M., 38, 54, 431, 437
Mukherjee, J., 12, 15n3, 390
Müller, ร., 497, 505
Munn, A., 286, 302
Munro, p, 763
Murray, J. D., 556, 571
Myers, G., 312,328
Nagle, s. J., 157,159n7, 159n9
Nakamori, T., 630
Napoli, D., 472,479
Nariyama, ร., 78, 88
Narrog, H., 158
Nassaji, H., 14
Nation, I. ร. p., 51, 54—55
NattingerJ., 33, 39, 54, 201, 206
Neagu, M., 450,460
Neeleman, A., 88, 88nl
Negueruela, E., 43, 54
Neiderhiser, J. A., 240, 244
Nelson, G., 193, 206, 244, 565, 571,
5731112
Nerlich, B., 460
Nesselhauf, N., 126, 133
Neufeld, ร., 56
Neukom-Hermann, A., 197, 206
Neuman, R. A., 798, 811
Neumann, R., 338, 347
Newbrook, M., 624, 628
Newmeyer, E, 30
Ney, J. พ, 147, 157
Nichols, J., 516, 536
Niemeier, ร., 298, 302
Nikitina, T., 382, 384, 389
Nilsen, D. I. E, 537
Nishiyama, A., 123, 133
Noonan, M., 705
Norris, J., 7, 12
Nouwen, R., 404,411
Nowak, M. A., 764
Nuyts, J., 158
Nyyssõnen, H., 50, 54
O’Connor, M. c., 38-39, 53, 55
Odlin, T., 14
O’Dowd, E., 418,437,439nl, 441,
446-447, 453,460,461n2, 461 ท6,
461 ท8
O’Keeffe, A., 55,181, 594, 602, 699,
704
Olin, M., 455
Olsen, L., 639, 653
Olshtain, E., 181
Olson, c., 100,103
Ono, T., 195,206
Ortega, L., 7,12, 210, 229, 815, 818
O’Sullivan, J. K., 207, 230, 244,
439, 790
Ovens, J, 56,73,638,653,762
Palacios Martinez, I. M, 468-469,478
Palmer, E R., 134, 141, 157-158,
516,536
Paltridge, B., 13
Papaefthymiou-Lytra, ร., 617, 628
Paradis, c., 404—405, 411
Park,Y.Y., 149,157
Parker, L., 456
Partee, B., 505, 507114, 632, 653,
763
Parulis, G., 130
Paul, พ, 393,411
Pavlenko, A., 816-817
Pawley, A., 2,13,39-40, 54
Payne,J., 322, 328-329, 330nl6
Peacock, M., 561-562, 572, 728
Pelletier, F.J., 284, 293, 302
Penka, D., 184,206
Pennington, M., 14, 265, 370, 630
Perales-Escudero, M., 187, 206
Perdue, c., 62, 73
Perenyi, E., 474
Pesante, L., 473,478
Peterson, L. M., 67, 73
Petrie, B., 753, 762
Piazza, R., 220, 229
Names
887
Pica, τ., 287, 302
Pienemann, Μ., 210, 229
Pierce, L., 282, 302
Pinker, ร., 382, 390, 764
Pitts, A., 195,206
Plauche, M., 467,478
Poehner, Μ. E., 433, 438
Poole, G., 31
Popkes, ร., 567
Porter, p., 74, 523, 532, 536, 630,
654, 677
Posner, M., 490-492, 505
Poutsma, H., 705
Praninskas,J., 530, 536
Prince, E., 479, 667, 675-676
Pullum, G., 31, 88,151,157, 206,
208nl2, 272-273, 278, 312-313,
322, 327-329, 329n2,330n8,
347, 349nl6, 353, 358, 369, 390,
391n4-5, 397,411, 484, 505, 586,
602,645,653,802,811-812
Quirk, R., 74,188, 206, 217, 229, 273,
278,315, 328, 343, 347, 349nl6,
358,364, 369, 371nl, 406,411,
509-510, 515, 536, 548, 572, 576,
586, 602, 644, 653, 676, 705, 728,
734, 748,762,790, 797,811
Radden, G., 142,144-146,149, 157,
284,286,297,302,328, 348
Radford, A., 31, 728
Raimes, A., 506
Ramanathan, V., 49, 53
Ramsay, V, 554, 572
Randall, R. K., 591,602
Rando, E., 472,479
Rauh, G., 437-438, 439n6
Ravin, Y., 460
Raymond, G., 223, 228-229, 230nl
Reali, E, 613, 629
Redman, ร., 47, 53
Reed, A. Al., 342,347
Reed, NT., 261
Reed, ร., 763
Rehn Jordan, ร., 43, 54
Reid, พ., 31, 32n2, 63, 69, 73,
75nlO, 75nl2
Reilly, J. ร., 603
Reinhart, ร., 14
Renaud, c., 629	A
Reppen, R., 52, 54, 431,438-439,
623-624, 628,705,728, 790,
791n6
Reynolds, D., 120,132
Richards, J., 134, 220, 229
Riddle, E., 134
Riggenbach, H., 71, 74,134,154,158,
207, 230, 265, 278, 298, 302, 348,
370,412,454, 460, 603, 630, 786,
790,812
Rimmon-Kenan, ร., 744, 762
Rinvolucri, M., 14
Ritz, Μ. E.A., 123, 133
Roberts, p., 18, 31
Robinson, J., 229, 230n5
Rohdenburg, G., 15
Romer, บ., 126, 133-134
Rosansky, E. J., 183, 205
Rosen, c., 360, 369
Rosenbach, A., 322, 328, 330nl2,
330nl4
Rosenheim, J., 702
Rosenzweig, E, 700, 704
Rudzka-Ostyn, B., 449-450, 455,
460
Ruhl, c., 54, 56n4
Russell, B., 285, 302, 591, 593, 602
Rutherford, พ., 2, 14, 88, 359, 361,
369,464,479, 506, 676-677,
677n9
Ryder, M., 55
Ryshina-Pankova, M., 816, 818
Sacks, H., 219, 229
Saddock, J., 230
Sahre, พ., 811
Sag, I., 264
salkie, R., 112,133, 158,763
Samuda, V, 71, 74,134,154,158,
207, 230, 265, 278, 298, 302, 348,
370,412,454,460, 603,630, 786,
790,812
Sanders, p., 438
Sanders, T., 404,411
Sandoval, V, 101
Santos, T., 720, 727
Sasaki, M., 464,473,479
Savage, A., 537, 630, 654, 705
Scanlon, J., 135n8
Schachter, J., 464,479, 580, 602,
6O3n3, 608, 629
Schachter, 461nl, 505, 507n4, 632,
653-654, 662,676
Schaffer, D., 274, 278
Schaffer, K., 243-244
Scheffer, J., 134
Schegloff, E. A., 13, 199,206, 670,
676
Schegloff, M., 219, 229
Schiffrin, บ., 181, 182n5,492-493,
496, 505,577,602
Schleppegrell, AL,'28, 31, 521-522,
536
Schlue, K., 219j 229
Schluter, J., 15
Schmid, H., 39, 54, 201, 206, 317, 328
Schmitt, c., 286, 302
Schmitt, N., 41, 51, 54—55
Schmitt, T. L., 479, 480n5
Scholz, B. c., 329
Schonbeck, G., 257, 264
Schultz, บ., 408
Schumann, J., 13,15n4, 183,205,
612,629
Schwarz, ร., 172,181
Schwarzschild, R., 348, 348n2
Scontras, G., 237, 244
Seal, B., 55
Seidlhofer, B., 15
Seitz, ร., 179, 181
Serrano-Lopez, M., 433,438
Seymour, R., 236, 244
Shalek, ร., 100,103
Sharvit, Y., 812
Sharwood Smith, M., 127,133
Shaw, p., 476,479, 502, 505
Shayne, J., 499-500, 505
Shepheard, J., 14
Shi, L., 753-754, 762
Shibatani, M., 355, 359, 363, 369
Shintani, AL, 363, 369, 708
Shirai, Y, 119, 132, 135n7
Short, M., 764
Siewierska, A., 385, 390, 391n2
Simango, R., 358, 369
Simon, H. J., 329
Simon-Vandenbergen, A., 517-518,
536-537
Simpson, R. c., 56, 73, 638, 653, 762
Simpson-Vlach, R., 33, 54, 56,438
Sinclair,}., 13,38, 40,54,282,
302, 359,370, 438,572, 751,
762-763
Skira, p., 518
Skousen, R., 207
Slobin, บ., 43, 54
Smith, B., 14, 608, 617, 629-630
Smith, c., 134
Smith, J., 200, 206
Smith, N., 115, 132-133,145,
157
Snipp, K., 198, 206
Snow, M. A., 645,647, 653
So, N. V, 694, 704
Solomon, G., 779-780, 790, 798,
804-805,811
Sommers, N., 753, 759, 762
Sorrentino, E, 178, 181
Spinner, p., 284, 301
Ssensalo, บ. A, 746, 762, 777-778, 790
StaczekJ., 315, 323, 328, 330nl7
Stafford, c., 155,157
Stateva/p., 801, 811-812
Stauble, A., 613, 616-617, 629, 630n2,
643,653
Stefanowitsch, A., 235, 244, 384, 390
Stern, ร., 293, 302
Stevens, G., 124, 182nl0
Stevens, p., 198, 206, 208nl0
Stevick, E., 475,479
Stivers, T., 218, 229, 255, 264
Stockwell, R., 505, 507n4, 632, 653
Stowell, T., 382,390
Strauss, ร., 316-317, 328
Strodt, B., 140
Suh, K. H., 167-169,171, 173,175,
177, 181
Sunderman, K., 431, 438
Index
Svartvik,}., 74, 188, 206, 217, 229,
269, 273, 278,315, 328, 343, 347,
358, 369,406, 411, 509, 536, 548,
572, 602, 644, 653, 676, 705, 728,
734,762,797,811
Svatko, K., 405, 411
Swales, J., 28,31, 56,174,181, 236,
240,244, 365, 370, 638,653, 756,
762,764
Swan, M., 15,608, 617, 629-631, 653
Sweetser, E., 142-143, 157, 579,
595-596,602
Syder,E, 2,13,39-W, 54
Szabo, p., 451, 455,459
Szendrõi, K., 88, 88nl
Szmrecsanyi, B., 134,152,157, 323,
327
Tagliamonte, ร., 200, 206, 322, 327,
816,818
Taglicht,}., 641, 643, 654
Tai, ร., 199,206
Takahashi, H., 235, 237, 244
Talmy, L., 142,157,438
Tannen, D., 763
Tao, H., 641-643, 650, 654, 654n4
Tarone, E., 10, 13, 15n4
Tauroza, ร., 506
Taylor, J. B., 476,479, 502, 505, 800,
811
Taylor, J. R., 39, 54, 361, 370, 416,
420, 431,438, 771, 790, 791n4,
816,818
Temperley, D., 622-623, 629
ter Meulen, A., 293, 302, 603
Terkel, ร., 167-168,177, 181
Terkourafi, M., 764
Terrace, H., 593, 602
Thewlis, ร., 134,154,157-158,181,
303,329, 344,348,370,409,
411-412, 503, 505, 532, 537,588,
603,626,630, 705, 728, 764,790,
812
Thomas, L., 88
Thomas, ร., 474, 479
Thompson, B., 426,438
Thompson, G., 223, 229, 734, 742,
755,762-763
Thompson, I., 608, 629
Thompson,}., 747, 763, 765n6
Thompson, ร. A., 19, 31, 50, 54,195,
206, 245, 258, 264, 362-364, 370,
390,447,459, 520, 524-525, 537,
552,572,591, 593-594, 596,602,
620-624, 628, 630n4-5, 641, 648,
653-654, 696-697,699, 704-705
Thornbury, ร., 14
Todaka,Y, 431-432,438
Todd, z., 460
Ybde, T, 57, 74
Todeva, E., 210, 229
Tomasello,M., l, 13,19, 31, 183, .
206
Tonkyn, A., 14
Torres Cacoullos, R., 109, 126,
133, 135n3
Tottie, G., 194,197,199-200, 206,
268-271,278
Toyota,}., 370
Traugott, E., 603
Trebits, A., 4-57, 460
Tregidgo, p. ร., 181
Treichler, p., 45, 54
Trenkic, D., 281, 294, 302
Tsang, E. ร. c., 563, 571
Tse, p., 623-624, 629
Tsui, A., 230, 273, 278
Tyler, A., 138,142,154,158,207,
416, 420, 423,425-427,433,
438
Tyler, L., 762
Tyson, ร., 563-564, 571
Ultan, R., 210, 229
บท!น, E. A., 57, 74
Ur, p., 14,152-153,158, 262, 264,
503,505
Uriagereka,}., 5, 12
Usó-}uan, E., 239, 244
Van Bell,พ., 390
Van Bogaert,}., 705, 7O6nl3
van den Bergh, H., 404, 411
van der Auwera,}., 158
van Dommelen, D., 630, 654
van Hoek, K., 329
Van Langendonck, พ., 390
van Riemsdijk, H., 629
van Shaik,}. D., 68-69, 74
VandeKopple, พ.}., 639-641, 654
Vandeloise, c., 420, 438
VanderBrook, ร., 219, 229
Vannestâl, Μ. E., 348
Varlokosta, ร., 655, 675
Vendler, z., 45, 54, 117, 133
Ventola, E, 563, 572
Vergaro, c., 240, 244
Vergun, A., 497, 505
Vernoy,}., 174, 180
Vernoy, M., 174,180
Wald, M., 533, 537, 748, 762, 764
Wales, K., 329
Walker, B., 55
Walker,}. A., 109, 126, 133, 135n3
Wallage, p., 207
Walsh, ร., 55
Ward, G., 472, 479
Waring, z. H., 210, 229
Warner, A. R.,37O,371n2
Wasow, T, 453, 460
Weber, E., 219, 229, 230n4, 255, 264,
268,278
Wechsler, ร., 311, 328
Wedgwood, D., 656, 675-676
Weigle, ร., 140
Weingarten, ร., 702
Weinstein, N., 181, 182n8
Wexler, K., 294, 302
Whitaker, ร., 586, 602
White, B., 286, 302, 450-451, 455,
460-461
Widdowson, H., 25, 31
Wierzbicka, A., 45, 54, 351, 370
Wiese, H., 329
Wilkes, M., 229, 230n5
Williams, c., 134
Williams, E., 14, 629
Williams, H., 299, 556-557, 572
Williams,}., 219, 229
Williams, R.S., 385, 390
Willis, D., 55, 358, 365, 370
Winn-Bell Olsen,}., 221, 229
Winter,}., 186
Winters, T, 244
Wisniewska, I., 71, 74,134,154,158,
207,230, 265,278, 298, 302, 348,
370,412,454,460, 603,630, 786,
790,812
Wolfson, N., 181,182n5
Wong,}., 612, 629
Wong Fillmore, L., 40, 54
Wray, A., 201, 206
พน, R., 507
พน, X., 210, 229
Wulff, ร., 75nl4,405,411
Wyndham,}., 144
Yaeger-Dror, M., 198, 200, 204,
206
Yaguchi, M., 404, 412
Yan, G., 625, 629
Yang, C., 376, 390
Yang, L., 370
Yang [He], A. พ., 666-667, 676
Yasuda, ร., 450, 455, 460-461
Ye, C.,747,763,765n6
Yim, B., 357-358, 370
Yip, L. M. ๐., 563-565, 571
Yip, V, 361, 370,464,479, 624, 629,
708,727
Yoon, K. K., 284, 303
Yoshida, N., 170-171,180
Yoshimura, K., 361, 370
Yotsukura, ร., 295, 303
Young, ร., 281, 301
Yueng, L., 565, 572
Yule, G., 329, 422, 433, 438, 744,
763-764
7.Άi'llΆrckí R 329
Zanuttini’R.,’231-232, 244,
244nl
Zareva, A., 565, 572
Zelinsky-Wbbelt, c., 415,438
Zhu, c., 210, 229
Zimmerman, c., 41, 54
Zobl, H, 361, 370
Zweig, E., 762
Names
889
Index of Languages and Language Groups
African languages, 281
American Indian languages, 791n2
Anglo-Saxon, 159nl
Arabic, 57, 62, 78,198, 267, 405,
480nl, 608, 617
Egyptian Arabic, 78
Asian languages, 217, 281
Bahasa Indonesian, 207nl
Bantu languages, 351,461nl, 700,
768,791n3
Brazilian Portuguese, 655
Breton, 78
Bulgarian, 78, 397, 655
Cantonese, 78,463, 563, 617, 680, 708
Celtic, 78
Chinese, 26, 40, 57, 62, 88nl, 105,
182nll,210, 352, 360-361,431,
520, 563,608,625,700,768
Czech, 415
Danish, 798
Dutch, 56, 79, 461nl, 617, 798
East Asian languages, 502
Egyptian Arabic, 78
Farsi, 78, 281, 608. See also Persian
Finnish, 655
Flemish, 461nl
French, 43, 62, 77-78,105, 138,
185,267,283,312,321,374,385,
393,405,415,467,563,617,655,
679-680, 793-794
German, 1, 40, 77, 79,122,138,161,
184,210,213,267,376, 379, 385,
391n6, 394, 415, 461nl, 494, 496,
563,617,631,655,679-680,794,
798
Greek, 88nl, 185, 397, 617, 655, 734
Hebrew, 57, 78, 494, 608
Hixkaryana, 78
Hungarian, 656
Igbo, 791n3
Indo-European languages, 700,
768
Indonesian, 78, 105,210,607.
See also Bahasa Indonesian
Irish, 78
Italian, 88nl, 361, 463, 655
Japanese, 26, 32n5, 57, 62, 78, 88nl,
105,120,198,210,283,351-352,
357,361,362,413n9,416, 463,
464, 520, 547-548, 608, 655, 680,
708,768
Kabardian, 78
Korean, 32n5, 62, 78, 250, 282, 297,
367,431,481,520, 608
Latin, 105,185, 385, 452, 461 ท7-8
Malagasy, 78
Malayo-Polynesian languages,
78,311
Malay(-sian), 607
Mandarin Chinese, 267, 282, 393,
464, 492, 494, 496. See also Chinese
Persian, 78, 608, 680. See also Farsi
Polish, 1, 184,268,617,655
Portuguese, Brazilian, 655
Romance languages, 41, 105, 394,
798
Russian, 57, 79,161, 268, 312,415,
617
Scandinavian languages, 213, 281,
461nl,617
Semitic languages, 78, 281
Slavic languages, 281, 105
Slovenian, 607
Spanish, 1, 43, 61-62, 77-78, 88nl,
138,161,184,283,297,315,321,
374,415,431,463,655,680
Swahili, 78
Swedish, 267, 798
Tagalog, 26, 78, 607
Thai, 105,182nll,
Turkish, 78,105, 520, 608
Ute, 268
Welsh, 78
West African languages, 19, 217,
413119, 768
Yoruba, 105,182nll, 315, 791n3
891
Index of Words, Phrases, and Affixes
a-, 185
a(n), 23, 37, Ch 15 (Articles: 271f), 309
a bit more, 774
a few, 186
a little, 186
a lot, 336
a lot more, 779
-able, 394
able to, 140-141,148-149 (vs. call)
about, Ch 21 (Prepositions: 415f),
425-426 & 428 & 434 (meaning),
447
above, 425,430
absent, 390
according to, 743
accuse, 439n3
-ache, 290
across, 447
actually, 555
additionally, 545
admit, 689 & 693 (gerund
complement), 701
adrift, 397
advise, 686 (infinitive complement),
692 (subjunctive ite-clause)
afraid, (of), 412n3
after Ch 21 (Prepositions: 415f),
419 (preposition deletion), 513
(in adverbiais), Ch 26 (Logical
Connectors: 541f), 551
after all, 545
against, 428 (meaning)
agree, 745
air, 295
-al, 394
alike, 805
all, 66, 343, 349n9, 419 (preposition
deletion)
all the time, 528
allow, 381, 686 (infinite complement),
716 (in complex passive), 718
(nonfactive)
along, 449 (in phrasal verbs)
already, 122
also, 545,550,554
alternately, 545-555
alternative, 404
although, 23, 500, 507n8, 513
(in adverbiais), Ch 26 (Logical
Connectors: 541f), 548, 553
always, 513, 525-531 (preverbal
adverb of frequency)
amazing/amazed, 399
American, 405 (adjective order)
among, 431^4-32 (in discourse)
amused/amusing, 402
and, 23, Ch 24 (Conjunction: 481f),
490-492, 497 (alternation with or),
548,552,658
announce, 376, 382
annoying/annoyed, 402, 714 (easy-to-
please construction)
another, 309-310, 343
anxious, 712 (with complement)
any, 197 (in negation), 220 (inyes/no
questions), 334 (quantifier), 343,
498
any other, 776 & 781 (with
comparatives)
anybody, 234 (in imperatives), 310
(singular use)
anyhow, 555
anymore, 121, 135n8
anyone, 310 (singular use)
anything, 310
apparent, 398
appear, 59,469 (with there), 709
appreciate, 117, 689 & 693 & 697
(gerund complements)
approach, 469 (with there)
-ar, 394
are you?, 269 (tag question)
aren’t, 219 (in tags), Ch 14 (tag
questions: 267-271)
argue, 749 (in reported speech)
arise, 469
as,	543f, Ch 26 (Logical Connectors:
5410,783 (vs.ro)
as (if), 729n3
as a result (of), 545, 550
as long as, 543
as soon as, 543
as well as, 782
ask, 373, 380-381, 669 (in ๗-cleft),
684 & 692 (in subjunctive
complement), 706n9, 738-740
assert, 747
assume, 683 & 691 (àr-complement),
686 (infinitive complement), 749
(in reported speech)
assuming that, 588
assure 745
at,	23,103n2, Ch 21 (Prepositions:
4150, 418 (deletion), 420-421
(meaning), 431 (in discourse), 513
(in prepositional phrases)
at any rate, 555
at least, 555
at odds with, 417
at the same time, 554
atomic, 396
attempt, 639 & 686 (infinitive
complement), 706n5
attractive, 47
audience, 335
available, 397
averse, 400
avoid, 689 & 693-694 & 701 (gerund
complements)
awake, 397
awareness of, 417
away, 447, 448 (in phrasal verbs)
back, 447 (in phrasal verbs)
bad, 403, 772 (comparative)
bake, 359, 380-381
be, 21, 25, Ch 4 (copula: 53-57,
59-60), 90, 126-129 (descriptive
verb), 191 (negation), 210 (in short
answers), 218 (aren't), 235 (in
negative imperatives), 252-253 (in
๗-questions), 314 (with personal
pronouns), Ch 18 (in passive voice:
351Í), 397 (with predicate adjectives),
485, 633-634 & 639 & 654n3
(deletion in relative clause), 677n2
be able to, 140-141,148-149 (vs. can)
be about to, 127,140-141
be all, 743 (in reported speech)
be allowed to, 140-141
be aware, 749 (in reported speech)
be certain, 749 (in reported speech)
be fixing to, 152
be going to, 33,126-129,140-141,
151-152 (vs. ๗//), 163-164 (in
Bull Framework), 169-173 (in
discourse), 355 (with passive), 582
& 590 (in conditional)
be like, 743 (in reported speech)
be permitted to, 140-141
be supposed to, 127, 140-141,145
be to, 127,140-141,159n2,169
(in discourse), 215 (inyes/no
questions)
be worth, 729n9 (be worth V + -ing)
bear in mind, 717 (factive)
beautiful, 47
because, 23, 500, 513 & 521-523
(in adverbiais), Ch 26 (Logical
Connectors: 541Í), 550 (vs. because of)
because of, 417, 538n4, 550
become, 59
before, 543f, Ch 21 (Prepositions:
415f), 419 (preposition deletion),
429 (meaning), 521 (in adverbiais)
begin, 687 (infinitive complement),
689 & 693 (gerund complement),
701
belief, 417, 717 (factivity), 742 (in
reported speech)
believe, 117, 208n8, 371n4 (in
passive), 397 (with predicate
adjective), 418 (with prepositions),
683 & 699 (ite-complement),
685 (infinitive complement), 691,
706n4, 715 (in complex passive),
717 (nonfactive), 743 & 745 & 749
(in reported speech)
belong, 117, 356
below, 429 (meaning), 430
893
beneath, 430
beside(s), 430, 554
better, 310, 772 (comparative)
between, 429 (meaning), 430-431
(vs. through), 431-432 (in discourse)
beverage, 283
big, 405 (adjective order), 747
bill, 376 (with indirect object)
blue, 407 (adjective order), 413n9
boring, 714 (easy-to-please construction)
born (to be), 355
both, 339-340 (quantifier), 343, 481
& 488^-89 (both . . . and), 507n4
bound (for), 397
boy, 283
break, 46-47, 359, 444 (in phrasal
verbs)
break down, 452
brick, 403 (adjective), 407 (adjective
order)
bring, 37
bring about, 452
bring back, 445
broken, 358-359
build, 117
burn down, 444
burst, 359 (middle voice)
but, 23, 472, 484 & 490
(conjunctions), 493 (vs.yet), 548,
553, 591 (with conditional),
661-662 (with zi-clefts), 662-663
(with emphatic do), 507n7-8
buy, 380, 381 (with indirect object),
387
by, 357 (in passive), 359, 362, 399
(with adjective participles), Ch 21
(Prepositions: 415f), 439n7, 447
(in phrasal verbs)
by contrast, 545
by the way, 33,39
call, 397 (with predicate adjectives)
call off, 444
can, 61, 169 (in discourse), 556-557
(in conditional), 590 (in reported
speech), Ch 8 (modals: 137f),
148-149 (vs. be able to), 149 (vs. no
modal)
can’t, 190
car, 284
careful, 403
carry on, 452
carry out, 452
cash, 375 (verb)
cause, 686 (infinite complement), 716
(in complex passive)
certain, 710
certainly, 517
chalk, 283
challenging, 714 (easy-to-please
construction)
charge, 376, 376 (with indirect
object), 439n3
check out, 444,451-452, 461n7-8
cheese, 294
chief, 395 (attributive adjective)
Chinese, 407 (adjective order)
chocolate, 294
choose, 693
church, 296
claim, 681, 683 (^^-complement),
717 (nonfactive), 749 (in reported
speech)
clean up, 441
clear, 717 (factive)
clever, 403
climb up, 448
close, 359 (middle voice)
coffee, 294
come, 59, 444 (in phrasal verbs), 469
(with there)
command, 706n9
committee, 335
compared to, 776
compete with/against, 417
complain/complaint, 749 (in reported
speech)
comprehend, 717 (factive)
comprise, 356
concern(ed), 398, 413117
conclude, 745
confess, 376 (with indirect object)
consequently, 545, 548, 555
consider, 397 (with predicate
adjective)
consist of, 117, 418
constantly, 530
contain, 117, 356
content with, 418
continually, 530
continue, 687 (infinitive
complement), 689 & 693 (gerund
complement), 693
conversely, 545
convince, 745
cook, 375 (with indirect object),
380-381
cost, 117, 356, 376-377 (with indirect
object)
could, 127, 148 (vs. be able to), 223 (in
yes/no questions), Ch 8 (modals:
137f), 589 (in conditional), 764nl
(in reported speech)
could have, 160nl2
crooked, 399
cut down on, 444
dangerous, 714 (easy-to-please
construction)
dare, 152, 159nl0, 693 (with
complements)
deal (great/good deal of), 285
decide, 687 (infinitive complement),
746 (in reported speech)
deck of, 348n2
declare, 397
decorate(d), 382, 403 (adjective)
deep, 803
defend, 689 & 693 (gerund
complements)
demand, 683 & 684 (with subjunctive
complement), 692 (in reported
speech)
demolish, 360
demonstrate, 749 (in reported speech)
deny, 381 (with indirect object), 689
& 693 (gerund complements)
dependent on,418
describe, 376 (with indirect object)
desire, 117, 688 (infinitive
complement)
despite that/this, 545
determine, 746 (in reported speech)
detract from, 418
develop, 469 (with there)
didn’t they/she/he/it?, Ch 14, (tag
questions: 267-271)
differ, 805
different, 805, 756nl2 (than, to, or
from), 813nl2
difficult, 42, 714 (easy-to-please
construction)
dis-, 185,187
disappear, 37, 360
disappointed, 712 (with complement)
discover, 683 (rázzí-complement),
689-690 (-ing complements), 742
& 747 (in reported speech)
dislike, 117, 689-690 & 693 & 696 &
701 (with complements)
distinguished, 403
do, 60, 183 (negation), 209-230 (yes/no
questions), 215 (in short answers),
235 (in negative imperative), 239
(emphatic imperative), 248 (in
questions), 487 (in conjunction),
538nll-12 & 656 & 664 & 672
(emphatic)
do (lexical), 121
do over, 444
do so,507n3
do you?, 269
doesn’t it/she/he?, Ch 14 (tag-
questions: 267-271)
dollar, 65
donate, 376 (with indirect object)
don’t, 190
double, 343
doubt, 117
down, 433 & 447 (in phrasal verbs)
down-, 419 (lexical compounds)
downtown, 419 (preposition deletion)
draw, 135n7
drink, 46
drive, 359
drop of, 348n2
due to, 550
during, 545, 551 (vs. -while)
dwell, 469 (with there)
Index
each, 37, 67, 340-341 (quantifier)
each other, 308, 314—315
eager, 712 (complement)
earth, 292
easy, 714 (easy-to-please construction)
eat, 46
-ed, 36, Ch 18 (in passive voice: 3511),
399 (in adjectives)
egg, 295, 334
eh?,279n3
either ... or, 68, 489
elder, 772 (comparative), 791n7
elderly, 335
else, 309, 32 9n5
elsewhere, 329n5
emerge, 360,469 (with there)
-en, 36, 90, 97, Ch 18 (in passive
voice: 35If), 399 & 402 (adjective
participles), 413n8, 522-523 (as
adverbial), 661 (participle fronting)
enjoy, 669 (in wh-cleft), 689 &
693 (gerund complements), 701
(complements)
enough, 343 (quantifier), 812nl-2
ensue, 469 (with there)
entail, 117
entertaining, 399-400
equal, 117, 356 (verb), 805
(comparative)
-er, 36, 394, Ch 34 (Degree—
Comparatives and Equatives:
767Y, 779 (vs. as... as), 799 & 806
(vs. more)
-est, 36, 394, 776 (vs. comparative),
Ch 35 (Degree—Complements
and Superlatives: 7931), 798
(frequency), 799 (morphological
rule)
even if, 543, 587
even more, 779
even though, 543, 553, 587
(conditional)
ever, 255 (in emphatic questions),
528 (with preverbal adverbs
of frequency), 531 (myes/no
questions), 539nl6-17, 776 &
781 (with comparatives), 801 (in
superlative)
every, 67, 310 (singular use),
340-341 (quantifier), 343, 584
& 594 (in relative clause), 419
(preposition deletion)
every day, 525
every now and then, 525, 530, 538nl0
(adverbiais)
everybody, 310 (singular use)
everyone, 310 (singular use), 357 (in
passive)
everything, 310
everywhere/place, 330n6
evidently, 517
exact, 395 (attributive adjective)
exceed, 776
exclaim, 749 (in reported speech)
exist, 469 (with there)) 471
expect, 208n8, 681, 683 (ithat-
complement), 688 (infinitive
complement), 693
explain, 376 & 378 (with indirect
object), 683 (ito-complement),
742 & 747 (in reported speech)
fact, 710 & 729n5 (because of the fact
that, etc.), 717
fail, 687 (infinitive complement), 693,
718 (implicative verb)
faint, 397 (health adjective)
fall, 59, 360, 448 (in phrasal verbs)
far, 772 (comparative)
farther, 772 (comparative)
fast, 403,777
fax, 376 (with indirect object), 381
feel, 59,117, 208n8, 683
(complements), 688 (infinitive
complement), 689 & 693
(gerund complement), 699
(àt-complement)
few, 37, 186,285,336,343,357
(in passive), 748
fewer, 804 & 806 (vs. less)
fewest, 349nl5, 804
fill out, 444
finally, 545-555
find, 117 (achievement verb), 375
(with indirect object), 683 & 699
(rto-complement), 686 (infinitive
complement)
find out, 444, 683 (rZwt-complement),
742 (in reported speech)
finish, 689 & 693 (gerund
complement)
first, 545-555
fish, 296
fit, 356
flu, 290
fly, 469 (with there)
follow up, 452
for, 103n2, Ch 19 (indirect objects:
3731), 380, Ch 21 (Prepositions:
415Í), 418 (deletion), 447 (in
phrasal verbs), 490 (conjunction),
513 (in prepositional phrases),
687 (with infinitive complements),
696 (vs. to infinitive), 713
(extraposition), 714 (easy-to-please
construction), 765n5, 776
for example, 545, 550 (vs. such as), 591
(with conditional)
for instance, 545, 554
force, 686 (infinite complement)
forget, 46, 687 (infinitive
complement), 689 & 693 (gerund
complement), 718 (implicative
verb), 745 (in reported speech)
former, 396, 404
fortunately, 517-519 (vs. unfortunately)
-free, 186
free from/of, 418
frequently, 525-531 (preverbal adverb
of frequency)
from, 23, 391n6, Ch 21 (Prepositions:
415f), 417-418 & 420 (meaning),
447 (in phrasal verbs)
from my point of view, 417
-fill, 348n3
full, Ch 20 (Adjectives: 3931)
fun, 714 (easy-to-please construction)
furniture, 283
further, 772 (comparative)
furthermore, 545, 553-554,
565,658
future, 396 (adjective)
general, 398
generally, 516, 525-531 (preverbal
adverb of frequency), 538nl 1
German, 407 (adjective order)
get, 59, 375-376 (with indirect
object), 380, 397 (with predicate
adjectives), 403 (with adjectives),
441 & 427 & 429 (in phrasal
verbs), 697 (causative)
get used to, 149
gei-passive, 362
give, 378-382, 391n2-3, 396
give up, 441
given that, 588 (conditional)
glass, 295
glassy, 407 (adjective order)
glue, 56n3
go, 59, 360, 444 (in phrasal verbs),
469 (with there), 743 (in reported
speech)
going to, 129,140-141,147,152,163
(in Bull Framework), 169-173 (in
discourse), 582 & 590 (in conditional)
good, 400 (with prepositions), 403
(polarity), 772 (comparative)
grow, 59
grow up, 117
guilty, 401 (attributive or predicate
adjective)
had, 124 (simple past vs. past perfect),
159nl (had to vs. maist), 173 (past
perfect in discourse), 578 (in
conditional)
had best/better, 144,146
half, 343
hand, 37, 374 (with indirect object),
375-376 (with indirect object)
happen, 360, 469 (with there), 582 (in
conditional), 669 (in cleft), 709
hard, 42, 403 (polarity), 714 (easy-to-
please construction)
hardly (any), 186, 539nl7
hardly ever, 527-528
has he/she/it?, Ch 14 (tag questions:
267-271)
Words, Phrases, and Affixes
895
hate, 117, 688-690 (infinitive
complement), 717-718 (factivity),
693 & 696 & 700 (with
complements)
have, 21, 63, 106 (perfect aspect),
113-114 & 122 (perfect aspect),
117 (interaction of verb categories
with), 117 (possession), 117 (state
and possession), 124 (past perfect),
129 (simple future vs. future
perfect), 150 (with modals), 163
(in Bull Framework), 168 (in
discourse), 193 (negation), 230n2
(in questions), 354—355
(Zjizre-passive), 688 (infinitive
complement), 689-690 {-ing
complements), 691, 696 (bare
infinitive vs. subject-participle
complements), 697 (causative), 716
(in complex passive), 733 (tense
shifts in reported speech)
have got to, 140-141,145-146 (vs.
must), 159n5
have to, 140-141, 145, 151-152, 196
(negation), 214 (in yes/no questions)
have you?, 310
he, 313, Ch 16 (reference: 3051),
736-737 (deictic shifts)
head,37
hear, 117-118, 688 (infinitive
complement), 689 {-ing
complements), 696 (bare infinitive
vs. subject-participle complements),
716 (in complex passive)
heavy, 777
help, 686 & 688 (infinitive
complement), 696 (complements),
706n7
her, 313, Ch 16 (possession: 319)
here, 329n4, 419 (preposition
deletion), 439n5, 480n4, 665
(emphatic), 736 (deictic shifts)
hers, 306
herself, 307, 657 (emphatic)
high, 403
him, Ch 16 (reference: 3051)
himself, 307, 330n9, 657 (emphatic)
his, 37, 306, Ch 16 (possession:
319)
hold, 356, 397 (with predicate
adjectives)
home, 103n2, 419 (preposition
deletion), 439n5
hope, 588, 688 (infinitive
complement), 728nl, 692-693, 710
house, 40 (compounds)
how, 265n4 (measurements), Ch 13
(JF^-questions: 245f), 273
(exclamatory questions), 637-638
& 645-648 (in relative clause)
how many, 254
how much, 254
how often, 254, 528, 531
however, Ch 26 (Logical Connectors:
541Í), 545, 547-548, 550, 555, 588
(conditional)
huh?, 269
hundred(s), 334
I, 736 (deictic shifts), Ch 16
(reference: 306f)
-ible, 394
-ic, 394
identical, 780, 805
if, 521 (in adverbiais), 543f, Ch 27
(conditional sentences: 5751), 742
(in indirect questions), 746 (vs.
whether), 765n5
if not, 586-587
imagine, 208n8, 397 (with predicate
adjectives), 588, 683 & 691 (dr-
complement), 685 & 691 (infinitive
complement), 718 (nonfactive)
important, 714 (easy-to-please
construction)
in, 23, 33,410,418 (deletion), 420^-21
(meaning), 447 (in phrasal verbs),
513 (in prepositional phrases)
in-, 184-187
in, Ch 21 (Prepositions: 415f), 417 (in
multiword preposition clusters)
in addition, 545, 554
in any case, 557
in case (of/that), 417, 543
in charge of, 417
in contrast, 545, 555, 563
in fact, 545, 555
in favor of, 417
in front of, 429
in my opinion, 417
in order that, 543
in other words, 545
in particular, 545
in return for, 417
in spite of (that/the fact), 500, 545
in sum, 545
in that, 543
in the course of, 417
in the habit of, 417
in the name of, 417
in the opinion of, 743
in turn, 545
in as much as, 543
inclined (to), 397,'712 (with
complement)
increase, 37, 359 (middle voice), 444
inform, 745
information, 283
-ing, 35, 90, 107-108 (progressive),
108 (interaction of verb categories
with), 124 (simple past vs. past
progressive), 129 (future meaning),
163 (in Bull Framework), 168 (in
discourse), 182n6, 398-399 &
401-402 & 409 (adjective participles),
413n8, 521 (as adverbial),
635-636 (in relative clause), 661
(participle fronting), 689-690
(in complements), 696 (vs. bare
infinitive complement), 706nl0,
713 (extraposition), 717 (factivity)
innit, 279n3
input, 2O7n3
inquire, 742 (in reported speech)
insist, 38, 683 & 692 (with
subjunctive complement), 706n9,
738 & 744 (reported speech)
insofar as, 543
instead, 507n7, 553, 555
intend, 208n8, 687-688 (infinitive
complement), 693
interested, 402
interesting, 398, 405 (material
adjective order), 714 (easy-to-please
construction)
introduce, 376 (with indirect object)
involve, 413n7
iron, 295
-ish, 304n9
isn’t she/he/it?, Ch 14 (tag questions:
267-271)
it, Ch 16 (reference: 3051), 309,
312, Ch 23 (nonreferential: 463f),
661-662 & 667-669 (Íí-clefts)
Italian, 405 (adjective order)
its, 329n3
itself, 307
Japanese, 407 (adjective order),
413nl0
just, 45, 121, 239 (in imperative)
keep, 397
keep up with, 444
kindly, 239
Kleenex, 295
knit, 381
know, 46,117, 669 (in '๗-cleft), 681,
683 & 691 & 699 (íto-complement),
686 (infinitive complement),
706n4, 715 (in complex passive),
742 & 745 (in reported speech)
lament, 749 (in reported speech)
land, 118
large, 407 (adjective order)
last, 343 (quantifier), 356 (verb), 419
(preposition deletion), 439n4, 555
(conjunctive adverb)
lawful, 396
lay, 37
learn, 742 (in reported speech)
learned, 399
least, 340 (superlative), 343, 803-804
(with marked forms), Ch 35
(Degree—Complements and
Superlatives: 793f)
leave, 445 (in phrasal verbs)
legal, 396
Index
legged, 399
lend, 376 (with indirect object)
less,	310, 340 (comparative, 343, 771
& 779 (vs. fewer), 791nl2,
Ch 34 (Degree—Comparatives and
Equatives, 767Í)
-less, 186
lesser, 804
lest,	Ch 26 (Logical Connectors:
5411), 5435
let, Ch 4 (copula: 53-57, 59-60),
244n2 (negative imperative), 688
& 691 (infinitive complement), 716
(in complex passive)
let’s, 148,236
lie, 59,469 (with there)
life, 284
light, 777
like, 117, 397 (with predicate
adjectives), 688 (infinitive
complement), 689-690 (-ing
complements), 693 (gerund vs.
infinitive), 696, 718 (factivity),
729n3, 743 (be like in reported
speech), 791n4, 805 (comparative)
likely, 709, 717 (nonfactive)
likewise, 309, 545, 554
liquefy, 56n3
little, 37,186,285, 336, 340 & 745
(quantifier), 343,403 (adjective
polarity), 407 (material adjective
order), 772 (comparative), 803
(superlative)
live, 42,45,117,121, 469 (with àre)
locally, 513
long, 398,403 (polarity)
look, 59, 117,444-445 & 447^48 &
455 (in phrasal verbs)
look like, 356, 709, 805
lose, 117
lot of, 66, 285, 336 (quantifier), 343
lots of, 66
loud, 403
love, 117,688 (infinitive complement),
689-690 (-ing complements), 693,
696, 718 (factivity)
low, 403
luckily, 517
luggage, 283
-ly, 413n8, 770 (in comparatives), 799
(in superlatives)
maintain, 717 (nonfactive)
major, 395 (attributive adjective)
majority, 64—65, 334, 349n5
make, 117, 380 (with indirect
object), 381, 397 (with predicate
adjectives), 444 (in phrasal verbs),
688, 696, 697 (causative), 716 (in
complex passive)
make up, 442,452
manage, 687 (infinitive complement),
693, 718 (implicative verb)
many, 37, 336, 340 (quantifier), 343,
357 (in passive), 772 (comparative)
may, 127, Ch 8 (modals: 137f), 582
& 590 (in conditional), 764nl (in
reported speech)
may not, 160nl4
maybe, 417 (vs.perhaps), 516
me, Ch 16 (reference: 3O5Í), 416 (with
prepositions), 499 (in rejoinder)
mean, 117, 669 (in wh-cleft)
measure, 117
medical, 290, 396
melt, 359 (middle voice)
mention, 749 (in reported speech)
mere(ly), 45, 396
mess up, 441
might, 127, 160nl3, Ch 8 (modals:
137f), 582 & 590 (in conditional),
764nl (in reported speech)
might could, 159n7
might should ought, 159n9
mile, 65
mine, 306
minority, 64—65, 334, 349n5
more, 310, 340 (comparative, 343,
Ch 34 (Degree—Comparatives
and Equatives: 767f), 770-771 &
779-780 (vs. -er), 791n4, 791nl2,
The more, the merrier, 588
moreover, 545, 553-554, 658
mosque, 304nl0
most, 336 (quantifier),
340 (superlative), 343, 791114,
Ch 35 (Degree—Complements
and Superlatives: 739Í), 798
(frequency), 799 (morphological
rule), 801 (— very), 803 (with
unmarked forms), 813n8
much, 37, 336, 340 (quantifier), 343,
772 (comparative)
much more, 779
must, Ch 8 (modals: 1371), 145-146
(vs. have to/have got to), 152 (dialect
differences), 159nl, 194 (negation),
581 & 590 (in conditional)
my, 37, Ch 16 (possession: 3051)
myself, 307, 657 (emphatic)
naked, 399
narrow, 403
navigable, 401 (attributive or
predicate adjective)
near, 429^130
need, 117,159nlO
neglect, 718 (implicative verb)
neither, 340-341 (quantifier), 489-490
(in conjunction), 498-499, 507n5
neither ... nor, 68,186,489
never, 186, 234 (negative imperative),
525-531 (preverbal adverb of
frequency), 538n15, 539nl8, 776 &
781 (with comparatives)
nevertheless, 545, 548, 555-556
new, 403
next, 343, 419 (preposition deletion),
430, 555, 735 (deictic shifts)
nice, 714 (easy-to-please construction)
no,	271 (yes/no questions), Ch 10
(Negation: 183Í), 199 (vs. not),
Ch 11 (Yes/No Questions: 2091),
215 (short answers), 217 (negative
questions), 220 (short answers), 269
(tag questions), 336 (quantifier)
no matter wh-, 588 (conditional)
no one, 310 (singular use)
nobody, 310 (singular use)
nod, 118
none, 66, 207n4, 336 (quantifier),
349n9
nor, 489,490 (conjunction)
north, 513
not, 529 (interaction with preverbal
adverb of frequency), 539nl7,
Ch 10 (Negation: 1831), 199
(vs. no), 578 (in conditional)
not all, 336 (quantifier)
not any, 199,336 (quantifier)
not as, 188
not only ... but also, 488
(exercise)
nothing, 310, 716 (in complex
passive), 734 (in reported speech)
now, 329n4
now that, 543
nowhere/place, 330n6
number of, 64, 285, 336 (quantifier),
343
object to, 669 (in ใฝ?-cleft)
objection to, 417
oblong, 407
observe, 688 (infinitive complement),
689-690 (-ing complements), 696
(bare infinitive vs. subject participle
complements)
obviously, 517, 518 (vs. of course)
occasionally, 516, 525-531 (preverbal
adverb of frequency)
occur, 360, 469 (with there)
odd, 717 (nonfactive)
of,	Ch 16 (possession: 319, 321-323)
330nl5, Ch 17 (partitives,
collectives: 326-329), 339, Ch 21
(Prepositions: 4151), 430, 447
of course, 518 (vs. obviously)
off, Ch 21 (Prepositions: 415f), 427
(meaning), 447 (in phrasal verbs)
offer, 376 (with indirect object), 687
(infinitive complement)
often, 525-531 (preverbal adverb of
frequency), 538nl3
O.K., 269 (tag question)
old, 208n9, 398,401 (ambiguity), 403
(positive polarity), 407 (material
adjective order), 772 (comparative),
777, 803 (superlative)
Words, Phrases, and Affixes
897
on, 103n2, Ch 21 (Prepositions:
415Í), 417 (in multiword
preposition clusters), 418
(deletion), 420 (meaning), 439117,
447 (in phrasal verbs)
on account of, 417, 548
on behalf of, 417
on grounds of, 417
on many occasions, 528
on the advice of, 417
on the basis of, 417
on the contrary, 542, 545, 555, 557, 563
on the other hand, 547, 555
on the strength of, 417
on top of, 23, 434
once, Ch 26 (Logical Connectors: 543f)
once a week, 525, 530, 5381110
(adverbiais)
once in a while, 525, 538nlO
(adverbiais)
one another, 308, 315
one’s, 306, 329n3
one(s), 282, 329nl, 33011'10
oneself, 307
only, 45
only if, 586 (conditional), 604n8
onto, 417, Ch 21 (Prepositions:
415f), 417
open, 37, 46, 359 (middle voice), 374
(with indirect object), 380, 444
or, 23, 271-272 (alternative question),
484—485 & 490 & 494-496
(conjunction), 497 (alternation
with anã)
order, 716 (in complex passive), 738
& 744 (in reported speech)
other, 309
otherwise, 545, 555
ought to, 145, 159n3
our, 306, 323, 738 (deictic shifts)
ours, 306
ourselves, 307
-OUS, 394
out, 439nl, 447 (in phrasal verbs)
out-, 776 (inherent comparatives)
out of, 23, Ch 21 (Prepositions: 415Í),
417,439nl
over-, 419 (lexical compounds), 776
(inherent comparatives)
over, Ch 21 (Prepositions: 4151),
419 & 423 & 425 (meaning), 447 ...
& 433 (in phrasal verbs), 776
(inherent comparatives)
overjoyed, 712 (with complement)
own, 117,657 & 664 (emphatic), 677n5
paint, 117
pair, 64, 349n4
part with, 418
particular, 395 (attributive adjective)
pass,	376, 376 (with indirect object),
383,444 & 445 (in phrasal verbs)
past,	429,430
pay, 375, 375 (with indirect object)
perceive, 683 (^^-complement), 686
(infinitive complement)
percent, 64
perform, 378
perhaps, 80, 417 (vs. maybe)
permit, 686 (infinite complement)
persuade, 686 (infinite complement),
716 (in complex passive), 745 (in
reported speech)
phone, 289-290
pink, 401 (adjective order)
plan, 208n8, 688 (infinitive
complement)
play, 46, 444 (in phrasal verbs)
please, 238 (in imperative), 244n3
(in imperative)
plenty of, 66, 340
point out, 452, 683 (àr-complement),
749 (in reported speech)
possess, 117
possible, 714 (easy-to-please
construction), 717 (nonfactive)
pour out, 452-453
prefer, 117, 397 (with predicate
adjective), 439n3, 684 (in
subjunctive complement), 688
(infinitive complement), 689-690
(gerund complements), 689-690
(-mg complements), 693, 696, 718
(nonfactive)
prepare, 380 (with indirect object)
present, 396 (attributive adjective), 588
pretty, 47, 396 (attributive adjective)
previous, 396
primary, 395 (attributive adjective)
principal, 395 (attributive adjective)
proceed, 687 & 693 (infinitive
complement)
promise, 46, 381, 683 (that-
complement), 687 & 693 (infinitive
complement), 706n6, 745 (in
reported speech)
propose, 2O8n8, 684 (in subjunctive
complements), 738 (in reported
speech)
protect, 439n3
prove, 683 (àr-complement), 686
(infinitive complement), 745 & 749
(in reported speech)
provide for/with, 418
provided that, 543, 588 (conditional)
public, 398 '^··
put off, 451
question, 746 (in reported speech)
quickly, 513^
quiet, 403
radio, 289-290
rare, 403, 404 (adjective order)
rarely, 186, 525-531 (preverbal
adverb of frequency), 538nl5
rather, 545,555
read, 46, 376
real, 767, 791n4
realize, 117, 669 (in w/j-cleft), 745 &
749 (in reported speech)
really, 83
recall, 689-690 & 693 (-mg
complements), 696 & 701
recently, 513
reckon, 208n8
recognize, 117
recommend, 376 (with indirect
object), 684 & 692 (in subjunctive
complement), 738 (in reported
speech)
red, 407 (adjective order)
refuse, 381, 687 & 693 (infinitive
complement)
regret, 687 (infinitive complement),
689 & 693 (gerund complement),
693, 717 (nonfactive)
regrettably, 517
regularly, 525-531 (preverbal adverb
of frequency)
rejoice, 749 (in reported speech)
relieved, 399-400
rely on, 418
remain, 59, 469 (with there), 471
remainder of, the, 340
remember, 46, 687 (infinitive
complement), 689-690 (-mg
complements), 693, 696, 706nll,
718 (implicative verb), 745 (in
reported speech)
remind, 745 (in reported speech)
repair, 119
report, 397, 706n4, Ch 33 (Reported
Speech and Writing: 73 If)
request, 380 (with indirect object), 684
& 692 (in subjunctive complement)
require, 684 & 692 (in subjunctive
complement), 706n9, 738 (in
reported speech)
resemble, 117, 356, 412n4 (resembling)
reserve, 396 (attributive adjective)
respectively, 488
responsible, 400 (predicate or
attribute adjective)
rest, 59 (verb), 340 {rest of)
resume, 689 & 693 (gerund
complements)
reveal, 376 (with indirect object), 379,
749 (in reported speech)
right, 767, 791 ท4
right?, 269
rightful, 396
rise, 360
risk, 689 & 693 (gerund complements)
roast, 381
rough, 403
round, 403,407 (adjective order)
rule out, 452
rumor, 715 (in complex passive)
Index
run, 59, 117, 120,444-445 &
448^-49 (in phrasal verbs), 469
(with there)
rural, 396
-s, 36, 61 (subject-verb agreement)
’ร, 330nl4, 330nl6, Ch 16
(possession: 306-307, 318-319),
321-323
safe, 714 (easy-to-please construction)
said, 731, 754-755 (with that)
salt, 56n3
same, 309, 395 (attributive adjective),
805 (comparative)
say, 374 (with indirect object), 380,
669 (in 'น)h-cleft), 691 & 699 {that
complement), Ch 33 (Reported
Speech and Writing: 73 If), 745 &
749 (in reported speech)
scarcely (any), 186, 336 (quantifier),
5391117
scarcely ever, 526-528
school, 296
second, 545, 555
see, 46, 117,118, 683 & 699 (that-
complement), 689-690 (-dug
complements), 716 (in complex
passive), 745-746 (in reported
speech)
seem, 59 (copula), 117 (description),
117 (state), 708 & 710 (with
raising), 717 (nonfactive), 728nl
seem like, 709, 805
seldom, 186, 525-531 (preverbal
adverb of frequency)
self-same, 309, 395 (attributive
adjective)
-self/ves, 307, 315
sell, 376, 377 (with indirect object),
380
send, 376, 376 (with indirect object)
set up, 452
several, 343
shall, Ch 8 (modals: 137f), 147-148,
764nl (in reported speech)
shall we?, 269
shallow, 803
shatter, 359
she, 313
sheer, 396 (attributive adjective)
short, 403 (adjective order), 777, 782,
803
should, Ch 8 (modals: 137f), 148 (vs.
shall), 151 (vs. ought to, be supposed
to), 159nl-2, 578 & 581-584 &
590 (in conditional), 764nl (in
reported speech)
shouldn’t we?, 269
show, 376 (with indirect object),
381,455 (showup), 683 & 699
(àt-complement), 742 & 745 &
748 (in reported speech)
sick, 354,401
significant, 717 (factive)
similar, 780, 805
similarly, 545, 554-555
since, 500, 543f
single, 396
sit down, 448
slow, 403, 777
small, 403,407 (adjective order)
smell, 59,117, 689 & 693 (gerund
complement)
smooth, 403
so, 309,484 & 486 (adverb), 487 &
490 (conjunction), 5O7n2, 507n9,
578 (in conditional), 783 (vs. as),
797 (vs. so and very)
so (much)... as, 781
so long as, 588 (conditional)
so that, 543
soft, 403
sole, 396
some, 197, 220 (inyes/no questions),
Ch 15 (Articles: 281f), 336, 336
(quantifier), 343,498
some of the time, 528
somebody, 234 (singular use), 310
(singular use), 330
someone, 310 (singular use), 330
someone else, 310
something, 310
sometimes, 517-518, 525-531
(preverbal adverb of frequency)
somewhere/place, 330n6
soon, 121
sorry (for), 39, 418
sound, 59, 117
sound like, 709, 805
spin, 359
stand, 59, 448 (in phrasal verb), 469
(with there)
start, 687 (infinitive complement), 689
& 693 (gerund complement), 693
still, 121,13 5n9, 545
stolen, 401 (attributive or predicate
adjective)
stop, 689 & 693 (gerund
complements)
store, 290
strike, 46-47
strong(er), 403
stubborn, 403
study, 117
substitute for, 418
succeed, 718 (implicative verb)
such, 284, 309
such ... that, Ch 35 (Degree—
Complements and Superlatives:
793 y
such as, Ch 21 (Prepositions: 415f,
417), 550 (ys.for example)
suggest, 684 & 692 (in subjunctive
complement), 738 & 748-749 &
752 (in reported speech)
suit, 356 (verb)
suitcase, 283
sum up, 452
suppose, 208n8, 588
supposition, 717 (factivity)
surely, 80, 516
surpass, 776
suspect, 749 (in reported speech)
swim, 117
take, 445 & 448 & 452 (in phrasal
verbs)
take on, 452
take place, 360
take up, 452
tall, 398, 403 (polarity), 413n9, 777,
782,803
taste, 59,117,119
tea, 294
teach, 376 (with indirect object), 381,
742 (in reported speech)
tell, 376, 381, 384 (with indirect
object), 738 & 745 (in reported
speech)
temple, 296
tend, 687 & 693 (infinitive
complement)
than, 314, 767-770 (in comparative),
813n7
that, 22, 23, 282, 308, 316-318,
439n4, Ch 28 (relative clauses:
605f),610,617,618,630n3,
Ch 29 (relative clauses: 63If),
637-639, 645 (in relative clause),
661-662 (in zi-clefts), 684, Ch 31
(Complementation: 679f),
681-684, 690-691, 697, 706n2,
706nl2, Ch 32 (Other Aspects of
Complementation: 707f),
Ch 33 (Reported Speech and
Writing: 731f), 735 & 737-738
(deictic shifts), 754-755 (with said),
773 (with comparatives)
their, 306
theirs, 306
them,	Ch 16 (Reference and
Possession: 306Í)
themselves, 307, 315, 657 (emphatic)
then,	329n4, 555, 578 (in conditional)
there, 23, 68-69, 329n4,419
(preposition deletion), 439n5,
490n4, 618 (in relative clause),
Ch 23 (nonreferential: 463f), 665
(emphatic), 736 (deictic shifts)
therefore, 545, 552, 555, 560-561
these, 22-23, 37, 308, 316-318
they, 313-314 (non-sexist use), Ch 16
(reference: 3061), 330n8 (singular),
363 (nonanaphoric), 480n2
think, 117, 122, 208n8, 371n4 (in
passive), 397 (with predicate
adjective), 669 (in ^^-cleft), 686
(infinitive complement), 697, 745
& 749 (in reported speech)
Words, Phrases, and Affixes
899
this, 22-23, 308-309, 316-318, 419
(preposition deletion), 645 (in
relative clause), 735 & 737-738
(deictic shifts)
those, 22-23, 316-318, 773 (with
comparatives)
though, 519 (in adverbial), Ch 26
(Logical Connectors: 543f), 553
thousands, 349n6
through, 430^431 (vs. between), Ch 21
(Prepositions: 415f), 429 (meaning),
439n8,447 (in phrasal verbs)
throw, 376 (with indirect object),
381
throw away, 445, 448
thus, 551, 555, 560-561
till, 429
to, 23, Ch 21 (Prepositions: 4151),
430, 447 (in phrasal verbs), 513
(in prepositional phrases), 685 &
691-692 (infinitive complements),
696 (vs. -for infinitive), 712
(adjective complements), 713
(extraposition), 716 (in complex
passive), 718 (infinitives with
implicative verbs), 738 (in reported
speech)
to my mind, 417
to sum up, 555
today, 419 (preposition deletion)
tomorrow, 419 (preposition deletion),
734	& 735 (deictic shifts)
tonight, 419 (preposition deletion),
735	(deictic shifts)
too, 22,186, 498-499, 499-500,
729nlO, 793f, 797 (vs. so and very),
812n2
total, 396 (attributive adjective),
412n4 ('totaling')
totally, 767
touch, 46-47
toward, 429 (meaning)
transmit, 376 (with indirect object)
true, 396 (attributive adjective)
try, 687 (infinitive complement), 689
& 693 (gerund complement), 693
(infinitive vs. gerund)
turn, 59, 397 (with predicate
adjective), 442-447 & 449 & 454
(in phrasal verbs)
turn out, 709
twice, 343
typically, 516
ugly, 406 (adjective order)
un- 185-187,813nll
under, 430
under-, 419 (lexical compounds), 776
(inherent comparatives)
under, Ch 21 (Prepositions: 415f),
429 (meaning), 776 (inherent
comparatives)
underneath, 430
understand, 117-118,683 & 691
(rto-complement), 686 (infinitive
complement), 749 (in reported
speech)
unfortunately, 518-519
unless, 186, 604nl0, Ch 26 (Logical
Connectors: 5431), 586-587 (in
conditional)
unlike, 805
unlikely, 710
until, 103n2,135n6,430, 530
(in adverbial), Ch 26 (Logical
Connectors: 5431)
unwilling, 712 (with complement)
up, 441, 447 (in phrasal verbs),
448
up to now, 555
urban, 396
urge, 686 (infinite complement), 686
(with subjunctive complement),
738 (in reported speech)
us, Ch 16 (reference: 3061), 416 (with
preposition)
used to, 127,140-141,149, 159n4,
169 (in discourse), 182n7, 214 (in
yes/no questions)
usually, 516, 525-531 (preverbal
adverb of frequency), 538nl 1
utter, 396 (attributive adjective)
vanish, 360
very, 22, 83-84, 395 (attributive
adjective), 400 (intensifier), 404,
797 (vs. so and very), 813n3
vow, 687 & 693 (infinitive
complement)
walk, 58, 60, 117 (activity verb), 469
(with there)
want, 117, 208n8, 356 (in passive),
371n3, 397 (with predicate
adjective), 669 (in cleft),
687-688 (infinitive complement),
693, 716 (in complex passive)
warn, 745 (in reported speech)
warn/warning, 742 (in reported speech)
wash, 118
watch, 688 (infinitive complement),
689-690 (-ing complements), 696
(bare infinitive vs. subject participle
complements),·? 16 (in complex
passive)
water, 283
way more, 779
we, 311, 323, 480n2, Ch 16
(reference: 3O5f)
weed, 56n3
weigh, 117, 356
well, 397 (health adjective)
well-worn, 398
were, 583 (in conditional), 589,
604nl2
wet, 403
what, 273 (exclamatory question),
284 (exclamation), 639 & 648 (in
relative clause), 662-663 & 669
(in wh-cleft), 677n3, 742-744 (in
embedded questions), Ch 13 (Un-
Questions: 245f)
what kind of, 254
whatever, 588 (conditional)
when, 662 (in wh-cleft), 742-744 (in
embedded questions), Ch 13
(fm-Questions: 245f), Ch 26
(Logical Connectors: 543f), 580
(in conditional), 636-639 (in
relative clause)
whenever, 580 & 588 (in conditional)
where, 480n4, Ch 13 (Jin-Questions:
2451), Ch 26 (Logical Connectors:
543f), 637-639 (in relative clause),
662 (in wh-cleft), 713 (extraposition
of free relatives), 742-744 (in
embedded questions)
whereas, Ch 26 (Logical Connectors:
543f),573n9
wherever, 588 (conditional)
whether (... or not), 587
(conditional), 742 (in indirect
questions), 745-746 (vs. if), 765n5
which, 254 (in questions), 316,
Ch 28 (relative clauses: 6051), 617,
630n3, 632, 637, 639, 742-744 (in
embedded questions)
while, 511 (in adverbial), Ch 26
(Logical Connectors: 5431), 551
(vs. during), 553
white, 407 (adjective order)
who, 252 (vs. whom), Ch 13 (พh-
Questions: 2451), Ch 28 & 29
(relative clauses: 6051), 610, 613f,
617, 639, 648, 662 (in ir-clefts),
662 (in wh-cleft), 677n3, 713
(extraposition of free relatives),
742-744 (in embedded questions)
whole of, the, 340
whom, 252 (vs. who), 610 (relative
clause), 617
who(m)ever, 588 (conditional)
whose, 251 (in w£-questions), 254,
307, 610 (in relative clause)
why, Ch 13 (แ^-questions: 245f),
636-637 (in relative clause), 662 (in
w^-cleft)
wicked, 399
wide, 403,407 (adjective order)
will, 106-108 (future), 129 (simple
future vs. other ways), Ch 8 (modals:
1371), 151-152 (vs. going to), 163-164
(in Lull Framework), 170-173 (in
discourse), 582 (in conditional), 590,
733 & 764nl (in reported speech)
willing, 712 (with complement)
win, 117, 120
wine, 294
wire, 381
Index
wish, 117, 208ท8, 376 (with indirect
object), 588
with, 391n6, Ch 21 (Prepositions:
415f), 423 & 427-428 (meaning),
447 (in phrasal verbs), 513 (in
adverbial)
with respect to, 417
wonder, 741 & 744—745 (in reported
speech)
won’t, 190
won’t you?, 269
wooden, 407 (material adjective order)
worse, 310, 772 (comparative)
worth, 729n9 (be worth V + -ing)
would, 127,182n7, Ch 8 (modals:
1371), 159nll, 168 (in discourse),
174, 551 & 582 & 590 & 604nll
(in conditional)
would like, 159-160, Ch 8 (modals:
137Í), 159-160nll
would prefer, 160
would rather, 160
would that, 588
write, 117, 376, 449 (in phrasal verbs)
wrong, 767, 791n4
-y, 394
year, 65
yellow, 407 (adjective order)
yes, 271 (yes/no questions), Ch 11
(Yes/No Questions: 2091), 215 (short
answers), 217 (negative questions),
220 (short answers)
yesterday, 419 (preposition deletion),
734 & 735 (deictic shifts)
yet, 120,186, 484 & 490 & 493
(conjunction), 493-494 (vs. but)
you, 221 (deletion in elliptical
questions), 232 & 234 (imperatives),
Ch 16 (Reference and Possession:
305Í), 736 (deictic shifts)
young, 208n9, 777, 803
your, 306, 323
yours, 286
yourself/ves, 232, 307
Words, Phrases, and Affixes
901
Index of Topics
"ท" means that the information is in an endnote rather than in the main text.
The ร}ๆทboi
ablative case, 427
accomplishment verbs, 117-120
achievement verbs, 117-120
active voice, 358, 362-363
activity verbs, 117-120
adjective phrases, complex,
postnominal, 636
adjective(s), 22-23, 392^413
attributive, 395-396
attributive vs. predicative position
of, 400-401
collective nouns derived from, 335
complements of, 712-713
co-occurrence of prepositions
with, 418
emphatic, 657-658
-er vs. more with, 779-780
-est vs. most with, 799-800
form of, 394-400
gradability of, 404-405
meaning of, 400^407
negative, 185
participial, 74n2 ...
past participles as passive or, 358
plus nouns, 37
polarity of, 403-404
predicative, 396-398
primary stress rule for, 407
proper, 413nl0
restrictive/nonrestrictive, 403
stative/dynamic, 402-403
transitive vs. intransitive, 37
usage issues, 407
variable order of, 407
adverb clauses
of condition, 576
nonrestrictive use of, 638
punctuation with, 522
reduced forms of, 523
relative, 638-639
sentence-final adverbiais as,
512-513
adverbial participles, 522-525
discourse function of -ing clauses,
413n8
form of, 522-523
sentence-final clauses, 524—525
sentence-initial, 523-524
adverbial phrases, sentence-final
adverbiais as, 513-515
adverbial prepositional phrase
fronting, 660
adverb subordinators
because, 553
clauses with, 542-545
complex, 543
concessives, 553
meaning of, 551-552
punctuation with, 548-549
sentence syntax with, 544—545
simple, 543
adverbial(s), 509-539
conjunctive, 545-547
internal structure of, 83-84
of manner, direction, and
position, 97
past-time, 122
of position, 660
of purpose and reason, 97
sentence-final, 96-97, 512-515. See
also sentence-final adverbiais
sentence-initial, 519-520. See also
sentence-initial adverbiais
adverb(s), 22
deletion from relative clause, 638
emphatic, 657-658
-er vs. more with, 779-780
-est vs. T/zoriwith, 799-800
no in,186
preverbal, 525-532
relative, 645
sentential, 80
of tense and time, 120-121
advice, giving with modals, 144
affirmations, indirect, 221
affixation, derivational, 41
agented passives, 363-364
alternatives questions, 271-272
ambient it, 465-466
ambiguity, with prepositional
phrases, 634—635
animal nouns, 43
answers
to tag questions, 269
to ๗-questions, 258
to yes/no questions, 217-218
antecedent, 317
antonym, 47
apostrophe, possessives and, 318
appositive, nonrestrictive relative
clause and, 635
appositive clause, 635
argument structure, 46-47
arithmetical operations, subject-verb
agreement with, 65
articles, 281-304
definite, 285-286, 803
demonstratives and, 317
form of, 282
with geographical names, 291
indefinite, 282-286
meaning of, 285-287
null article, 286-287
problems involving, 297
pronunciation of, 282
syntax of, 284—285
uses of, 287-297
zero, 286-287
aspect
with infinitives and gerunds,
694-695
passive with, 353-343
perfect, 89-90, 113-114
phrasal verbs of, 449-450
preverbal adverbs of, 530
progressive, 89-90, 115-116
structural markers of, 96
attitude, verbs for, 117
attribution, methods of, 742-744
attributive adjectives, 395-396
order of, 405-407
attributive position, adjective in, 400,
400-401
auxiliary verb
be as, 60
modals. See modals
phrase structure rules for, 89-91
sentence-level negation with,
188-189
subject-operator inversion with,
211-212
in ๗-questions, 249
backshifting, 732-735
bare infinitive, subject-participle
complement vs., 696-697
bare-stern infinitives, 688
be copula
adjective position after, 395
difference from other verbs, 58-60
as learning problem, 60-61
meaning of, 60
past tense, 58
present tense, 58
sentence-level negation with, 191
structural roles of, 60
subject-operator inversion with, 213
use of, 60
๗-questions with, 252-253
be verb
as auxiliary, 60
negative imperatives with, 233-234
as passive verb, 357-358
as true verb, 60
benefactive verbs, 380-381, 427
binomials, 38
boundary problem, 127
Bull framework
for imaginative conditionals,
584—585
for tense, 162-167
903
case, semantics of, 427-428
causative constructions, 697-698
change-of-state copulas, 59
change-of-state verbs, 359
clauses
adverbial, 513, 522, 552-554
with adverb subordinates,
542-545
appositive, 635
conditional, 578
coordinate, 500
dependent, 681
embedded, 24. See also relative
clauses
sentence-final if, 593-594
small, 93
subjunctive, 692
subordinate, 24, 554-555
that, 681-683,710,731-732
it-, 661-662
พ#-, 662-663
cognition verbs, 685
cognitive styles, learners’, 6
cohesion, 27
collective nouns, 63-64, 334-335
subject-verb agreement with, 75nl 1
collocation, 34, 38-39
command, imperative mood as, 231
common nouns, 43, 64, 283
nongeneric, 287-292
proper nouns vs., 283
shifts involving, 295
comparative inflection of adjectives,
394
comparative quantifiers, 339-340
comparative reference, 308-310
comparatives
construction types of, 769-770
-er vs. more, 779—780
irregular forms, 772
less vs. fewer, 778-779
marked, 777-778
meaning issues, 775-776, 782-783
negative equatives vs. marked
negative, 784
other constructions, 774-775
substitute expressions used with,
772-773
surpass, 768
use of, 777-778	K
comparison
forms of, 768
fronting, 659-660
by juxtaposition, 768
limited scope, 768
other forms used to express, 776
particular, 310 -
using degree morphemes, 768
complementation, 679-706
complex passives, 715-716
easy-to-please construction, 720-721
factives and implicatives, 717-718
raising to subject, 709-710. See also
complements
complementizer, 682-683
in indirect questions, 741-742
as and than, 780
complements
adjective, 712-713
common meaning within types
of, 692
complex-NP, 710-712
degree, 793-813
extraposition and, 713-714
form of, 681-698
gerund, 689-690, 693,697
infinitive, 684—688, 693
subject-participle, 690, 696-697
subjunctive, 683-684
that-, 681-683,691,698-699
use of, 698-699
See also complementation
complex passives, 715-716
complex sentence, 24
compounding words, 40-41, 481
concessives, 553
concrete nouns, 43
conditional sentences, 575-604
factual, 580
frequency of, 589-591
future (or predictive), 581-582
imaginative, 582-583
syntactic analysis of, 576-578
use of, 591-592
See also conditionals
conditionals
explicit inference factual, 581
form of, 576-579
generic factual, 580
habitual factual, 580
implicit inference, 580-581
so (much)...as in, 781, 783-784
subject-operator inversion in, 578
See also conditional sentences
confirmation checks, 171, 182n9
conjunction(s), 23
and/or, 497-498
and, 490-492
but, 493-494
coordinate clauses without, 500
coordinating, 481-507. See also
coordinating conjunctions
correlative, ?88
or, 494-496
so, 496-49'7
too/either and so/neither, 498-500
yet, 493
conjunctive adverbiais, 545-547
meaning of, 558-561
placement in sentence of,
554-555
propositional frames for, 556-557
punctuation with, 549-550
connectors
conditional and related, 586-587
logical. See logical connectors
connotation, 45
contraction, not, 190-191
contrast
but as marker of, 493-494
conditionals to introduce, 591
ii-cleft implying, 661
conversation
พ#-clefts in, 669-671
See also discourse
conversion, 42
coordinate clauses, without
conjunctions, 500
coordinating conjunctions, 481-507
combining like constituents with,
482^484
ellipsis, 485^487
gapping, 487
meaning and use of, 489-500
phrasal vs. sentential negation
with, 486
pro-forms, 487-488
punctuation with, 548
sentences with respectively, 488
simple, 484-485
See also conjunctions
coordination, process of, 24
copulas
be. See be copula
change-of-state, 59
perception, 59
state, 59
core determiners, 81, 343, 806
correlative conjunction, 488
correlatives, proximity rule for, 68
count nouns, 283-284
articles with, 283-284
fewer before plural, 778-779
partitive constructions and, 332
plural, 309
quantifiers with, 338-339
singular, 309
dative alternation, 385
dative case, 427
dative verbs, 380
declarative mood, 25, 231
definite article, 282
co-occurrence of superlatives
with, 803
as core determiner, 806
definite determiner, with logical
subject, 470
degree
comparatives, 767-791. See also
comparatives
comparison complements, 793-813.
See also degree complements
equatjve constructions, 780-783.
See also equative constructions
fronting, 659-660
morphemes, 768
superlatives, 798-805
Index
deictic shifts, 735-737
in pronouns, 738
time/place adverbial shifts, 738
demonstrative reference, 308
demonstratives
emphatic here and there with, 665
meaning of, 315-316
with personal pronouns and
articles, 315-318
use in discourse, 315-318
denial
of expectation, 493
indirect, 221
negation and, 194
denotation, 45
dependent clauses, tto-complements
as, 681
derivational affixation, 41
derivational morphemes, 35
derivational rule, obligatory, 204n6
derivations
common word, 34
notations for, 239n2
descriptions, verbs for, 117
desire, modals and, 145,159nll
determiners, 23, 81
core, 343
definite, 470, 806
demonstrative, 345-318
indefinite, 470
order in noun phrase, 343
plus nouns, 3 7
possessive, 306-307, 323
post, 806
quantifiers as, 337-338
syntax of, 284—285
difference, referential forms of,
309-310
diffuse imperatives, 234
direct objects, 3
separable phrasal verbs and,
453-454
verbs with obligatory vs. deletable,
375
direct quotation, 731
direct request,yes/no questions for, 222
discourse
background and foreground in, 27
Chafe’s observations on tenses in,
165-166
communities of, 49-50
demonstratives in, 315-318
free indirect, 744
inferential logical connectors in,
551-552
nongeneric common nouns in, 289
patterning in written, 173-174
possessives functions in, 320-321
prepositions in, 430-431
quantifiers considerations in,
343-343
suprasentential grammar level
and, 3
tense-aspect-modality (TAM)
system in, 161-181
there in oral, 473
there in written, 473-474
ditransitive verbs, 108n8
dominance principle, 452-453
easy-to-please construction,
720-721
echo question, 219
eliciting case, 427
eliciting verbs, 380
ellipsis, 481,485-487
elliptical imperatives, 234—235
elliptical, 221, 257
embedded clauses, 24
advise-type infinitives in, 686
passives within, 715-716
subjunctive complement in, 683
ite-complement in, 681
embedded sentence
object in, 610-612
object of preposition in,
613-616
possessive determiner in, 616
subject in, 609-610
embedding, 606
process of, 24
See also embedded clauses/
embedded sentence
emotive verbs, 117, 401-402, 749
emphasis
focus and, 655-677
syntactic means for expressing,
660-663
emphatic adjectives, 657-658
emphatic adverbs, 657-658
emphatic do, 656-657, 664
emphatic forms, meaning and use of,
664-671
emphatic here and there, 665
emphatic logical connectors, 658
emphatic own, 657, 664
emphatic reflexive pronouns, 657
end focus, 29
equative constructions
affirmative, 781
comparatives vs., 784
form and meaning of, 780-783
negative, 781
patterns for, 780
usage issues, 783-784
ergative verbs, 359-361
exclamatory mood, 25
exclamatory questions, 273-274
existential there, 456-466
extraposition
formal aspects of, 713-714
use of, 718-720
factive predicates, 717-718
field, 28
phrasal verbs and, 452
focus
emphasis and, 655-677
special constructions, 660-663
syntactic means for expressing,
660-663
formality
articles and, 295
modals and, 140-141
phrasal verbs and, 452
See also register
fractions, subject-verb agreement
with, 64
frame-elaboration hypothesis,
167-170
free indirect discourse, 744
free relatives, 663, 669
frequency, preverbal adverbs of,
528-532
fronting, 659-660
extent/degree/comparison,
659-660
present participle, 666
with or without subject-verb
inversion, 660
functional criterion, for identifying
words, 18
future conditionals, 581-582
future perfect, 114
simple future vs., 126
future perfect progressive, 116
future progressive, 116
future tense, 105
simple, 112-113
futurity, other ways of indicating,
124-126
gapping, 487
gender
notional, 321
of nouns, 43
generalizations, conditionals and,
591-592
genre, 28
geographical names, 290-291
articles with, 290-291
gerunds
aspectual options in, 694-694
complements, 689-690, 697
infinitives vs., 721
-ing complements, 693
verbs taking, 693
get-passive, 354, 357-358
given information, 28-29
gradability, of adjectives, 404—405
grammar
defined, 2-5
dimensions of, 3-4
levels of, 1-2
nature of rules in, 2-3
pedagogical vs. linguistic, 4—5
habit formation, 5
ta>e-passive, 354-355
Topics
905
head noun, 806
hedges, indirect, 221
hierarchy, property of, 79-81
historical present tense, 166-167
homography, 42-43
homonymy, 42-43
homophony, 42^-3
humor, conditionals and, 592
hypothesis testing, 5
identity, referential, 309
idiom, 38,44
idiomatic phrasal verbs, 451
imperative mood, 25, 91, 231
See also imperatives
imperatives, 231-244
assumed cooperation in, 239
diffuse, 234
elliptical, 234—235
emphatic affirmative, 656-657
form of, 232-235
function and form of, 237-238
indirect, 738-739
let and, 237, 244n2
meaning and, 235-237
negative, 233-234
politeness and use of, 239, 244n3
tags added to, 270nl
use of, 237-240
implicative verbs, 718
indefinite article, 282
a/an, 286
some, 286
indefinite determiner, with logical
subject, 470
indefinite pronouns, 310
negative, 186
indicative mood, 231
See also declarative mood
indirect imperatives, 738-739
indirect objects
alternation of, 382-385
form of sentences with, 374—379
implied, 375
meaning issues with, 381
most likely occurrences of, 385
optional postverbal, 375
optional prepositional, 375
in passive voice, 378-379
sentences with, 373-392
separable phrasal verbs and,
453-454
subcategorization of verbs taking,
376
use of, 382-385
verbs followed by, 382
indirect reporting, quotation vs. in
writing, 751-753'.
indirect speech, 731-744
indirect imperatives in, 738-739
indirect questions, 740-741
subjunctives in, 738
tense sequence in, 732-735
inferential connective, 491-492
infinitive complements, 684—688
enough plus, 796-797
too (much/little) plus, 794—795
verbs taking, 691
infinitives)
for/to, 687-688
advise-type, 686
aspectual options in, 694—694
attew.pt-type, 686-687
bare-stern, 688, 696-697
believe-type, 685-686
to-complements, 693
gerunds vs., 721
let-type, 688
ordinary vs. purpose, 695
want-type, 687-688
inflectional morphemes, 35
of adjectives, 394
inflection(s), 77
comparative, 394
Germanic system of, 77
possessive, 318-323
superlative, 394, 799-800
inherent negatives, 186, 201
intensifiers, 22
adverbial phrase, 83-84
interaction, use of nongeneric
common nouns in, 289
interlanguage, 10
interrogative mood, 25, 231
intonation
phonological form and, 656
of tag questions, 269
oiyes/no questions, 210
intransitive adjectives, 37
intransitive phrasal verbs, 444
intransitive verbs, 687
inversion, present participle, 666
invitation, modals and, 145, 160nll
it, nonreferential, 465-466
Zi-cleffs, 661-662, 668-669
juxtaposition, comparison by, 768
L2 morpheme acquisition, 62
language
approaches to teaching, 1-2
subject-prominent, 62
topic-prominent, 62
See also Index'òf Languages and
Language Groups
learning
challenges in, 10-11
process of, 5-6
lexical categories, 77
See also .parts of speech
lexical devices, 656-658
lexical level of negation, 184—185
lexical phrases, 39-40
lexical process, productive, 40-42
lexicogrammar, 1, 33-56,45
lexicon, 33-56
meaning extension in, 44
See also words
limited scope comparison, 768
linearity, property of, 77-79
linguistic ecology, 430
linguistics
corpus, 5
structural, 5
literal phrasal verbs, 448
living nouns, 43
logical connectors, 541-573
because vs. because of, 550
choosing similar meaning, 566
emphatic, 658
for example vs., such as, 550-551
inferential, 551-552
meaning and use of, 551-565
overuse of, 564
punctuation with, 547
truth conditional vs. inferential,
551
types of, 541
uses of, 551-552
logical operator, and as, 490-491
main clause, 24
marked word order, 658-659, 665-667
markedness, 26
comparatives forms and, 777-778
of superlatives, 803-804
measurement, verbs for, 117
mental perception, verbs for, 117
metalanguage, grammatical, 17-32
middle voice, 359-361
modal auxiliaries, 137-152
เSee also modals
modals, 90
contexts of meaning and use for,
141-	144
defined, 137
form of, 138-141
giving advice and, 144
logical probability meanings of,
150-152
meanings of, 142-143
necessity and, 144
negation and, 143-144
phrasal modal counterparts with,
142-	143
prediction and, 151-152
sequences in frame-elaboration
hypothesis, 167-170
shifts in, 764nl
social functions of, 144—146
use of phrasal forms and, 144—152
yes/no question with, 216
mode, 28
morphemes
categories of, 35-36
negation, 195
prepositions as free, 416
morphological devices, 656-658
morphological rules, 77
Index
morphology
irregularity of, 34
subsentential grammar level and, 3
names
geographical, 290-291
personal, 295
trade, 295
narrative
first vs. subsequent mention of
articles in, 288-289
Levey’s structure for, 166
necessity, modals and, 144
negation, 183-208
affixal vs. nonaffixal, 200
contracted vs. uncontracted, 200
forms of, 184—193
functional negatives, 201-202
lexical level of, 184-185
meaning of, 193-197
modals and, 143-144
negative equatives, 200-201
notvร. no, 199
phrasal vs. sentential, 486
phrase level of, 186-187
preverbal adverbs and, 529
problems for ESL/EFL students
with, 183-184
scope of, 195-196
shift in meaning with, 196-197
some vs. any with, 197
system of, 198-202
See also negatives
negative equative, 781, 784
negatives
and/or alternation with, 497-498
disyllabic, 190
fronting, 659
functional, 201-202
imperatives, 233-234
inherent, 186, 201
monosyllabic, 190
much and many with, 339
yes/no questions, 217
See also negation
new information, 28-29
noncount nouns, 283-284
articles with, 283
partitive constructions and, 332
quantifiers with, 338-339
nonfactive predicates, 717-718
nonintervention, principles of, 69
nonreferential it, 465-466
nonreferential there, 466-474
nonrestrictive adjectives, 403
nonrestrictive relative clauses
sentence form with, 362-636
use in speaking, 620-621
use in writing, 622-623
notional gender, 321
noun phrases
function of, 84
indefinite and generic, 310
internal structure of, 81-83
order of determiners in, 343
relativized, 607
subject in command, 231
noun predicates
object, 99-100
syntactic roles of, 93-94
noun(s), 19-20
adjectives plus, 37
animal, 43
classification of, 283-284
collective, 63-64, 334—335
common, 43, 64, 283-284
concrete, 43
co-occurrence of prepositions with,
417-418
count, 20, 283-284, 332. See also
count nouns
defined, 18
deletion of head in relative clause,
637-638
determiners plus, 37
gender of, 43
head, 806
living, 43
mass-to-count shifts in, 284
morphologically irregular, 56nl
nominalized, 56n3
noncount, 283, 283-284, 332. See
also noncount nouns
partitive, 778
plural, 82
plural pronouns with singular, 306
proper, 64, 275, 283
reporting, 742-743
singular proper, 37
o/before specific, 339
null article, 295-297
numbers, as nouns, 334
object noun predicates, 99-100
object pronouns, 306
objects, indirect, 373-392
See also indirect objects
object-subject-verb word order,
658-659
offers, modals and, 144, 160nl 1
operator-addition, 192
and subject inversion in
conditionals, 578
opinion, verbs for, 117
orthographic rules, 77
orthography, 34
paraphrasing, or in, 495, 731
participial adjectives, 74n2
participle phrases, extraposed, 671
participle phrases, present or passive,
635
participles
adjectival vs. verbal, 399-400
adjectives and, 398-400
adverbial, 522-525
not derived from relative
clauses, 635-636
present vs. past, 401
particular comparatives, 310
partitives, 332-334
exceptions with numbers, 334
idiomatic, 333-334
nouns, 778
register with, 339
parts of speech, 19-23
adjectives, 22-23. See also adjectives
adverbs, 22. See also adverbs
conjunctions, 23. See also
conjunctions
determiners, 23. See also
determiners
identifying, 17-19
nouns, 19-20. See also nouns
prepositions, 23. See also
prepositions
pronouns, 22. See also pronouns
verbs, 20-21. See also verbs
See also lexical categories
passive verbs, past participles as
adjectives or, 358
passive voice, 351-371
active voice vs., 362-363
forms of, 352-355
meaning difference between active
and, 358
meaning of, 355-361
semantic constraints on using, 356
sentences with indirect objects in,
378-379
use of, 362-365
passives
agented, 363-364
complex, 715-716
past participles, 74n2, 97-98
as adjectives or passive, 358
fronting, 660
present participles vs., 401
past perfect tense, 114
subsentential grammar level and, 3
past tense
of be, 58
percentages, subject-verb
agreement with, 64
with reporting verbs, 755
simple, 111-112
perception copulas, 59
perfect aspect, 89-90, 113-114
accomplishment verbs with, 117
achievement verbs with, 117
activity verbs with, 117
stative verbs with, 118
yes/no question with, 216
perfect progressive aspect, 90,
115-116
accomplishment verbs with, 119
achievement verbs with, 119
activity verbs with, 119
stative verbs with, 119
Topics
907
periphrastic modals, 139
See also phrasal modals
periphrastic possessive, 318-319
periphrastic possessives, inflected vs.,
321-323
permission, requests for, 146-148
personal names, 295
personal pronouns, demonstratives
and, 315-318
personal reference, 306-308
personification, 44
perspective, shift in, 733
phonetics, of words, 34
phonological form, 656
phonological rules, 77
phrasal forms
contexts of meaning and use for,
142-144
use of modals and, 144—152
phrasal modal, 90
sequences in frame-elaboration
hypothesis, 168-170
yes/no question with, 216
phrasal verbs, 441-461
aspectual, 449-450
form of, 442-447
idiomatic, 451
indirect object ambiguity in,
380-381
literal, 448
meaning of, 448-451
phonological test for, 447-448
polysemous, 451
prepositions and, 442^-47
productivity and idiomaticity
of, 448
semantic categories of, 448-451
separability of, 445
structure rules, 77
syntactic analysis of, 442-443
syntactic features of, 442-447
transitive and intransitive, 444
use of, 452-454
phrase structure rules, 77-79
adjectives and, 400
for auxiliary, 89-91
summary, 98
for verb phrase, 98-99
verb system, 57-75
word order and, 77-88
plural count nouns, 82, 342
plural pronouns, with singular
nouns, 306
plural unit words, 65
polarity, adjective, 403^-04
politeness
with commands, 239
with directives, 592-593
indirectness as sign of, 112
reporting verbs and, 751
rudeness vs., 239
use of imperatives and, 239
polysemous phrasal verbs, 451
polysemy, 42-43
as illusion, 56n4
possessive determiners
in embedded sentence, 616
pronouns and, 306-307
uses of, 323
possessive forms, 318-319
possessive pronoun, 306-307
possessive(s)
inflected vs. periphrastic,
321-323
meaning and use of, 320-323
noun phrases inflected for, 319
periphrasitc, 319
postdeterminers, 82, 343
predicate adjectives, 396-398
predicate position, adjective in, 400,
400-401
predicates)
auxiliary in, 89-91
factive vs. nonfactive, 717-718
noun predicates in, 93-94
object noun, 99-100
prediction, modals and, 151-152
preference, modals and, 144, 160nll
prefix
multiple, 56n2
negative, 185
preposition followed by verbs, 416
prepositional phrases
adverbial, 660
optional, 84
relative clauses and, 634-635
semantically predictive, 84
sentence-final adverbiais as, 513
structural variation in, 94—96
syntactic roles of, 93-94
prepositions, 23, 415-439
abstract definitions vs. prototypes,
421-422
common, 428^429
co-occurrence restrictions
involving, 38
deletion of, 418-419
form of, 416-419
lexical compounding with, 419
for locating objects in space,
420-421
meaning of, 419^429
multilevel strategy for teaching,
431-432 -
phrasal verbs and, 442^447
preposition, object of in embedded
sentence, 613-616
semantics of case and, 427^428
use of, 430-432
word order and, 77
present continuous tense. See present
progressive tense
present participle, 398-399
fronting, 660, 666
inversion, 666
past participles vs., 401
present perfect progressive tense,
115-116
present perfect vs., 122
present perfect tense, 113
present perfect progressive vs., 122
simple past vs., 121-122
present progressive tense, 115-116
simple present vs., 121
present relevance, 755
present tense, 92
of be, 58
historical, 166-167
with reporting verbs, 755-756
simple, 110-111
preverbal adverbs of frequency,
528-532
progressive aspect, 89-90,115-116
accomplishment verbs with, 118
achievement verbs with, 118-119
activity verbs with, 118-119
frequency of, 172
stative verbs with, 119
yes/no question with, 216
pronouns, 22
deictic shifts in, 738
emphatic reflexive, 657
indefinite, 310 object, 306
plural, with singular nouns, 306
possessive, 306-307
reciprocal, 308, 315
reflexive, 307-308, 315
relative, 617-620, 635
subject, 306
proper nouns, 64, 283
common nouns vs., 283
shifting involving, 295
singular, 37
prototypicality, 48
proximity principle, for correlatives,
68
pseudo-modal, 139
See also phrasal modal
punctuation
with adverbial clauses, 522
with adverb subordinators,
548-549
with conjunctive adverbiais, 549-550
with coordinating conjunctions, 548
with logical connectors, 547
with possessive forms, 318-319
quantifiers, 335-342
comparative, 339-340
with count/noncount nouns,
338-339
as determiners, 3 3 7-3 3 8
differences between superlatives
and regular, 804
for differing amounts, 336
discourse considerations in using,
343
minimal contradictions with,
336-337
Index
positive and negative continua for,
336-337
preverbal adverbs of frequency
vs., 528
with special semantic
characteristics, 340-341
of before specific nouns with, 339
subject-verb agreement with, 66
superlative, 339-340
usage issues with, 339
quantity, approximations of, 334
quasi-modals, 139
See also phrasal modals
questions
alternative, 271-272
echo,219
exclamatory, 273-274
indirect, 740-741
much and many with, 339
negative, 217-218
rhetorical, 273-274
statement-form, 225n5
tag, 267-271
uninverted, 218-221
wh-t 245-265. See also w/j-questions
yes/no, 209-230. See alsoyes/no
questions
quotation
direct, 731
indirect reporting vs. in writing,
751-753
shifting and partial, 738
raising to subject rule, 709-710
reciprocal pronouns, 308
antecedent for, 308
meaning and use of, 315
reference
comparative, 308-310
demonstrative, 308
forms that express, 305-310
personal, 306-308
referential forms, scope of, 310
reflexive pronouns, 307-308
antecedent for, 308
emphatic, 657
meaning and use of, 315
register, 28
differences with relative adverb in,
646-647
of logical connectors, 566
with partitives, 339
of phrasal verbs, 452
See also formality
rejection, negation and, 194
relationship, verbs for, 117
relative adverb
deletion from relative clause, 638
relative pronoun vs., 647
use of, 645
relative adverbial clauses, form of,
636-639
relative clauses, 605-630
antecedents in, 66
diversity of, 613-614
extraposed, 671
focus constructions resembling,
660-663
form of, 606-608
free, 639
head noun deletion from, 637-638
nonrestrictive, 632-636
noun phrases in, 607
object-object type, 610-611
object in, 610-612
object-subject type, 612
order of difficulty of, 612-613
participles not derived from, 635-636
relative adverb deletion from, 638
restrictive, 632-636
subject in, 609-610
subject-object type, 610
subject-subject type, 609
use of, 620-623, 620-624
relative pronoun
+ be deletion rule, 635-636,
639-641
relative adverb vs., 647
use of, 617-620
repetition, 7-8
reporting
meaning of devices for, 744—750
reader inferences in extended, 757
usage issues in, 755-757
reporting verbs
complements of, 744—750
emotional-state, 749
interrogative, 749-750
present vs. past tense with, 755-756
semantics of, 746-748
simple declarative, 748-749
requests
making with modals, 146-148
yes/no questions in polite, 227
restrictive adjectives, 403
rheme, 26-27
rhetorical questions,273-274
rudeness, politeness vs., 239
sarcasm, conditionals and, 592
semantic fields, 47-48
semantic information, words and,
34-35
semantics, 3
of case, 427-4-28
feature analysis, 47-48
features, 43^44
restrictions, 43-44
semantics criterion, for identifying
words, 18
sensory perceptions, verbs for, 117
sentence derivation, 101-103
sentence grammar, basic properties
of, 77
sentence modifier, 80
sentence-final adverbiais, 512-515
sentence-final if clauses, 593-594
sentence-initial adverbiais
of course vs. obviously, 517
form of, 523-524
maybe vs. perhaps, 517
meaning of, 516-519
sometimes, 518
use of, 520-522
sentence-initial conditional, 591-592
sentence-initial if clauses, 592-593
sentence-level negation, 187-193
with be copula, 191
-rot with, 190-191
with other main verbs, 192-193
sentential adverbs, 80
sentential grammar level, 3
sentential terminology, 24—27
sibilant consonants, plural ending
after, 75n9
Silent Way approach, 86
similarity, referential forms
expressing, 309
simple aspect, 110-113
lexical verb types and, 117
simple future tense, 124
future perfect vs., 126
future progressive vs., 126
with will, 112-113
simple past tense, 111-112
simple present tense, 111-112
present progressive vs., 121
simple sentence, 24
small clauses, 93
space, prepositions and expressing,
425-427
speaker/writer stance, 755-756
spelling, 34
stance, speaker/writer, 755-756
state copulas, 59
stative verbs, 117-120
in imperative mood, 239n3
stative/dynamic adjectives, 402-403
structural criterion, for identifying
words, 18
subject pronouns, 306
subjective(s), 738
complements, 683-684
mood, 25
subject-object relatives, 610-611
subject-operator inversion, fronting
with, 660
subject-participle complement, 690
bare infinitive vs., 696-697
gerund complements vs., 697
subject(s)
clausal and phrasal, 67-68
compound, 481
of imperative mood, 239n3
nonreferential it and there as,
463-480
and operator inversion in
conditionals, 578
raising to, 709-710
Topics
909
subject-verb inversion, 660, 665-667
subject-verb-object (S-V-O) word
order, 77
subject-verbs agreement, 22, 57-69
arithmetical operations, 65
clausal and phrasal subjects, 67-68
collective nouns, 63-64
with each or every, 67
form and, 60-61
fractions, 64
heuristic principles influencing,
75nl2
meaning and, 63-66
with none, 66
percentages, 64
plural unit words, 65
problems in subject and verb
number choice, 61-62
quantifiers and, 66
relative-clause antecedents and, 66
rule summary, 70-72
there and, 467-469
usage issues, 66-69
subjunctive, verbs, 692
subordinate clause, 24
placement in sentence of adverbial,
554-555
subordination, process of, 24
subsentential grammar level, 3
subsentential terminology, 17-23
suffix
irregular tense form, 92
negative, 186
regular tense form, 92
superlatives)
comparatives vs., 775-776
co-occurrence of definite article,
803
differences between regular
quantifiers and, 804
expression in other languages, 798
inflectional endings, 394, 799-800
lack of double marking with,
804-805
marked vs. unmarked, 803-804
quantifiers, 339-340
similarities with comparative
construction, 799-800
use of, 802-805
suprasentential grammar level, 3
suprasentential terminology, 2 7—2
surface structure rules, 77
surpass comparatives, 768
syntax, 3
of adjectives, 395
sentential grammar level and, 2
tag questions, 267-271
teaching
multifaceted approach to, 7-8
tenor, 28
tense-aspect system, 105-135
formal characteristics, 106-109
meaning in, 109-121
use of, 121-127
See also tense-aspect-modality
(TAM) system
tense-aspect-modality (TAM) system,
161-181
tense(s)
adverbs of, 120-121, 530
future. See future tense
grammatical, 95-96
passive with, 353-343
past. See past tense
present. See present tense
sequence of, 732-735
shifting, 165-167
àt-complements, 681-683
theme, 26-27
theme-rheme distinction, 25-26
there, nonreferential, 466-474
subject-verb agreement and, 467M-69
time
adverbs of, 120-121
marker, 165
shifted, 738
titles, singular verb inflection with,
64
TOEFL (lest of English as a Foreign
Language) preparation class, 10
Total Physical Response
methodology, 7, 241, 454
trade names, 295
transitive adjectives, 37
transitive phrasal verbs, 444
transitive verb, 78
as passive, 356
tree diagrams, 80
trinomials, 38
t-unit, 279n6
uncountable nouns, less before,
778-779
understood you, 232
ungrammatical, 3
unit words, plural, 65
usage issues, 220-223
verb phrase, structure rules for,
98-99
verb tense. See tenses
verb-noun phrâse restrictions, 37
verb(s), 20-21
argument-structure, 46-47
be as auxiliary, 60
benefactive, 380
cognition, 685
co-occurrence of prepositions with,
430-431
complex transitive, 21
copular, 58-60
dative, 380
ditransitive, 21
eliciting, 380
emotive, 689
ergative, 360-361
implicative, 718
with indirect objects, 374
in indirect questions, 741-742
intransitive, 21, 687
lexical aspect of, 117-120
linking, 21
negative, 185
phrasal, 441-461. See also phrasal
verbs
prepositional phrases following,
416
prepositional verbs, 21
reporting, 744-750
semantic classes, 47-48
singular, 307-308
subject-verbs agreement, 21
subjunctive, 692
taking gerunds, 693
taking infinitive complements,
693-694
taking tto-complements, 691
tense forms of, 92. See also tenses,
specific verb tenses
transitive, 21
verb-subject-object (V-S-O) word
order, 77
vividness effect, 755
voice, 26-27
active, 358, 362-363
middle, 359-361
passive, 351-371
warning, or as, 495
พ/;-clefts, 662-663, 669-671
พ/;-fronting, 446-447, 741
'พh-questions
affirmative, 657
alternative combinations, 272
with copula be, 252-253
display, 259
elliptical, 257
embedded indirect, 741
emphatic with ever, 255
form of, 245-253
meaning of, 253-256
negative, 256
phrasal verb in, 446-447
so (much)... as in, 781—784
social uses of, 257
subject vs. predicate, 247-250
uninverted, 255, 257
use of, 256-259
พ/?-fronting, 250-252
'who/whotn, 258
word with demonstratives, 308
word with referential possessive
forms and, 308
yes/no questions vs., 256
word order, 26-27, 77-88
grammatical, 62
for indirect questions, 740-741
marked, 658-659, 665-667
Index
object-subject-verb, 658-659
pragmatic, 62
predicate adjectival/nominal-
subject-copula, 659
subject-verb-object, 77
words
compound, 40-41
connotation of, 45
co-occurrence of, 38. See also
collocation
denotation of, 45
form of, 35-36
inflections of, 82
knowing, 34—35
semantic nuances of, 47-48
yes/no questions, 209-230
alternative questions vs.,
271-272
elliptical, 221
focused, 218
form of, 211-216
intonation in, 210
meaning of, 216-220
negative, 217
short answers to, 215-216
some vs. any in, 220
statement-form questions, 218
subject-operator inversion with,
211-214
uninverted, 218-221, 223
you, understood, 232
zero article, 286-287, 295-297
zero aspect, 107
zero-quotatives, 744
Topics
911