THE OXFORD HANDBOOK 〇 F
JAPANESE
LINGUISTICS
Edited by
SHIGERU MIYAGAWA
AND MAMORU SAITO
OXFORD
UNIVERSITY PRESS
2008
OXFORD
UNIVERSITY PRESS
Oxford University Press, Inc., publishes works that further
Oxford University's objective of excellence
in research, scholarship, and education.
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With offices in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
Copyright © 2008 by Oxford University Press, Inc.
Published by Oxford University Press, Inc.
198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016
www.oup.com
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
The Oxford handbook of Japanese linguistics / Edited by Shigeru Miyagawa
and Mamoru Saito.
Includes index.
ISBN 978-0-19-530734-4
.Japanese language~ rammar. I. Miyagawa, Shigeru. II. Saito, Mamoru.
PL533.094 2008
49565― C22	2007041899
135798642
Printed in the United States of America
on acid-free paper
Contents
Contributors, vii
1.	Introduction, 3
Shigeru Miyagawa and Mamoru Saito
2.	On the Causative Construction, 20
Heidi Harley
3.	Japanese -Wa, -Ga, and Information Structure, 54
Caroline Heycock
4.	Lexical Classes in Phonology, 84
Junko Ito and Armin Mester
5.	On Verb Raising,107
Hideki Kishimoto
6.	Nominative Object,141
Masatoshi Koizumi
7.	Japanese Accent,165
Haruo Kubozono
8.	Ga/No Conversion,192
Hideki Maki and Asako Uchibori
9.	Processing Sentences in Japanese, 217
Edson T. Miyamoto
10.	The Acquisition of Japanese Syntax, 250
Keiko Murasugi and Koji Sugisaki
11.The Syntax and Semantics of Floating Numeral Quantifiers, 287
Kimiko Nakanishi
Vi CONTENTS
12.	V-V Compounds, 320
Kunio Nishiyama
13.	Wh-Questions, 348
Norvin Richards
14.	Indeterminate Pronouns, 372
Junko Shimoyama
15.	Noun Phrase Ellipsis, 394
Daiko Takahashi
16.	Ditransitive Constructions, 423
Yuji Takano
17.	Prominence Marking in the Japanese Intonation System, 456
Jennifer /. Venditti, Kikuo Maekawa} and Mary E. Beckman
18.	The Structure of DP, 513
Akira Watanabe
Author Index, 541
Subject Index, 549
Contributors
Mary E. Beckman
Ohio State University, mbeckman@ling.osu.edu
Language-specific and language-universal aspects of lingual obstruent productions
in Japanese-acquiring children, (with Kiyoko Yoneyama and Jan Edwards)
Journal of the Phonetic Society of Japan 7:18-28. (2003)
The ontogeny of phonological categories and the primacy of lexical learning in
linguistic development, (with Jan Edwards) Child Development 71:240-249.
(2000)
Japanese tone structure, (with Janet B. Pierrehumbert) Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.(1988)
Heidi Harley
University of Arizona, hharley@email.arizona.edu
On obligatory obligation: The composition of Italian causatives, (with Raffaella
Folli) Linguistic Inquiry 38(2):197-238. (2007)
How do verbs get their names? Denominal verbs, Manner Incorporation, and the
ontology of verb roots in English. In The syntax of aspect, ed. Nomi Erteschik-
Shir and Tova Rapoport, 42-64. Oxford: Oxford University Press. (2005)
Caroline Heycock
University of Edinburgh, c.heycock@ed.ac.uk
On the interaction of adjectival modifiers and relative clauses. Natural Language
Semantics 13(4):359-382. (2005)
Categorical Subjects, (with Edit Doron) Gengo Kenkyu 123:95-135. (2003)
Layers of predication: The non-lexical syntax of clauses. New York: Garland.(1994)
Junko Ito
University of California, Santa Cruz, ito@ucsc.edu
Japanese morphophonemics: Markedness and word structure, (with Armin Mester)
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. (2003)
Japanese phonology, (with Armin Mester) In The handbook of phonological theory,
ed. J. Goldsmith, 817-838. Oxford: Blackwell.(1995)
A prosodic theory of epenthesis. Natural Language & Linguistic Theory 7:217-26〇.
(1989)


viii CONTRIBUTORS
Hideki Kishimoto
Kobe University, kishimot@lit.kobe-u.ac.jp
Wh-in-situ and movement in Sinhala questions. Natural Language & Linguistic
Theory 23:1-51.(2005)
Binding of indeterminate pronouns and clause structure in Japanese. Linguistic
Inquiry 32:597-633. (2001)
Split intransitivity in Japanese and the unaccusative hypothesis. Language 72:248-
286.(1996)
Masatoshi Koizumi
Tohoku University, koizumi@sal.tohoku.ac.jp
Cognitive processing of Japanese sentences with ditransitive verbs, (with Katsuo
Tamaoka) Gengo Kenkyu 125:173-19〇. (2004)
The split VP hypothesis: Evidence from language acquisition. In Language
universals and variation, ed. Mengistu Amberber and Peter Collins, 61-81.
Westport, Conn.: Praeger. (2002)
String vacuous overt verb raising. Journal of East Asian Linguistics 9:227-285.
(2000)
Haruo Kubozono
Kobe University, kubozono@lit.kobe-u.ac.jp
Temporal neutralization in Japanese. In Papers in laboratory phonology 7, ed. Carlos
Gussenhoven and Natasha Warner, 171-201. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
(2002)
The organization of Japanese prosody. Tokyo: Kurosio.(1993)
The mora and syllable structure in Japanese: Evidence from speech errors.
Language and Speech 32(3):249-278.(1989)
Kikuo Maekawa
The National Institute for Japanese Language, kikuo@kokken.go.jp
Corpus-based analysis of vowel devoicing in spontaneous Japanese, (with Hideaki
Kikuchi) In Voicing in Japanese, ed. Jeroen van de Weijer, Kensuke Nanjo, and
Tetsuo Nishihara, 205-228. (2005)
Statistical tests for the study of vowel merger. Quantitative Linguistics 39:200-219.
(1989)
Hideki Maki
Gifii University, makijp@gifu-u.ac.jp
Two notes on wh-movement in Modern Irish: Subject/object asymmetries and
superiority, (with Donall P. 6 Baoill) Gengo Kenkyu 128:1-31.(2005)
Embedded topicalization in English and Japanese, (with Lizanne Kaiser and Masao
Ochi) Lingua 109:1-14.(1999)
Implications of embedded topicalization. (with Lizanne Kaiser) English Linguistics
15:290-30〇.(1998)
CONTRIBUTORS
ix
Armin Mester
University of California, Santa Cruz, mester@ucsc.edu
Japanese morphophonemics: Markedness and word structure, (with Junko Ito)
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. (2003)
The phonological lexicon, (with Junko Ito) In The handbook of Japanese linguistics,
ed. Natsuko Tsujimura, 62-10〇. Oxford: Blackwell.(1999)
The quantitative trochee in Latin. Natural Language & Linguistic Theory 12:1-61.
(1994)
Shigeru Miyagawa
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, miyagawa@mit.edu
On the "undoing" property of scrambling: A response to Boskovic. Linguistic
Inquiry 37:607-624. (2006)
Argument structure and ditransitive verbs in Japanese, (with Takae Tsujioka)
Journal of East Asian Linguistics 13:1-38. (2004)
Structure and Case marking in Japanese. San Diego, Calif.: Academic Press.(1989)
Edson T. Miyamoto
University of Tsukuba, miyamoto@alum.mit.edu
Factors in the incremental processing of NPs in Japanese. In Proceedings of the
7th Tokyo Conference on Psycholinguistics, ed. Yukio Otsu, 1-24. Tokyo: Hituzi
Syobo.(2006)
Unscrambling some misconceptions: A comment on Koizumi and Tamaoka 2004.
(with Michiko Nakamura) Gengo Kenkyu 128:113-129. (2005)
Keiko Murasugi
Nanzan University, murasugi@nanzan-u.ac.jp
VP-shell analysis for the acquisition of Japanese intransitive verbs, transitive
verbs, and causatives, (with Tomoko Hashimoto and Chisato Fuji) Linguistics
43:615-651.(2007)
An antisymmetry analysis of Japanese relative clauses. In The syntax of relative
clauses, ed. Artemis Alexiadou, Paul Law, Andre Meinunger, and Chris Wilder,
231-263. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. (2000)
N'-deletion in Japanese: A preliminary study, (with Mamoru Saito) Japanese and
Korean linguistics, ed. Hajime Hoji, 285-301. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI Publica-
tions. (1990)
Kimiko Nakanishi
University of Calgary, k.nakanishi@ucalgary.ca
Formal properties of measurement constructions. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. (2007)
Measurement in the nominal and verbal domains. Linguistics and Philosophy
30:235-276. (2007)
Japanese plurals are exceptional, (with Satoshi Tomioka) Journal of East Asian
Linguistics 13(1):113-14〇. (2004)
X
CONTRIBUTORS
Kunio Nishiyama
Ibaraki University, kn20@mx.ibaraki.ac.jp
Verbs, adjectives, and Pred: Review of Mark C. Baker, Lexical categories. English
Linguistics 22:133-161.(2005)
Adjectives and the copulas in Japanese. Journal of East Asian Linguistics 8:183-222.
(1999)
V-V compounds as serialization. Journal of East Asian Linguistics 7:175-217.(1998)
Norvin Richards
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, norvin@mit.edu
Phase edge and extraction: A Tagalog case study, (with Andrea Rackowski)
Linguistic Inquiry 36:565-599. (2005)
Movement in language: Interactions and architectures. Oxford: Oxford University
Press. (2001)
An island effect in Japanese. Journal of East Asian Linguistics 9:187-205. (2000)
Mamoru Saito
Nanzan University, saito@nanzan-u.ac.jp
Expletive replacement reconsidered: Evidence from expletive verbs in Japanese.
In Form, structure, and grammar: A festschrift presented to Gunther Grewendorf
on occasion of his 60th birthday, ed. Patrick Brandt and Eric Fuss, 255-273.
Berlin: Akademie Verlag. (2006)
Subjects of complex predicates: A preliminary study. SBOPL 1:Intensionality and
sentential competition, ed. Tomoko Kawamura, Yunju Suh, and Richard
K. Larson, 172-188. Stony Brook, N.Y.: Stony Brook University. (2006)
Ellipsis and pronominal reference in Japanese clefts. Studies in Modern Grammar
36:1-44. (2004)
Junko Shimoyama
McGill University, junko.shimoyama@mcgill.ca
Indeterminate phrase quantification in Japanese. Natural Language Semantics
14:139-173. (2006)
Indeterminate pronouns: The view from Japanese, (with Angelika Kratzer) In The
proceedings of the 3rd Tokyo Conference on Psycholinguistics (TCP 2002), ed.
Yukio Otsu, 1-25. Tokyo: Hituzi Syobo. (2002)
Internally headed relative clauses in Japanese and E-type anaphora. Journal of East
Asian Linguistics 8:147-182.(1999)
Koji Sugisaki
Mie University, sugisaki@human.mie-u.ac.jp
The parameter of preposition stranding: A view from child English, (with William
Snyder) Language Acquisition 13:349-361.(2006)
Early acquisition of basic word order: New evidence from Japanese. In Proceedings
of the 29th annual Boston University Conference on Language Development,
CONTRIBUTORS
xi
ed. Alejna Brugos, Manuella R. Clark-Cotton, and Seungwan Ha, 582-591.
Somerville, Mass.: Cascadilla Press. (2005)
Preposition stranding and the compounding parameter: A developmental
perspective, (with William Snyder) In Proceedings of the 26th annual Boston
University Conference on Language Development, ed. Anna H.-J. Do, Laura
Dominguez, and Aimee Johansen, 677-688. Somerville, Mass.: Cascadilla
Press. (2002)
Daiko Takahashi
Tohoku University, daiko@rn.tains.tohoku.ac.jp
Apparent parasitic gaps and null arguments in Japanese. Journal of East Asian
Linguistics 15:1-35. (2006)
Determiner raising and scope shift. Linguistic Inquiry 33:575—615. (2002)
Move-F and raising of lexical and empty DPs. In Step by step: Essays on minimalist
syntax in honor of Howard Lasnik, ed. Roger Martin, David Michaels, and Juan
Uriagereka, 297-317. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. (2000)
Yuji Takano
Kinjo Gakuin University, ytakano@kinjo-u.ac.jp
Object shift and scrambling. Natural Language & Linguistic Theory 16:817-889.
(1998)
Symmetry in syntax: Merge and Demerge, (with Naoki Fukui) Journal of East Asian
Linguistics 7:27-86.(1998)
Predicate fronting and internal subjects. Linguistic Inquiry 26327-34〇.(1995)
Asako Uchibori
Nihon University, uchibori@cit.nihon-u.ac.jp
Pseudoraising, (with Daiko Takahashi) Gengo Kenkyu 123:299-329. (2003)
Raising out of CP and C-T relations. In MITWPL 41:Proceedings of FAJL3,
ed. Maria Cristina Cuervo, Daniel Harbour, Ken Hiraiwa, and Shinichiro
Ishihara, 145-162. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working Papers in Linguistics.
(2002)
Opacity and subjunctive complements in Japanese. In Japanese and Korean
linguistics 6, ed. Ho-Min Sohn and John Haig, 399-414. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI
Publications.(1997)
Jennifer J. Venditti
San Jose State University, jen.venditti@mac.com
Prosody in sentence processing. In Handbook of East Asian psycholinguistics: Vol. 2,
ed. Reiko Mazuka, Mineharu Nakayama, and Yasuhiro Shirai, 208-217.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (2006)
The J_ToBI model of Japanese intonation. In Prosodic typology: The phonology of
intonation and phrasing, ed. Sun-Ah Jun, 172-20〇. Oxford: Oxford University
Press. (2005)
xii CONTRIBUTORS
Akira Watanabe
University of Tokyo, akirawat@Lu-tokyo.ac.jp
The genesis of negative concord: Syntax and morphology of negative doubling.
Linguistic Inquiry 35:559-612. (2004)
Case absorption and wh-agreement. Dordrecht: Kluwer.(1996)
Subjacency and S-structure movement of w/i-in-situ. Journal of East Asian
Linguistics 1:255-291.(1992)
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
SHIGERU MIYAGAWA
AND MAMORU SAITO
In his 1977 keynote address to the Japanese linguistics community gathered for the
LSA Linguistic Institute in Honolulu, Susumu Kuno congratulated the field for
the enormous body of work produced on Japanese, which, as he observed, gave
the Japanese language the distinction ofbeing the most studied language within the
generative tradition next to English (Hinds and Howard 1978:213). Today, the sheer
number of linguists working on Japanese and the immense volume of research that
continues to be published serve as witnesses to the fact that the Japanese language
continues to engender high-quality work in vast amounts. Susumu Kuno's con-
gratulatory comment in 1977, if repeated today, would be just as apt.
For this Handbook of Japanese Linguistics, we selected topics that capture this
excitement of the field over the past fifteen years or so. In making the selections, we
made two decisions. First, we wanted this handbook to have an overall coherence
in approach. For this reason we decided to focus our coverage on "formal" studies
of Japanese一syntax, semantics, morphology, phonetics, phonology, acquisition,
sentence processing, and information structure. The chapters relate to each other
across the different subdisciplines not only in the general approach taken but also
at times even in the particular phenomenon being studied. For example, we find
issues of word order taken up in syntax, acquisition, processing, and information
structure. Moreover, although the topics we chose center on some aspect of Jap-
anese, they also contribute to linguistic theory in general. As we discuss in this
introduction, many works that have appeared in the last fifteen years or so have
this characteristic: not only do they provide new and exciting analyses of aspects of
Japanese, but also they make a direct and important contribution to our under-
standing of human language. Each chapter indicates precisely in what way the
study of a particular topic has a bearing on the general linguistic theory. Due to this
4 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
focus on "formal” approaches to Japanese linguistics, we did not attempt to cover
other areas such as discourse analysis and sociolinguistics. This is not to say that
there have not been important contributions beyond Japanese in these research
domains一for example, in the area of "politeness" there are a number of important
achievements that have contributed to our overall understanding of this topic.
Nevertheless, we feel that, because of fundamental differences in approach, it
would take away from the coherence of the Handbook to try to include works from
these areas.
Our second decision concerns how we present the various topics. Going back
for a moment to Susumu Kuno's 1977 address, it is suggestive of the field at that
time that his remarks are included in Hinds and Howard's Problems in Japanese
Syntax and Semantics (1978). Among the large number of subfields of Japanese
linguistics, syntax and semantics represented the largest body of work then, and, we
believe, also over the past fifteen years. Consequently, we chose a variety of topics
in syntax-semantics and requested contributions from a number of linguists. We
also included morphology, which is relatively new in generative studies of Japa-
nese, and chose a topic that has a direct bearing not only on morphological theory
but on syntactic theory as well. To round out the volume, we decided to include
state-of-the-art chapters on phonetics, phonology, acquisition, sentence proces-
sing, and information structure. The chapters on syntax-semantics-morphology
cover a variety of topics, are written by linguists who have directly contributed to
the understanding of the particular topics, and are relatively short. The state-oA
the-art chapters, some of which are considerably longer, are also written by leading
scholars of the subfield.
1.1	Syntax and Semantics
S.-Y. Kuroda's 1965 doctoral dissertation, Generative Grammatical Studies in the
Japanese Language, marked the beginning of the generative studies of Japanese. The
vast amount of research that Susumu Kuno celebrated in 1977 was spawned by
Kuroda's work to a large extent, all in the spirit of pioneering a new way to look at
Japanese. Given that there was no prior work of this nature, the focus, necessarily,
was on the analysis of Japanese through application of contemporary linguistic
theory, although Kuroda himself was clearly using Japanese to gain insights into the
nature of human language and provided important theoretical innovations such as
the attachment transformation. In one way or another, most works in the 19708 and
early 19808 asked the question: What can linguistic theory say about the Japanese
language?
The main enterprise of this era was to seek empirical generalizations within
Japanese that made it possible to describe some significant aspect of Japanese
grammar in a formal and insightful fashion. In other words, the focus was prin-
INTRODUCTION
5
cipally on Japanese independent of other languages, and linguistic theory was a
tool by which one could gain insights into the language. It is important to point
out that this singular focus on the analysis of a specific language reflected the
linguistic theory of the time一the standard theory developed by Chomsky and
his colleagues and students in the 1950s and 1960s. Transformational-generative
grammar, as it was known, set out a framework that tended to steer researchers to
look deeply into a single language as opposed to seek generalizations across lan-
guages. Exemplary works in this enterprise include Kuno 1973, Inoue 1976, and
Shibatani 1976, among many others.
In the 1980s, alongside the "Japanese-specific” research agenda of earlier years,
a fundamentally new research direction in Japanese linguistics arose. This new
direction is captured in the following question, which echoes the title of a WCCFL
paper Kuroda gave in 1983: What can Japanese say about linguistic theory?
That is, works began to appear in vast numbers that used Japanese as the
basis for making a direct contribution to linguistic theory. In most cases these
works also embodied the spirit of the earlier era in presenting an extensive analysis
of some aspect of Japanese grammar. The difference is that the analysis of Japanese
is not an end in itself but it is used to make a direct contribution to our knowledge
of human language. It is no accident that this new trend in Japanese linguis-
tics coincided with a fundamental shift in linguistic theory, from the rule-based
transformational-generative grammar to what has come to be known as the
principles-and-parameters approach to human language.
The principles-and-parameters approach postulates that the core of all human
languages is defined by a uniform set of principles. The differences among lan-
guages arise from the fact that these principles are parameterized; the job of the
language learner is to set the parameter of each principle according to the language
encountered in the environment (Chomsky 1981).To give a couple of examples,
there is a principle that requires that every phrase be headed; this principle is
parameterized for head initial (e.g., Indonesian) or head final (e.g., Turkish). (See
also Stowell1981.)In another work, Rizzi (1982) observed that English and Italian
have different parametric settings for bounding nodes for Subjacency: the bound-
ing nodes S (present-day TP or IP) and NP (DP) are what are set for English,
but in Italian they are set for S' (CP) and NP (DP). This allows extraction out of
some w/i-islands in Italian, for example. The principles-and-parameters theory set
a new research agenda that sought to identity the universal principles and the
nature of the parameter associated with them. To carry out this agenda, it often
became necessary to pursue cross-linguistic analysis as opposed to simply looking
deeply into one language.
An early work in this period that used an analysis of Japanese to shed light on
linguistic theory is Saito and Hoji 1983.1 They challenged Ken Hale's (1980,1982)
Configurationality Parameter, which had emerged as a highly influential theory of
human language within the principles-and-parameters approach. Hale suggested a
parameter that partitioned the languages of the world into two groups: configu-
rational and nonconfigurational.
6 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Configurational
Nonconfigurational
Sub
VP
Obj
Unlike configurational languages, which have the typical hierarchical structure
of the subject separated from the VP, nonconfigurational languages lack the VP
node, so that they are associated with a flat structure, with all phrases being
dominated directly by the S node. A reflex of this nonconfigurational property of
flat structure is free word order: because all phrases have a symmetrical (mutual c-
command) relation with the verb, they are free to occur in any order without
disturbing the meaning of the sentence. Because Japanese is a free-word-order
language, Hale (1980) suggested that it belongs to the nonconfigurational group of
languages.
In response to this, Saito and Hoji (1983) used arguments based on weak
crossover, condition C effects, and other phenomena to show that Japanese is just
as configurational as English. Although their empirical work focused by and large
on the Japanese language, the principal message that the field took away from it is
that there is no such thing as a nonconfigurational language. Thus, to the question,
what can Japanese say about linguistic theory? Saito and Hojfs work had a clear
message: every language is configurational. Although the "flat” structure has been
rejected, it is important to point out that linguists in recent years have "redis-
covered" Hale's proposal and have incorporated parts of it in dealing with free
word order and related issues (e.g., Boskovic and Takahashi 1998; Miyagawa 1997,
2001;Oku 1998; Saito 2003).
Other works of this nature一using Japanese to shed light on linguistic
theory—include Miyagawa 1989, which, based on earlier works by Haig (1980)
and Kuroda (1980,1983), showed that the distribution of numeral quantifiers in
Japanese gave evidence for NP trace, a theoretical notion whose existence has
been questioned throughout the history of generative grammar (see also Ueda
1986). In another work, Watanabe (1992) analyzed 印ん-questions in Japanese as
involving overt movement of a phonetically empty operator, in a fashion that
parallels overt 印//-movement languages. He concluded that in a 印//-question, some
element of the wh-phrase must move overtly, and that this is a universal re-
quirement. This laid the groundwork for the notion of "strong" (and, by impli-
cation, "weak") features in the early period of the Minimalist Program (Chomsky
1993).
The last fifteen years have seen theoretically oriented works on Japanese syn-
tax and semantics in vast numbers. The topics discussed cover a wide range of
phenomena: ellipsis, compounds, quantifiers and numerals, and operator binding,
just to name a few. Whenever there is an important theoretical issue, it is now
INTRODUCTION
7
almost always possible to find relevant works on Japanese. It is this sense of ex-
citement that we wish to convey in this Handbook, and we have included articles on
various topics in syntax and semantics for this reason.
We cannot close out the section on syntax and semantics without a mention of
scrambling. No other topic has attracted as much attention among those who work
on Japanese, and the interest has only grown as we have attained a deeper under-
standing of the phenomenon. One reason why scrambling has intrigued so many
linguists is that at any given point, there are at least two theories competing for the
correct analysis of it. In the 1970s and 1980s, the issue was whether scrambling
resulted from movement or if the various word orders were base generated. Harada
(1977) was the first to take a clear position on scrambling as movement. Shortly
thereafter, Hale (1980,1982) proposed the configurationality parameter and sug-
gested that Japanese belongs to the nonconfigurational family of languages, with
the result that scrambling is a function of the flat phrase structure, thus base
generated. As we noted earlier, Saito and Hoji (1983) responded to Hale's charac-
terization of Japanese as being a nonconfigurational language by showing that
Japanese is associated with a configurational syntactic structure.
Saito and Hoji's characterization naturally led to the view that scrambling is
due to movement. But now, a question arises: What motivates this movement? This
is a hotly debated issue today. One view, held by the majority of linguists working
on scrambling, is that the movement responsible for scrambling is purely optional,
and no motivation is necessary (e.g., Fukui 1993; Kuroda 1988; Saito 1992, 2005;
Saito and Fukui 1998). An early work that represents this view of scrambling is
Saito 1989, which argued that scrambling一he was making use of long-distance
scrambling—is semantically vacuous and must be radically reconstructed at LF.
The semantic vacuity of scrambling provides the crucial argument for those who
wish to view scrambling as purely optional: if it has no semantic import, it makes
sense for it to be optional. The other view of scrambling is that it must be motivated
by some factor. One of the earliest analyses to adopt this view is from Kitahara
(1994), who suggests that scrambling is subject to what we would now call Closest
Attract, a notion that requires a triggering feature for the movement. In a series of
works, Miyagawa (1994,1997, 2001,2003, 2005a, 2005b, 2006) develops a study of
scrambling that requires some motivation一either a formal requirement such as the
EPP or, in the case of optional scrambling, the idea that it must lead to a new
interpretation not possible without the movement (see Fox 2000). Other works that
assume some sort of motivation include Grewendorf and Sabel1999, Kawamura
2004, Kawashima and Kitahara 2003, and Sabel 2001,among others. In a slightly
different vein, Boskovic and Takahashi (1998) argue that the minimalist notion of
"last resort" applies to scrambling. Two books devoted to scrambling and related
issues have recently appeared (Karimi 2003, Sabel and Saito 2005), and in this
Handbook, we decided not to take it up beyond what we just described, because so
much has recently been written and it would be difficult to do justice to the
phenomenon in one chapter. That is not to say that we completely ignore the issue.
Miyamoto's chapter on sentence processing, and Murasugi and Sugisaki's chapter
8 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
on acquisition, treat scrambling among other constructions from the perspectives
particular to these chapters.
1.2	Phonology
Largely parallel to research in syntax and semantics, work in Japanese phonology
has undergone a reorientation from focusing on the analysis of the language to
focusing on the conclusions to be drawn from such analysis for general phono-
logical theory; the relation between phonology, morphology, and syntax; and the
structure of the lexicon.2 Although this perspective was not absent from leading
works of the earlier period, such as McCawley 1968 and Haraguchi 1977, it has
taken center stage since the mid-1980s.
Work on the prosodic morphology of Japanese (Ito 1990; Ito and Mester 2003;
Kubozono 1995; Mester 1990; Poser 1984a,1990) revealed the overwhelming im-
portance of the bimoraic foot一a unit realized as a single heavy syllable or as a
sequence of two light syllables一in many kinds of word formation where canonical
patterns play a role, such as nicknames, truncations, and the like. The fact that such
higher level organization into feet asserts itself in Japanese, a language lacking an
intensity-based system of prominence ("stress"; see Beckman 1986), was instru-
mental in establishing the view that prosodic structure一and most prominently,
foot structure一is a general kind of rhythmic skeleton present in all languages, not
just in those where foot heads are marked with phonetic stress. In a different vein,
Ito and Mester (1986, 2004; Mester and Ito 1989) used some of the central mor-
phophonemic alternations of Japanese to argue for specific properties of auto-
segmental representation and feature specification and, more recently, for a specific
version of markedness principles operating in tandem with constraints on word
structure in Optimality Theory.
The modern understanding of pitch accent systems is to a significant extent
based on studies devoted to Japanese, such as Poser 1984b, Kubozono 1993, Pier-
rehumbert and Beckman 1988, and Selkirk and Tateishi 1988, which have estab-
lished the general result that such systems involve only a few tonal landmarks
(boundary tones and accentual tones) assigned at well-defined locations within an
articulated prosodic constituent structure. As a last example, the segregation of the
Japanese lexicon into separate layers governed by somewhat different principles
(native, Sino-Japanese, Western loans) served as an empirical model for different
variants of a universal theory of the phonological lexicon in Optimality Theory that
can adequately represent such internal variation (Fukazawa, Kitahara, and Ota
1998; Ito and Mester 1995a, 1995b,1999, 2001,2002).
In one of the phonology chapters, "Lexical Classes in Phonology," Junko Ito
and Armin Mester explore loanword phonology from the perspective of sub-
structures that are known to exist in the Japanese lexicon. In another, "Japanese
INTRODUCTION
9
Accent,n Haruo Kubozpno reexamines the Tokyo Japanese accent and develops a
much simplified analysis. In "'Prominence Marking in the Japanese Intonation
System," Jennifer J. Venditti, Kikuo Maekawa, and Mary E. Beckman show that
Japanese employs a variety of prosodic mechanisms to mark focal prominence,
although, crucially, this does not include manipulation of accent.
I.z Acquisition
Acquisition research on Japanese has a long history of its own, comparable to
syntax and phonology. One of the main topics has been word-order variation as in
syntax. Given that both SOV and OSV orders are available in adult grammar, with
S and 〇 carrying morphological nominative and accusative case markers, re-
spectively, the question often addressed has been at what age children can correctly
comprehend the "scrambled" OSV order (e.g., Hayashibe 1975, Sano 1977). The
early works noted that young children had difficulty with the OSV order, mistaking
it as SOV, which suggests that in early stages word order plays a prominent role,
and it is the "neutral" SOV order that they assume. However, Otsu (1994) ques-
tioned this result by showing that children had no problem with the scrambled
OSV order if a proper context introduced the sentence, thus showing that
scrambling occurs earlier than previously believed. This result was reinforced by
Murasugi and Kawamura (2005), who demonstrated that even three-year-olds
were able to comprehend OSV sentences and, further, had knowledge of the re-
construction properties of scrambling.
Although it has been shown that many grammatical properties are acquired
quite early, it has also been noted that the acquisition of others may be delayed.
One candidate for late acquisition is A-chain. Here, the relevant theoretical pro-
posal is Borer and Wexlefs (1987) A-Chain Deficit Hypothesis, which states that
maturation is required for the formation of A-chains. A number of works have
appeared, for example, on Japanese passives and unaccusatives to examine this
hypothesis, and a definite conclusion is yet to be attained. Whereas Miyamoto et al.
(1999) argue for the hypothesis, Sano (2000) and Sano, Endo, and Yamakoshi
(2001)argue against it, both on the basis of acquisition data on unaccusatives.
Sugisaki (1999) and Minai (2000) take the late acquisition of passive as evidence for
the hypothesis. Machida, Wexler, and Miyagawa (2004) concur with them, offering
an alternative interpretation for the unaccusative data. But Murasugi and Kawa-
mura (2005) suggest that the late acquisition of passive may be due to factors
independent of A-chain maturation. The debate is yet to be settled.
In their chapter on acquisition, "The Acquisition of Japanese Syntax," Keiko
Murasugi and Koji Sugisaki explore a number of issues concerning parameter
setting and developmental factors in language acquisition. They consider those
cases that fall under Wexler's (1998) Very Early Parameter Setting (VEPS)
10
THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
hypothesis and those that apparently involve delayed parameter setting. They
discuss some data that pertain to A-chain maturation as well as to the gradual
process of the acquisition of lexical items.
1.4	Processing
Paralleling its study in syntax and semantics and also acquisition, scrambling is a
prominent topic of research in Japanese sentence processing. The question is, is
there a difference in processing load between SOV and OSV word orders? There is
an important theoretical implication. By Hale's (1980,1982) configurationality
parameter, languages with flexible word order are nonconfigurational. According
to this characterization, different word orders such as SOV and OSV are base
generated. No movement is involved, so that, from the viewpoint of processing,
there should be no difference in the processing load across different orders.
However, the "scrambling" analysis (Harada 1977, Saito 1985) could predict a dif-
ference. SOV is the "base" order, and OSV involves movement of the object over
the subject, thus increasing complexity and processing load. As Edson T. Miyamoto
discusses in his chapter on sentence processing, "Processing Sentences in Japanese,"
the results of experiments on this topic have been mixed.
Another area that has attracted attention is the relative clause. Given that
Japanese is head final, including the head of the relative clause, researchers wonder
how speakers process relative clauses. Here, too, there are consequences for the
general theory of sentence processing. What Miyamoto in his chapter calls a "head-
driven" model predicts that Japanese is processed nonincrementally. Everything
must be kept in working memory until the pertinent head appears and assigns each
phrase an appropriate role. This makes Japanese sentence processing fundamentally
different from the processing of head-initial languages. That claim, in fact, has been
made (e.g., Mazuka and Lust 1990; see Hasegawa 1990 in the same volume for
comments). Moreover, the nonincremental processing places a huge burden on
memory. Miyamoto summarizes the research on Japanese relative-clause proces-
sing, including discussion of alternatives to this language-specific model.
1.5	Information Structure
Kuroda's 1965 doctoral dissertation includes a discussion on -wa and -gn, where he
proposes that they represent distinct judgment forms. Although he has developed
this analysis over the years, equally influential on this and other topics in the
analysis of Japanese was Kuno's (1973) The Structure of the Japanese Language. That
INTRODUCTION
11
book laid the groundwork for a number of important research topics, and one of its
vital achievements is the analysis of -wa and -ga in what we would now call in-
formation structure.
In her chapter, "Japanese -Wa, -Ga, and Information Structure,n Caroline
Heycock revisits the important descriptive observations in Kuno 1973 and develops
a view of -wa and -ga based on modern theories of information structure. This is a
continuation of the project she initiated in Heycock 1993, where she provided an
explanation for what Kuno (1973:49-59) called "exhaustive-listing gを’in the map-
ping from syntactic structure to information structure. As Heycock shows, the
information-structure analysis of -wa and -ga not only can successfully account for
their complex properties but also may help to clarify aspects of the theory of in-
formation structure itself. Moreover, there may very well be contributions to be
made to the analysis of other languages (e.g., verb-second).
1.6	Brief Summary of the Chapters
1.6.1	Phonetics and Phonology
In "Lexical Classes in Phonology,n Junko Ito and Armin Mester explore class
distinctions, such as Germanic versus Latinate in English, which occur in virtually
all languages.3 The synchronic status of such lexical strata is controversial in lin-
guistics, and Japanese plays a prominent role in the discussion, partially because
lexical class distinctions are so clearly visible, even in the writing system. With the
shift in phonology from a rule-based derivational framework to a system of ranked
and violable constraints that came with Optimality Theory, a new perspective on
this topic has developed. This chapter takes up some of the conceptual issues
connected with the theoretical shift and its empirical predictions and problems.
In "Japanese Accent," Haruo Kubozono demonstrates the simplicity of (To-
kyo) Japanese accent through a review of the recent studies. He specifically argues
for the following two points. First, word accent is only sparsely specified in the
lexicon; that is, only certain classes of words in the whole vocabulary are lexically
specified with their accent patterns, whereas a majority of words are literally un-
marked in the lexicon. Second, major accent rules previously proposed as inde-
pendent rules in Tokyo Japanese一such as the loanword accent rule, compound
accent rules, and the accent rule for verbs and adjectives一can all be generalized.
In "Prominence Marking in the Japanese Intonation System,n Jennifer J.
Venditti, Kikuo Maekawa, and Mary E. Beckman show that Japanese uses a variety
of prosodic mechanisms to mark focal prominence, including local pitch range
expansion, prosodic restructuring to set off the focal constituent, postfocal sub-
ordination, and prominence-lending boundary pitch movements, but (notably)
not manipulation of accent. In this chapter, they describe the Japanese intonation
12
THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
system within the Autosegmental-Metrical model of intonational phonology and
review these prosodic mechanisms that have been shown to mark focal promi-
nence. They point out potentials for ambiguity in the prosodic parse and discuss
their larger implications for the development of a tenable general theory of prosody
and its role in the marking of discourse structure.
1.6.2	Acquisition, Sentence Processing, Information
Structure, and Syntax-Semantics-Morphology
In "On the Causative Construction,n Heidi Harley shows that the analysis of the
affixal Japanese causative morpheme -(s)ase requires an explicit treatment of the
morphology-syntax interface, because it exhibits syntactic characteristics typical of
both monoclausal and biclausal constructions, despite forming a single phono-
logical word in combination with the verb stem to which it attaches. The argu-
ments bearing on both lexicalist and syntacticocentric approaches are considered,
and an articulated syntax-based treatment is presented. Additionally, the rela-
tionship between the lexical causatives and the productive causatives of Japanese is
discussed in detail, and Harley argues that the allomorphic properties of the former
support a Late Insertion approach to the syntax-phonology interface.
In "Japanese -Wa, -Ga, and Information Structure," Caroline Heycock dis-
cusses two of the most long-standing interrelated issues in the synchronic study of
Japanese: the interpretation of the "topic marker" wa and the "nominative/subject/
focus marker" ga. Descriptively, it appears that the former can have both contrastive
and noncontrastive interpretations, and that the latter sometimes, but not always,
expresses narrow focus. Similar patterns have been observed in languages where
topic and focus are not marked morphologically; Japanese then may hold the key to
a better understanding of these very contentious notions and, in particular, to the
questions of how and why the different interpretations arise.
In "On Verb Raising," Hideki Kishimoto discusses issues and controversies
surrounding verb raising in Japanese by looking at the null-object construction,
unusual coordination, and emphatic verbal sequences. In the null-object construc-
tion, overt verb raising is argued to take place alongside VP-ellipsis (Otani and
Whitman 1991),and the unusual coordination is claimed to involve overt verb raising
(Koizumi 1995,2000). By contrast, it is claimed that the emphatic verbal construction
signals the absence of overt verb raising (Sakai 1998, Aoyagi 1998). A number of
counterarguments as well as some alternative views are advanced in the literature in
response to these arguments, so the claims still remain highly controversial.
In "Nominative Object," Masatoshi Koizumi presents a study of sentences in
which the object is marked with the nominative case-marker ga (the nominative
object construction). Such sentences contrast with prototypical transitive sen-
tences where the subject and the object bear nominative and accusative cases,
respectively. The nominative marking of objects is found in many languages of the
INTRODUCTION
13
world and has raised a number of important questions such as:(i)Is the nomi-
native object really an object rather than a subject? (2) When does it occur? (3)
Why does the nominative object tend to have wider scope compared with the
accusative object?
In uGa/No Conversion,n Hideki Maki and Asako Uchibori examine the two
major approaches to the Japanese ga/no (nominative/genitive) conversion phe-
nomenon: the DP approach by Miyagawa (1993) and Ochi (2001),and the non-DP
approach by Hiraiwa (2001a). They compare the strengths and weaknesses of each
approach and then suggest a refined analysis that incorporates ideas from
both approaches. In the suggested analysis, D licenses the genitive Case as in the DP
approach, but movement into Spec,DP is not involved in genitive Case licensing, as
in the non-DP approach.
In "Processing Sentences in Japanese,n Edson T. Miyamoto discusses many of
the major topics in sentence processing, including incremental processing of head-
final constructions, clause-boundary ambiguities, implicit prosodic contours,
relative clauses (attachment ambiguities, relativized position), w/2-phrases, word
order, and center embedding. A recurring theme is that the mechanisms and
strategies used in processing are language independent (although some potential
counterexamples are also discussed), so one crucial goal is to determine how
seemingly distinct phenomena in typologically diverse languages can be subsumed
under a unified account.
In "The Acquisition of Japanese Syntax,n Keiko Murasugi and Koji Sugisaki
begin by noting that the theory of language acquisition attempts to answer the
foundational question of how innate linguistic knowledge, or Universal Grammar
(UG), interacts with linguistic experience to yield a particular grammar in the actual
time course. They review some representative studies on the acquisition of Japanese
that attempt to answer this question and hence have a direct bearing on the con-
struction of the theory of language acquisition. These studies are discussed along the
following theoretical dimensions:(1)early emergence of UG principles, (2) pa-
rameter (re)setting, (3) A-chain maturation, and (4) the acquisition of lexical items.
In "The Syntax and Semantics of Floating Numeral Quantifiers,n Kimiko
Nakanishi looks at two competing views on floating numeral quantifiers (FNQs)一
that is, numerals that appear away from their host NPs. One view holds that FNQs
are transformationally derived from their nonfloating counterparts, whereas the
other view assumes no transformational relation. The chapter compares the two by
investigating how they fare with various syntactic and semantic properties of
FNQs. In particular, at issue are distributional restrictions, such as why the object
cannot intervene between the subject and its FNQ, and semantic restrictions, such
as why FNQs permit distributive but not collective readings.
In "V-V Compounds,M Kunio Nishiyama discusses V-V compounds as a
construction that has inspired the lexicon versus syntax debate for the place of
morphology. Some major lexical and syntactic analyses are reviewed, and Nish-
iyama examines how they fare empirically with the main properties of V-V com-
pounds. Basically, transitive-transitive combinations are rather easy to capture,
14 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
but complications arise when one of the verbs is intransitive. To accommodate
some idiosyncrasies ofV-V compounds within the syntactic approach, principles of
Distributed Morphology are invoked一in particular, the root-as-categorially-
neutral hypothesis. The goal of the chapter is to examine the implications ofV-V
compounds for the organization of grammar.
In "Wz-Questions," Norvin Richards considers some approaches to the syntax
of Japanese wh-in-situ, contrasting movement with nonmovement accounts. The
representative nonmovement account is Shimoyama's (2001),which gives Japanese
wh-words a semantics that allows them to be interpreted in situ. The discussion of
covert-movement approaches centers on the type first proposed by Nishigauchi
(1986), with covert pied-piping of islands; the approach is modified, following von
Stechow (1996), to allow subsequent reconstruction of the island. Data are drawn
from conditions on the placement of ittai, quantifier intervention effects, multiple-
wh questions, additional-印// effects, the distribution of mo, and semantic condi-
tions on interpretation of pied-piped structures.
In '"Indeterminate Pronouns,n Junko Shimoyama provides a survey on issues
surrounding the so-called indeterminate pronouns in Japanese such as dare "who'
and nani "what', of which similar counterparts are found cross-linguistically. It
focuses on two contexts, interrogative and universal, which easily allow appar-
ently long-distance association of indeterminates with the particles ka and mo. The
chapter examines two major types of analyses for the association, the movement
and nonmovement analyses, in light of questions concerning (1)what the semantics
of indeterminates are, and how the appropriate sentential meaning can be derived
from the syntactic structure; and (2) how the intriguing locality pattern found in
the association should be dealt with.
In ""Noun Phrase Ellipsis,n Daiko Takahashi presents an overview of the
analysis of null arguments in Japanese in terms of ellipsis. The idea of ""noun phrase
ellipsis" was put forth in part to overcome certain difficulties faced by the tradi-
tional analysis based on empty pronouns. There are two main varieties of ellipsis
analysis: one employs VP-ellipsis (Otani and Whitman 1991)and the other, more
directly, NP-ellipsis (Oku 1998, Kim 1999). Although the former proposal is quite
ingenious, this chapter shows that there are fairly strong arguments in favor of
the latter. The NP-ellipsis analysis also has the possibility of relating the presence of
null arguments to the free-word-order phenomenon (Oku 1998), which sheds a
new light on the issue of (non-)configurationality.
In ""Ditransitive Constructions/' Yuji Takano looks at the syntactic properties
of the two objects in Japanese ditransitive constructions. One major issue he takes
up is whether or not word-order alternation between the two objects is to be
attributed to movement (scrambling). It is shown that various arguments have
been presented in the literature in favor of both approaches. Given this, Takano
suggests a possible way to unify the two approaches.
In ""The Structure of DP," Akira Watanabe looks at two peculiarities of Jap-
anese nominals一namely, multiple possibilities for numeral placement and the
existence of an indeterminate system. The internal structure of DP is explored by
INTRODUCTION
15
investigating the parametric sources of these two interesting characteristics. The
possibility that emerges is that Japanese has more agreement relations within DP
than has English and that the movement operations fed by these agreement rela-
tions produce the diversity of numeral placement. The indeterminate system is also
shown to depend on agreement. Additionally, the behavior of nonnumeral
quantifiers is taken up and compared with that of numerals.
Acknowledgments
Earlier versions of many of the chapters were presented at the Workshop on
Linguistic Theory and the Japanese Language at the 2005 MIT-Harvard LSA
Summer Institute. We thank the audience for numerous useful suggestions. We are
grateful to the Japan Foundation, the MIT School of Humanities, Arts, and Social
Science, as well as MIT Foreign Languages and Literatures for providing financial
support for the workshop. We also wish to express our gratitude to the anonymous
reviewers whose critical comments helped to strengthen the arguments in each of
the chapters. This volume follows in the footsteps of The Handbook of Japanese
Linguistics (1999) edited by Natsuko Tsujimura; the way we conceived this volume
was greatly informed by the earlier work. Finally, we would like to thank the OUP
editors for their enormous help, and Eli Laurengot for coordinating this complex
project and providing expert copyediting for the entire volume, which made our
editorial work enormously easier.
NOTES FOR CHAPTER 1
1.	The configurational analysis of Japanese is further developed in Saito 1985 and
Hoji 1985.
2.	We thank Junko Ito and Armin Mester for extensive assistance with this section
on phonology.
3.	The summaries of the chapters presented here are based on the abstracts written
by the authors. Please see the reference sections of the individual chapters for the works
cited in these summaries.
REFERENCES
Beckman, Mary.1986. Stress and non-stress accent. Dordrecht: Foris.
Borer, Hagit, and Kenneth Wexler.1987. The maturation of syntax. In Parameter setting,
ed. Thomas Roeper and Edwin Williams, 123-172. Dordrecht: Reidel.
16 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Boskovic, Zeljko, and Daiko Takahashi.1998. Scrambling and Last Resort. Linguistic In-
quiry 29:347-366.
Chomsky, Noam.1981.Lectures on government and binding. Dordrecht: Foris.
Chomsky, Noam.1993. A Minimalist Program for linguistic theory. In The view from
Building 20, ed. Kenneth Hale and Samuel Jay Keyser, 1-52. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
Fox, Danny. 200〇• Economy and semantic interpretation. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Fukazawa, Haruka, Mafuyu Kitahara, and Mitsuhiko Ota.1998. Lexical stratification and
ranking invariance in constraint-based grammars. Ms., University of Maryland,
College Park, Indiana University, Bloomington, and Georgetown University, Wa-
shington, DC.
Fukui, Naoki.1993. Parameters and optionality. Linguistic Inquiry 24:399-42〇.
Grewendorfi Gunther, and Joachim Sabel.1999. Scrambling in German and Japanese:
Adjunction versus multiple specifiers. Natural Language & Linguistic Theory 17:1-65.
Haig, John H.198〇• Some observations on quantifier floating in Japanese. Linguistics
18:1065-1083.
Hale, Kenneth.198〇. Remarks on Japanese phrase structure: Comments on the papers on
Japanese syntax. In MITWPL 2: Theoretical issues in Japanese linguistics, ed. Yukio
Otsu and Ann Farmer, 185-203. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working Papers in Lin-
guistics.
Hale, Kenneth.1982. Preliminary remarks on configurationality. In Proceedings of NELS 12,
ed. James Pustejovsky and Peter Sells, 86-96. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA Publications.
Harada, Shin-Ichi.1977. Nihongo-ni henkei-wa hitsuyou-da [Japanese grammar requires
transformational rules]. Gengo [Language] 6(10):88-95, 6(11):96-103.
Haraguchi, Shosuke.1977. The tone pattern of Japanese: An autosegmental theory oftonology.
Tokyo: Kaitakusha.
Hasegawa, Nobuko.199〇• Comments on Mazuka and Lust's paper. In Language processing
and language acquisition, ed. Lyn Frazier and Jill de Villiers, 207-223. Dordrecht:
Kluwer.
Hayashibe, Hideo.1975. Word order and particles: A developmental study in Japanese.
Descriptive and Applied Linguistics 8:1-18.
Hey cock, Caroline.1993. Focus projection in Japanese. In Proceedings of NELS 24, ed. M.
Gonzalez, 159-187. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA Publications.
Hinds, John, and Irwin Howard, eds.1978. Problems in Japanese syntax and semantics.
Tokyo: Kaitakusha.
Hoji, Hajime.1985. Logical Form constraints and configurational structures in Japanese.
Doctoral dissertation, University of Washington, Seattle.
Inoue, Kazuko.1976. Henkei punpoo to nihongo [Transformational grammar and the
Japanese language]. Tokyo: Taishukan.
Ito, Junko.199〇• Prosodic minimality in Japanese. In Proceedings of CLS 26: Parasession on
the syllable in phonetics and phonology, 213-239. Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society.
Ito, Junko, and Armin Mester.1986. The phonology of voicing in Japanese: Theoretical
consequences for morphological accessibility. Linguistic Inquiry 17:49—73.
Ito, Junko, and Armin Mester. 1995a. Japanese phonology. In Handbook of phonological
theory, ed. John Goldsmith, 817-838. Oxford: Blackwell.
Ito, Junko, and Armin Mester. 1995b. The core-periphery structure of the lexicon and
constraints on reranking. UMOP 18: Papers in Optimality Theory, ed. Jill Beckman,
Laura Walsh Dickey, and Suzanne Urbanczyk, 181-21〇. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA Pub-
lications.
INTRODUCTION
17
Ito, Junko, and Armin Mester.1999. The phonological lexicon. In A handbook of Japanese
linguistics, ed. Natsuko Tsujimura, 62-10〇. Oxford: Blackwell.
Ito, Junko, and Armin Mester. 2001.Covert generalizations in optimality theory: The role
of stratal faithfulness constraints. In Proceedings of the 2001 International Conference
on Phonology and Morphology, 3-33. Seoul: Korea Research Foundation.
Ito, Junko, and Armin Mester. 2002. One phonology or many? The role of stratal faith-
fulness constraints. Phonological Studies 5:121-126.
Ito, Junko, and Armin Mester. 2003. Weak layering and word binarity. In A new century of
phonology and phonological theory: A festschrift for Professor Shosuke Haraguchi on the
occasion of his 60th birthday, ed. Takeru Honma, Masao Okazaki,rFoshiyuki Tabata,
and Shin-ichi Tanaka, 26-65. Tokyo: Kaitakusha.
Ito, Junko, and Armin Mester. 2004. Japanese morphophonemics: Markedness and word
structure. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Karimi, Simin, ed. 2003. Word order and scrambling. Oxford: Blackwell.
Kawamura, Tomoko. 2004. A feature-checking analysis of Japanese scrambling. Journal of
Linguistics 40:45-68.
Kawashima, Ruriko, and Hisatsugu Kitahara. 2003. Phonological content and syntactic
visibility. Gengo Kenkyu [Language Research]123:137-1/〇.
Kitahara, Hisatsugu.1994. Restricting ambiguous rule-application: A unified analysis of
movement. In MITWPL 24: Proceedings of FAJL 1,ed. Masatoshi Koizumi and Hiro-
yuki Ura, 179-209. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working Papers in Linguistics.
Kubozono, Haruo.1993. The organization of Japanese prosody. Tokyo: Kurosio.
Kubozono, Haruo.1995. Gokeisei to onin-kouzou [Word formation and phonological
structure]. Tokyo: Kurosio.
Kuno, Susumu.1973. The structure of the Japanese language. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Kuroda, S.-Y.1965. Generative grammatical studies in the Japanese language. Doctoral
dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Kuroda, S.-Y.198〇• Bun kouzou no hikaku [The comparison of sentence structures]. In
Niti-eigo hikaku kouza 2: Bunpou [Lectures on Japanese-English comparative studies 2:
Grammar], ed. Tetsuya Kunihiro, 23-61. Tokyo: Taishukan.
Kuroda, S.-Y.1983. What can Japanese say about government and binding? In Proceedings
of WCCFL 2, ed. Michael Barlow, Daniel P. Flickinger, and Michael T. Wescoat,153-
164. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Linguistics Association.
Kuroda, S.-Y.1988. Whether we agree or not. Linguisticae Investigationes 12:1-47.
Machida, Nanako, Ken Wexler, and Shigeru Miyagawa. 2004. A-chain maturation re-
examined: A response to Sano et al. In MITWPL 48: Plato's problem: Problems in
language acquisition, ed. Aniko Csirmaz, Andrea Gualmini, and Andrew Nevins, 91-
112. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working Papers in Linguistics.
Mazuka, Reiko, and Barbara Lust.199〇. On parameter setting and parsing: Predictions
for cross-linguistic differences in adult and child processing. In Language processing
and language acquisition, ed. Lyn Frazier and Jill de Villiers, 163-205. Dordrecht:
Kluwer.
McCawley, James D.1968. The phonological component of a grammar of Japanese. The
Hague: Mouton.
Mester, Armin.199〇. Patterns of truncation. Linguistic Inquiry 21:475-485.
Mester, Armin, and Junko Ito.1989. Feature predictability and underspecification: Palatal
prosody in Japanese mimetics. Language 65:258-293.
Minai, Utako. 200〇• The acquisition of Japanese passives. Japanese/Korean Linguistics
9：339-35〇•
18 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Miyagawa, Shigeru.1989. Structure and case marking in Japanese (Syntax and Semantics
22). San Diego, Calif.: Academic Press.
Miyagawa, Shigeru.1994. Scrambling as an obligatory movement. In Proceedings ofNanzan
University International Symposium on Japanese Language Education and Japanese
Language Studies, 81-92. Nagoya, Japan: Nanzan University.
Miyagawa, Shigeru.1997. Against optional scrambling. Linguistic Inquiry 28:1-26.
Miyagawa, Shigeru. 2001.The EPP, scrambling, and w/i-in-situ. In Ken Hale: A life in
language, ed. Michael Kenstowicz, 293-338. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Miyagawa, Shigeru. 2003. A-movement scrambling and options without optionality. In
Word order and scrambling, ed. Simin Karimi, 177-20〇. Oxford: Blackwell.
Miyagawa, Shigeru. 2005a. On the EPP. In MITWPL 49: Perspectives on phases, ed. Martha
McGinnis and Norvin Richards, 201-235. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working Papers in
Linguistics.
Miyagawa, Shigeru. 2005b. EPP and semantically vacuous scrambling. In The free word
order phenomenon, ed. Joachim Sabel and Mamoru Saito, 181-22〇. Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Miyagawa, Shigeru. 2006. On the "undoing" property of scrambling: A response to Bos-
kovic. Linguistic Inquiry 37:607-624.
Miyamoto, Edson T., Kenneth Wexler, Takako Aikawa, and Shigeru Miyagawa.1999. Case-
dropping and unaccusatives in Japanese acquisition. In Proceedings of BUCLD 23, ed.
Annabel Greenhill, Heather Littlefield, and Cheryl Tano, 443-452. Somerville, Mass.:
Cascadilla Press.
Murasugi, Keiko, and Tomoko Kawamura. 2005. On the acquisition of scrambling in
Japanese. In The free word order phenomenon, ed. Joachim Sabel and Mamoru Saito,
221-242. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Ochi, Masao. 2001.Move F and ga/no conversion in Japanese. Journal of East Asian Lin-
guistics 10:247-286.
Oku, Satoshi.1998. A theory of selection and reconstruction in the minimalist perspective.
Doctoral dissertation, University of Connecticut, Storrs.
Otsu, Yukio.1994. Early acquisition of scrambling in Japanese. In Language acquisition
studies in generative grammar, ed. Teun Hoekstra and Bonnie D. Schwartz, 253-264.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Pierrehumbert, Janet, and Mary Beckman.1988. Japanese tone structure. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Poser, William J. 1984a. Hypocoristic formation in Japanese. In Proceedings of WCCFL 3,
ed. Mark Cobler, Susannah MacKaye, and Michael T. Wescoat, 218-229. Stanford,
Calif.: Stanford Linguistics Association.
Poser, William J. 1984b. The phonetics and phonology of tone and intonation in Japanese.
Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Poser, William J.199〇. Evidence for foot structure in Japanese. Language 66:78-105.
Rizzi, Luigi.1982. Issues in Italian syntax. Dordrecht: Foris.
Sabel, Joachim. 2001.W/i-questions in Japanese: Scrambling, reconstruction, and wh-
movement. Linguistic Analysis 31:1-41.
Sabel, Joachim, and Mamoru Saito, eds. 2005. The free word order phenomenon. Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Saito, Mamoru.1985. Some asymmetries in Japanese and their theoretical implications.
Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
INTRODUCTION 19
Saito, Mamoru.1989. Scrambling as semantically vacuous A'-movement. In Alternative
conceptions of phrase structure, ed. Mark Baltin and Anthony Kroch, 182-20〇. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Saito, Mamoru.1992. Long-distance scrambling in Japanese. Journal of East Asian Lin-
guistics 1:69-118.
Saito, Mamoru. 2003. On the role of selection in the application of merge. In Proceedings of
NELS 33, ed. Makoto Kadowaki and Shigeto Kawahara, 323-345. Amherst, Mass.:
GLSA Publications.
Saito, Mamoru. 2005. Further notes on the interpretation of scrambling chains. In The free
word order phenomenon, ed. Joachim Sabel and Mamoru Saito, 335—376. Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Saito, Mamoru, and Hajime Hoji.1983. Weak crossover and move-a in Japanese. Natural
Language & Linguistic 1 Theory 1:245-259.
Saito, Mamoru, and Naoki Fukui.1998. Order in phrase structure and movement. Lin-
guistic Inquiry 29:439-474.
Sano, Keiko.1977. An experimental study on the acquisition of Japanese simple sentences
and cleft sentences. Descriptive and Applied Linguistics 10:213-233.
Sano, Tetsuya. 200〇• Issues on unaccusatives and passives in the acquisition of Japanese. In
Proceedings of the Tokyo Conference on Psycholinguistics 1,ed. Yukio Otsu, 1-21. Tokyo:
Hituzi Shobo.
Sano, Tetsuya, Mika Endo, and Kyoko Yamakoshi. 2001.Developmental issues in the
acquisition of Japanese unaccusatives and passives. In Proceedings of BUCLD 25, ed.
Anna H.-J. Do, Laura Dominguez, and Aimee Johansen, 668-683. Somerville, Mass.:
Cascadilla Press.
Selkirk, Elisabeth, and Koichi Tateishi.1988. Constraints on minor phrase formation in
Japanese. In Proceedings ofCLS 24, ed. Lynn MacLeod, Gary Larson, and Diane
Brentari, 316-336. Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society.
Shibatani, Masayoshi.1976. Japanese generative grammar (Syntax and Semantics 5). San
Diego, Calif.: Academic Press.
Shimoyama, Junko. 2001.W/i-constructions in Japanese. Doctoral dissertation, University
of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Stechow, Arnim von.1996. Against LF pied-piping. Natural language Semantics 4:57-11〇.
Stowell, Tim.1981.Origins of phrase structure. Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge,
Mass.
Sugisaki, Koji.1999. Japanese passives in acquisition. UConnWPL 11:The syntax-semantics
interface, 145-156. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working Papers in Linguistics.
Tsujimura, Natsuko, ed.1999. The handbook of Japanese linguistics. Oxford: Blackwell.
Ueda, Masanobu.1986. Quantifier float in Japanese. In UMOP 11:Oriental linguistics, ed.
Nobuko Hasegawa and Yoshihisa Kitagawa, 269-309. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA Pub-
lications.
Watanabe, Akira.1992. Subjacency and S-structure movement of w/i-in-situ. Journal of East
Asian Linguistics 1:255-291.
Wexler, Kenneth.1998. Very early parameter setting and the unique checking constraint: A
new explanation of the optional infinitive stage. Lingua 106:23-79.
CHAPTER 2
ON THE CAUSATIVE
CONSTRUCTION
HEIDI HARLEY
What is remarkable about the Japanese causative forms is
that, unlike many languages, intransitive verbs also form
causatives even when there are corresponding transitive
verbs with a causative meaning... sharing] a great many
semantic properties. These competing forms provide a rare
opportunity for the examination of the differences between
lexical word formation and syntactic word formation.
(Shibatani 1990:380)
2.1	Affixal Causatives and
Architectures
Japanese was the first language with morphological affixation of causative mor-
phemes to receive serious attention from generative grammarians (perhaps be-
cause it is the first language of several important early generative theoreticians,
such as Saito, Kuroda, and Kuno). The typological differences between Japanese
and English represented the first exploration of the Universal Grammar hypoth-
esis, which predicted the existence of important similarities in the grammatical
structure of languages from unrelated language families. Consequently, its impact
on generative linguistic theories in general and on principles-and-parameters
approaches specifically has been very significant.
ON THE CAUSATIVE CONSTRUCTION
21
The Japanese causative represents in a very pure form the problem of the
morphology/syntax interface. Consequently, the causative construction is one of
the most theoretically significant aspects of Japanese grammar, its three subtypes
having attracted more attention and inspired more theoretical proposals than
almost any other construction. Analyses of the causative have had a major influ-
ence on many foundational aspects of syntactic theory, including control, case
marking, clause structure, 0-theory and argument structure, and the morphology-
syntax interface.
All of these issues have received extensive treatment in the literature, and this
chapter touches on many of them. However, I focus on the importance for linguistic
theory of a single problem posed by the construction: In what component of the
grammar are the various causatives constructed? It turns out that the answers to
many of the other syntactic questions posed by causatives depend on the theoretical
choices made in answering this one. In fact, it is not unreasonable to say that the
entire architecture of a given linguistic theory can be deduced from the answer given
to this one question. The best analysis, we presume, provides a theoretically satisfying,
cross-Enguistically consistent, and most important, unified treatment of the causative
morpheme -{s)ase. I endeavor to show that such an analysis exists and that it de-
mands a certain type of theoretical framework; indeed, such a unified analysis could
not exist in a framework configured differently in any significant way.
2.1.1	The Empirical Base
To create a causative expression in Japanese, the disyllabic morpheme -{s)ase is
attached to what would be the embedded verb in an equivalent English causative
construction, as illustrated in the example in (i).
(1)	Taroo-ga Hanako-o ik-ase-ta.
Taroo-NOM Hanako-Acc go-ase-PST
'Taroo made Hanako go?
The Causer (here, Taroo) is the nominative-marked subject of the whole sentence.
The logical subject of the root verb, referred to below as the Causee, is marked with
accusative or dative case (here, Hanako^ using the accusative variant).
All V+sase combinations exhibit similar morphophonological properties,
indicating the indivisible nature of the single phonological word constructed by
-sase affixation. These are listed in (2), many of them taken from Manning, Sag,
and lida (1999).
(2)	Properties of all -sase- causatives
a.	V+sase behaves as a single phonological word with respect to stress
assignment and other phonological processes sensitive to word-sized
domains (Kitagawa 1986,1994)
b.	-sase is subject to phonological allomorphy depending on the last segment
of V (if it is a vowel, then -sase, if consonant, then -ase; Kuroda 1965a)
22 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
c.	V+snse may feed productive nominalization with -kata, "way of
d.	-sase- is a bound morpheme; by itself it may not behave as a lexical verb
(stem):1
i.	It may not be reduplicated by itself to express repetition.
ii.	It may not bear focus intonation by itself.
iii.	It may not be inflected for subject honorification by itself.
iv.	It may not stand alone as an answer to a yes/"〇-question.
Despite their morphophonological similarity, however, certain subtypes of
V-\-sase combinations may be distinguished. The literature has, over time, identi-
fied two main classes of V-(5)^se sequences in Japanese: the "lexical" (unproduc-
tive) causative in (3) (see Miyagawa 1980,1984; Jacobsen 1981,1992; Matsumoto
2000) and the "syntactic" (productive) causative in (4) (see Kuroda 1965a, 1965b;
Kuno 1973). These two V+(s)nse combinations have been shown to have dis-
tinct syntactic and semantic properties, although they are morphophonolo-
gically very similar. Within the class of syntactic causatives, two further subtypes
have been identified: the 'make', -o-causative (see (4a)), and the 'let', -ni-causative
(see (4b)).
(3)	(A subset of) Lexical causatives
Taroo-ga zisyoku-o niow-ase-ta.
Taroo-NOM resignation-ACC smell-nse-PST
'Taroo hinted at resignation.' (Lit. 'Taroo made resignation smell.')
(4)	Productive causatives
a.	causatives
Hanako-wa Yoshi-o ik-ase-ta.
Hanako-Top Yoshi-Acc go-tzse-PST
"Hanako made Yoshi go.'
b.	Let-causatives
Hanako-wa Yoshi-ni ik-ase-ta.
Hanako-Top Yose-dat go-ase-PST
"Hanako allowed Yoshi to go/Hanako had Yoshi go.'
The key problem of the causative construction has to do with a conflict between its
morphophonological status and its semantic status, which leads to significant
problems in its syntactic analysis. As noted in (2a), the V-\-sase combination, to-
gether with any other verbal suffixes that are attached to it, constitutes a single
phonological word. On the assumption that phonological words are (syntactically
simplex) terminal nodes一the "leaves" of syntactic trees一the derived V+sase verb
should head a single syntactic verb phrase, and clauses containing such a verb
phrase should behave in all respects like a monoclausal construction.
For the lexical causatives, this does not lead to any serious difficulties. Lexical
causatives are monoclausal with respect to all relevant syntactic tests (see discus-
ON THE CAUSATIVE CONSTRUCTION
23
sion below). Further, they can undergo semantic drift, acquiring idiomatic read-
ings in combination with particular argument NPs (as illustrated by the example
in (3), and discussed by Miyagawa 1980,1984 and Zenno 1985). Speakers have a
sense that these V+sase combinations are "listed” and nonproductive. Lexical
V+sase combinations feed nonproductive nominalization processes that can then
independently undergo semantic drift (Volpe 2005). The arguments of a lexical
causative are case-marked like the arguments of a single clause—only a single
nominative case is possible, assigned to the Causer subject. Finally, many lexical
causative verbs (in fact, most such verbs) are formed with some lexical causative
morpheme other than -sase\ choice of the causative allomorph is a listed, arbitrary
property for a given lexical causative verb root (Jacobsen 1981).In short, lexical
causatives behave syntactically, semantically, and morphophonologically like sin-
gle "words”一single verbs that head a single verb phrase.
Productive causatives, however, exhibit a number ofbiclausal properties, most
obviously, semantically: A productive N-\-sase combination refers to an event in
which an external Causer, X, acts to induce someone else, a Causee, to bring another
event or situation about, as described by the V°. The best translation equivalent of
a productive causative in English involves embedding a clause headed by a bare
infinitive verb under a causative matrix verb (usually make but sometimes let or
have). Besides that intuitive biclausality, however, productive causatives like those
in (4) exhibit several other biclausal properties, listed in (5)-(8).
(5)	Scopally, VP-modifying adverbials can be interpreted as modifying the
caused event or the causing event. Similarly, quantifiers on the object of the
root verb can take scope over just the caused event, or both the causing and
caused events (see Shibatani 1990:314).
(6)	Subject-control adjuncts formed with the -te suffix can be controlled either
by the external argument of the causative verb (Causer) or the external
argument of the embedded verb (Causee). (This latter possibility is partic-
ularly notable because the Causee is a surface object, with accusative or dative,
rather than nominative, case.) (See, among others, Terada 1991,Dubinsky
1994.)
(7)	The subject-oriented anaphor zibun can be anteceded by either the Causer or
the Causee, which again suggests that the subject argument of the embedded
verb is a true subject, although it is a surface object (see Oshima 1979:433).
(8)	Two separate events can be conjoined using the disjunct -ka 'or' underneath
a single causative morpheme (see Kuroda 2003:455).
All of these properties一together with full productivity and compositionality—
suggest that these constructions are biclausal and that the V+snse combination is
assembled in the syntactic component.
Productive causatives do exhibit several features that are typical of single
clauses, however. Besides being a single morphophonological word, a productive
24 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
causative clause is clearly a single case-marking domain, licensing only a single
nominative argument. Further, productive causatives obey the Double-o
Constraint (Harada 1973): causatives of intransitive Vs may show accusative case on
the Causee argument, as illustrated in (1), but causatives of transitive Vs, which
require an accusative case for the object of the V, require the Causee to receive the
dative -ni marker, given that within a single clause only a single accusative argu-
ment is possible.2,3 Similarly, a productive causative is only a single tense domain.
No independent tense marking is possible to distinguish the time of the caused
event from the time of the causing: the single tense morpheme on the end of the
complex verb must cover both. Finally, productive causative clauses behave as a
single domain for clausemate negative polarity item licensing.
The main distinguishing properties of these two types of causatives are sum-
marized here:
(9)	a. Lexical causative
Monoclausal by all tests
Can have idiomatic interpretations
Exhibits allomorphy with other lexical causative affixes
Strong speaker sense of "listedness,” nonproductivity
May feed (nonproductive) nominalization
b.	Productive causative
Biclausal by tests involving scope, adverbial control, binding,
and disjunction
Monoclausal by tests involving negative polarity and tense
(Alnke-causative) monoclausal by tests involving case.
Causee must be animate/agentive
Productive
There is also an interesting acquisition difference between lexical -sase and
syntactic -sase (Murasugi, Hashimoto, and Kato 2004):lexical -sase appears first
in the speech of children, before productive -sase (but not as early as zero-derived
lexical causative uses of verbs show up).
Within the set of causatives classified as "productive," two subtypes have
been identified (Kuroda 1965a, 1965b; Kuno 1973), where a difference in reading af-
fects the case-marking possibilities on the Causee of an intransitive verb. When the
causative has a 'make' reading—forcible or direct causation—the case marker on the
Causee of an intransitive verb is accusative, as noted in (4). When it has a reading
more similar to 'let'—permission or indirect causation一the Causee receives dative
-ni, even if the verb is intransitive and the Double-o Constraint is not in effect (see
(4)). Although this distinction has received considerable attention in the literature, I
do not discuss it here. For extensive discussion of the 'make/let' distinction, see
Dubinsky 1994, Miyagawa 1999, and citations therein.
Examples illustrating each individual property described in (9) are not pro-
vided here for space reasons and because similar summaries have been provided in
ON THE CAUSATIVE CONSTRUCTION
25
multiple publications elsewhere. For useful summaries exemplifying most of these
properties, see Kitagawa 1986,1994 and Manning, Sag, and lida 1999. For surveys of
many previous analyses, see Cipollone 2001 and Kuroda 2003.
2.1.2	Theoretical Approaches
This constellation of properties really forces one to face one's theoretical priorities.
The productive V+snse forms pose serious architectural issues, even without
considering the lexical causatives. How should a theoretical framework be con-
figured to allow it to accommodate a construction that appears to be headed by a
single morphological verb and is monoclausal with respect to case, tense, and NPI
licensing, but appears to be biclausal with respect to binding, scope, control, and
disjunction? Resolving these issues usually involves radical replumbing of gram-
matical architectures. Consequently, the influence of Japanese causatives on lin-
guistic theory could not be bigger.4
2.1.2.1	Lexicalist treatments of V+sase: HPSG
Lexicalist frameworks take it as axiomatic that single morphophonological words
correspond to terminal nodes in the syntax. It follows that productive causatives
must be treated as syntactically monoclausal: only one morphophonological verb,
therefore only one clause.
Consequently, the apparent multiclausal properties of causative constructions
must arise from the productive operation that affixes the causative morpheme in
the lexicon and produces a complex word. It then follows that binding relations,
adverbial scope, quantifier scope, and adverbial control are phenomena that de-
pend on lexical operations, not syntactic structure一in other words, these phe-
nomena are not properly asyntactic" phenomena at all. This position is thoroughly
presented in the proposal of Manning, Sag, and lida 1999, which treats causatives
within the Head-driven Phrase Structure Grammar (HPSG) framework. There, the
key replumbing of the architecture is the inclusion of adjunction and quantifier
scope as lexical operations. Syntactic constituency is no longer at issue in treating
these phenomena in HPSG.
The most serious challenge to this approach to causatives, within the terms of
HPSG, comes from the availability of disjunction of two VPs under a single
causative morpheme, as discussed by Kuroda (2003:455).5 Kuroda's examples
showing disjunction of VPs under -sase are given in (10).
(10)	a. Hanako-ga [[Masao-ni uti-o soozisuru]-ka
Hanako-NOM [[Masao-DAT house-ACC clean]-or
[heya-dai-o haraw] ] -aseru koto ni sita.
[room-rent-acc pay]]-sase that dat do
"Hanako decided to make Masao clean the house or pay room rent.'
Reading: sase scopes over or; Masao has a choice.
26 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
b. Hanako-ga [[Masao-ni uti-o soozis-aseru]-ka
Hanako-NOM Masao-DAT house-ACC clean-sase-OR
[heya-dai-o haraw-aseru] ] koto ni sita.
room-rent-ACC pay-snse that dat do
"Hanako decided to make Masao clean the house or she decided to make him
pay room rent?
Reading: or scopes over sase\ Masao does not have a choice.
The availability of disjunction of the verb phrase without the -sase affix is a sig-
nificant challenge to the lexicalist treatment of -sase, because in the phrase-
structure grammars employed for the syntactic component by these frameworks,
disjunction is treated syntactically, not lexically.6 Treating the adjunction of ad-
verbs as lexical, as well, raises issues concerning how to capture syntactic adjunct/
argument asymmetries within HPSG, as discussed by Cipollone (2001):if both
argument structure-altering operations and adjunction operations are lexically
implemented, it is not clear how their different behaviors with respect to extraction
and other phenomena may be captured.
2.1.2.2	Principles and parameters: Logical Form from syntax
In principles and parameters (P&P) approaches, however, a different set of priorities
are in force. The ultimate syntactic representation of a clause is taken to be (iso-
morphic to) its Logical Form. Semantic properties such as scope assignment of
quantifiers must therefore be syntactically represented. Further, the notion "subject”
is famously a configurational one in P&P; consequently, the assignment of ante-
cedents for subject-oriented reflexives or of controllers for adjoined -te phrases must
be (at least partially) syntactically determined. The consequence of these assump-
tions, then, is that the causative morpheme and the verb to which it is affixed must
each head a separate syntactic projection, which creates different constituents that
can independently be used to construct scopal or subject properties. To account for
the ways in which causatives have syntactically monoclausal properties, then, P&P
frameworks propose that the embedded clausal structure is deficient in some way—
not a full CP or TP but some reduced yet thematically complete clause is embedded
by the causative morpheme. The absent intermediate projections account for the
monoclausal behavior in the relevant domains.
The inescapable conclusion given this set of priorities is that morphological
and phonological words are not in a one-to-one relationship with syntactic ter-
minal nodes. The biggest problems to be faced by the P&P approach, then, are the
following: Where are words made一before or after syntax, or both? What is the
constituent structure of the embedded phrase?
There have been many proposals in the literature within these broad lines.
They are outlined in (11) in roughly chronological order, followed by their key
analytical property and the locus of word formation in the model:
(11)	a. Predicate raising (e.g., Kuno 1973). Biclausal D-structure collapses to
monoclausal S-structure; syntax feeds word formation.
ON THE CAUSATIVE CONSTRUCTION
27
b.	Parallel monoclausal and biclausal trees. Word formation feeds syntax
(e.g., Miyagawa 1984).
c.	LF-excorporation and projection. Word formation feeds syntax, which
then deconstructs complex words to project (covert) biclausal structure
(Kitagawa 1986,1994). (This proposal could be understood as a variant of
Chomsky's [1993]lexicalist checking theory and prefigures in some ways
Brody's [2000] Mirror Theory.)
d.	Incorporation (Baker 1988). Syntax manipulates morphemes, feeds word
formation.
Baker's Incorporation account became the most familiar P&P analysis and still
represents the core idea behind most current approaches in the literature. It itself
was an updated version of Kuno's predicate-raising approach. The updating in-
volved understanding how the "collapse" of the biclausal structure is only apparent:
the V that heads the lower VP simply head-moves to adjoin to the -sase morpheme,
which is a V in its own right, projecting the matrix VP. On this approach, syntactic
terminal nodes are not initially headed by fully formed morphophonological words
but rather individual morphemes. Productive morphology is affixed to its host by
syntactic operations such as head-movement. Because head-movement leaves a
trace, there is no collapse of the lower clause when this happens; rather, the entire
structure remains present and interpreted at LF一it is merely unpronounced. An
illustration of this account is provided in (12).
(12)	Derivation of Hanako-ga Taroo-ni piza-o tabe-sase-ta in a Baker-style In-
corporation account:7
Input to the syntax: {HanakoN, TarooN, pizaN, -gaK, -niK, -oK, tabev, -sasev>
-tai}
Domain for case-making,
negative polarity licensing.
Only one IP, hence only one
such domain.
Domain for subject-oriented
reflexive binding, condition
B, adverbial control,
quantifier scope. Two VPS,
lienee two such domains.
Note VP-intemal subjects.
28 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Several ingredients are needed to make an Incorporation account of productive
causatives work, and each has major theoretical consequences for the rest of the
framework.
Given that it is ungrammatical to attach a separate tense or comple-
mentizer morpheme to the verb stem before affixing -sase, the proposal is that
the constituent embedded under -sase is VP rather than IP (TP) or CP. This
accounts for the absence of separate tense domains for the two clauses. The
theory can then explain the availability of negative polarity items (NPIs) in the
embedded VP by assuming that the clausemate condition on Japanese NPI li-
censing is sensitive to the TP domain, not the VP domain: because there is
only one TP in a productive causative, NPIs in the embedded VP meet
the clausemate requirement.
The VP-internal subject hypothesis is then also necessary, so that the em-
bedded subject argument can be introduced in the lower VP, which allows for the
presence of the Causee in the structure without an embedded TP.
It must also be the case that clausal conditions on case assignment like
the Double-o Constraint are sensitive to the TP domain, rather than VP. To cap-
ture this, a theory of abstract Case checking is needed in which clausal Case do-
mains are bounded by a TP projection一a Dependent Case case theory of the
Marantz 1991 type (see, e.g., Miyagawa 1999). Such an account predicts that
the transitivity of the embedded VP can affect the morphological case realized in the
whole clause.
Similarly, it is necessary to have in place a theory of scope that allows quan-
tifiers to scope at the VP level as well as the CP level, to account for lower-clause
quantifier scope.
Finally, and most important, the approach entails a partial rejection of the
Lexicalist Hypothesis: the account only works if the syntax manipulates bound
morphemes, as well as free ones.8 In other words, productive inflectional and
derivational affixes must be considered to be input to the syntax. Rather than being
presyntactically attached to their host stems in the lexicon, such affixes are attached
to their hosts either in or following the syntactic component.
What of the lexical causatives? Recall that they are irregular, stem specific,
semantically idiosyncratic, and nonproductive. Nonproductive affixes are not in-
put to the syntax in this approach; they come preattached to their stems in a
presyntactic morphological component (the locus of irregularity). This explains
(a) their nonproductivity, given that syntax is understood as the domain of pro-
ductivity; and (b) the uniformly monoclausal behavior of lexical causatives: one V
in the numeration, one VP in the derivation.
The end result is a type of hybrid account, where productive causatives are
combined with their verbs in the syntax, but lexical causatives are treated in a
separate, presyntactic part of the grammar.9 The remainder of this chapter makes
an argument that something is wrong with this picture and explores the impli-
cations for linguistic theory.
ON THE CAUSATIVE CONSTRUCTION
29
2.2	Lexical Causatives
Like many languages, Japanese is rich in semantically related inchoative/causative
pairs of verbs, with overt causativizing (and/or inchoativizing) morphology at-
tached to a common root. These pairs have been extensively documented by
Jacobsen (1992); the first two examples of each class of pairs he identifies are given
in table 2.1. (None of these pairs involve -sase).
Table 2.1 Semantically related inchoative/causative verb pairs in Japanese
Class/世	Root	Intransitive	Transitive	Rough root gloss
I:e/0	hag	hag-e-ru	hag-0-u	'peel off
30 pairs	hirak	hirak-e-ru	hirak-0-u	'open>b
II:0/e	ak	ak-0-u	ak-e-ru	'open'
44 pairs	hikkom	hikkont-0-u	hikkom-e-ru	draw back'
III: ar/e	ng	ag-ar-u	ag-e-ru	'rise'
71 pairs	aratam	aratam-ar-u	aratam-e-ru	'improve'
IV: ar/0	hasatn	hasam-ar-u	hasam-0-u	'catch between'
8 pairs	husag	husag-ar-u	husag-0-u	'obstruct (clog, jam?)'
V: r/s	atna	ama-r-u	ama-s-u	'remain'
27 pairs	hita	hita-r-u	hita-s-u	'soak'
VI: re/s	arawa	arawa-re-ru	arawa-s-u	'show (up)'
18 pairs	hana	hana-re-ru	hana-s-u	'separate from'
VII: ri/s	ka	ka-ri-ru	ka-s-u	'borrow/(lend)'
2 pairs	ta	ta-ri-ru	ta-s-u	'suffice/(supplement)'
VIII: 0/as	hekom	hekom-0-u	hekom-as-u	'dent'
38 pairs	her	her-0-u	her-as-u	'decrease'
IX: e/as	bak	bak-e-ru	bak-as-u	'turn into/bewitch'
45 pairs	bar	bar-e-ru	bar-as-u	'come/bring to light'
X: i/as	ak	ak-i-ru	ak-as-u	'tire'
8 pairs	dek	dek-i-ru	dek-as-u	'come/bring into existence'
XI: i/os	horob	horob-i-ru	horob-os-u	'(fall to) ruin'
6 pairs	ok	ok-i-ru	ok-os-u	'get up'
XII: 0/se	abi	abi-0-ru	abi-se-ru	'pour over (self/other)'
6 pairs	ki	ki-0-ru	kise-ru	'put on (se由other)'
XIII: e/akas	obi	obi-e-ru	obi-(y)akas-u	'take fright/frighten'
4 pairs	hagur	hagur-e-ru	hagur-akas-u	'stray/evade'
XIV: or/e	kom	kom-or-u	kom-e-ru	'be fully present/fill'
2 pairs	nukum	nukum-or-u	nukum-e-ru	'warm'
XV: are/e	sut	sut-are-ru	sut-e-ru	'fall into disuse/discard'
3 pairs	wak	wak-are-ru	wak-e-ru	'divide'
XVI: Misc	nigi-wa	nigiwa-0-u	nigiwa-s-u	'(make) prosper'
25 pairs	nob	nob-i-ru	nob-e-ru	'extend'
a The number of pairs does not include other pairs derived from a root already on the list even when these
are not semantically related; the number of listemes on each list, then, is likely larger.
11 Mamoru Saito and Yosuke Sato (pers.comm.) inform me that the forms meaning 'open' here,
hirakeru^hiraku, are not used (the pair from class II, aku〜akeru, is the appropriate one). Some other
items in Jacobsen's lists also seem to not currently be in use; for example, bakasuy dekasu, and nukumeru.
3〇 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
2.2.1	Syntactic and Semantic Properties of Non-Sose
Lexical Causatives
The causative member of these pairs has one more argument than its intransitive
counterpart and bears a roughly causative reading with respect to it (sometimes
one or the other member of the pair having undergone some semantic drift) but
shows no obvious symptoms of a multiclausal syntactic structure. For example,
compare the available controllers for a -te- phrase in a syntactic versus a lexical
causative.
(13)	Basic intransitive verb and its syntactic causative
a.	Hanako-wa arui-te it-ta.
Hanako-Top walk-te go-PST
"Hanako, walking, went?
b.	Taroo-wa arui-te Hanako-o ik-ase-ta.
Taroo-Top walk-te Hanako-Acc walk-snse-PST
Readings: 'Taroo made Hanako go, walking?
£Taroo, walking, made Hanako go?
In the syntactic causative in (13b), the phrase arui-te, 'walking', can be controlled
either by Hanako, the Causee subject of the embedded verb (who is the controller
in the noncausative sentence in (13a)) or by Taroo, the Causer subject of the
causative -sase. An identical pair of sentences is given for a lexical causative formed
with the suffix -as- in (14).
(14)	Inchoative intransitive and its lexical causative
a.	Hanako-wa	nure-te	hi-e-ta.
Hanako-Top	wet-te	cooI-inch-pst
"Hanako('s body), getting wet, cooled?
b.	Taroo-wa	nure-te	Hanako-o	hi-(y)as-ita.
Taroo-Top	wet-te	Hanako-Acc	cooI-caus-pst
Reading: £Taroo, getting wet, cooled Hanako?
Impossible: 'Taroo cooled Hanako, (Hanako) getting wet?
Even though the notion of someone becoming cool by getting wet is semantically
sensible (as shown by the inchoative (14a)), the only available controller of the -te
phrase nure-te "getting wet' in (14b) is the Causer, Taroo, rather than the Causee who
is becoming cool, Hanako. Lexical causatives, like underived transitive verbs,
are monoclausal with respect to this and all the other tests for biclausality listed
above.
As shown by Miyagawa (1980,1984,1989,1994,1998) and Zenno (1985),lexical
causatives share another property with underived transitive verbs: they may form
part of an idiom. Sometimes their inchoative counterpart also participates (i.e.,
the idiom alternates), as in (16), sometimes not, as in (15). (These examples are
from Miyagawa 1989:126-127; they are given as V+object only, not in sentential
uses.
ON THE CAUSATIVE CONSTRUCTION
31
(15)	Lexical causatives in idioms by themselves
a.	kama-o kake- (intr. kak-ar does not
sickle-ACC splash on participate in this idiom)
'trick into confessing'
b.	zibara-o	kir- (intr. kire not in this idiom)
my.stomach-ACC cut
'pay out of one's own pocket'
c.	tenoura-o kaes- (intr. kaer not in this idiom)
palm-ACC return
'change one's attitude suddenly'
(16)	Lexical causatives in alternating idioms
a.	te-ga	kuwawar-	te-o	kuwae-
	hand-NOM join	hand-ACC	add
	'be altered'	'alter'	
b.	hone-ga ore-	hone-o	or-
	bone-NOM breakjntr	bone-ACC	breaktr
	'require hard work'	'exert oneself'	
c.	mune-ga itam-	mune-o	itame-
	heart-NOM ache	heart-ACC	hurt
	'be worried'	'worry (oneself)'	
Another test, developed by Oerhle and Nishio (1981),showed that lexical
causatives can participate in "adversity" readings, like simple transitive verbs
and unlike productive causatives (example in (17) taken from Miyagawa
1989:130).
(17) a. Simple transitive with adversity reading
Taroo-ga ie-o	yai-ta.
Taroo-NOM house-ACC burn-PST
'Taroo burned his house.'
'Taroo's house burned, and he was adversely affected (he didn't
cause it.)'
b. Lexical causative with adversity reading
Boku-wa booru-o	gake kara ot-os-ita.
I-top	ball-ACC	cliff from drop-CAUS-PST
'I dropped the ball from the cliff.'
'The ball dropped from the cliff, and I was adversely affected.'
2.2.2	V+Sose: The Same Properties as Lexical
Causatives or Not?
The examples in the previous section applied these tests to unambiguously lexical
causatives, formed with causative affixes other than -sase. As noted in section 1,
Miyagawa argues that some V+snse combinations behave like the other lexical
32 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
causatives discussed earlier.10 They participate in idioms, sometimes with (see
(18c,d)) and sometimes without (see (i8a,b)) their intransitive counterpart:
(18) Lexical V+sase causatives in idioms			
a.	tikara-o aw-ase-		
	power-ACC together-sase-		
	'pull together>		
b.	mimi-o sum-ase-		
	ear-ACC clear-sase		
	'listen carefully'		
c.	hana-ga saku-	hana-o	sak-ase-
	flower-NOM bloom	flower-ACC	bloom-sase
	'be done heatedly'	'engage in heatedly'	
d.	hara-ga	her-	hara-o	her-ase-
	stomach-NOM lessen	Stomach-Acc	lessen-sase
	'get hungry'	'fast/wait for a	meal'
Some such V+sase forms also allow adversity causative interpretations (examples
from Miyagawa 1989:129):
(19)	V+sase forms in adversity causatives11
a.	Taroo-ga yasai-o kusar-ase-ta.
Taroo-NOM vegetable-ACC rot-sase-psr
"Taroo spoiled the vegetables?
"The vegetables rotted, and Taroo was adversely affected?
b.	Taroo-ga kaisya-o toosans-ase-ta.
Taroo-NOM company-ACC bankrupt-sase-PST
'Taroo bankrupted the company?
"The company went bankrupt, and Taroo was adversely affected?
But most V+sase combinations do not exhibit these properties一most V+sase
combinations are productive, not lexical. For instance, no adversity causative in-
terpretation is available for the V+sase forms here (Miyagawa 1989:13〇):"
(20)	a. Boku-wa booru-o gake kara oti-sase-ta.
I-top ball-ACC cliff from drop-sase-PST
‘I caused the ball to drop from the cliff?
Impossible: "The ball dropped from the cliff, and I was adversely
affected?
b.	Kotosi-wa	dekinai gakusei-o	hue-sase-ta.
this.year-TOP	poor	students-ACC increase-sase-PST
'This year, we caused (the number of) poor students to increase?
Impossible: 'This year, the number of poor students increased, and
we were adversely affected?
c.	Taroo-wa	niku-o	koge-sase-ta.
Taroo-Top meat-Acc	scorch-sase-PST
'Taroo caused the meat to scorch?	(Pylkkanen 2002)
Impossible: 'The meat scorched, and Taroo was adversely affected?
ON THE CAUSATIVE CONSTRUCTION
33
Similarly, given an intransitive verb that participates in an idiom, like the examples
in (18c,d), a V+snse combination formed on the intransitive is not guaranteed to
also participate in the idiom (Miyagawa 1989:126):
(21)	a. kiai-ga hair- *kiai-o hair-ase-
spirit-NOM enter spirit-ACC enter-sase
'be full of spirit9	111spire/pat spirit into,
b. hakusya-ga kakar- *hakusya-o kakar-ase-
spur-NOM splash.on spur-ACC splash.on.5a5e
"spur onintr,	'spur ontr5
These verbs have lexical causative forms with non-sase causative affixes, ir-e-ru and
kak-e-ru (they are members of Jacobsen's class III alternators). The difference between
the verbs in (21), which do not allow an idiomatic interpretation with -sase, and the
verbs in (18c,d), which do allow such an interpretation, is that the verbs in (18) have no
other lexical causative form. This is Miyagawa's central observation—the only verbs
that show lexical causative behavior with -sase are the verbs that have no other idi-
osyncratic lexical causative suffix of their own. In other words, lexical behavior of -sase
is only possible in cases where it is not blocked by a more specific causative suffix.
2.2.3	The Blocking Effect
The hybrid P&P account outlined in section 2.0 simply divided NA-sase combi-
nations into productive, regular, compositional forms (created in the syntax) and
nonproductive, noncompositional forms (listed in the lexicon). This captures
the distinctions between the two types of forms, but it does not predict that
there should be any systematic relationship within the lexicon between lexical
V+sase and the other lexical causative forms, or that there should be any systematic
relationship between lexical V-\-sase and syntactic VA-sase. If there is any such
systematic relationship, then the hybrid account is flawed.
In fact, such a systematic relationship does exist. As noted above, Miyagawa
(1980 et seq.) and Zenno (1985) show that there is a simple way to predict when
a V-{-sase combination can behave like other lexical causatives and when it may
only behave as an productive causative, with no noncompositional interpreta-
tion and no adversity causative: Only intransitive roots with no other transitive form
can behave lexically with -sase.
That is, lexical interpretations of -sase are possible only if the root to which it is
attached does not have a transitive form derived in another way.
2.2.4	Miyagawa's (1984) Treatment: Paradigmatic Structure
The sensitivity of lexical V+snse to the (non)availability of another derived form
with the same meaning is a classic example of morphological blocking, seen cross-
linguistically in both derivational and inflectional morphology. A simple case is the
34 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
English past tense. Some verbs do not have a past tense formed with -ed\ ・了tinned,
^writed, Reeled, ^hitted. The reason is that they have an independently formed,
irregular past tense, which blocks the regular form: ran, wrote, felt, hit)5
The same phenomenon is argued to occur in derivational morphology. Many
English adjectives have a negative form in un-, but some do not: * impossible,
^unconsiderate, ^uncoherent. These are blocked by the irregular negative forms:
impossible, inconsiderate, incoherent.
The grammatical mechanism that is responsible for blocking effects in many
theories of morphology (for instance, Paradigm-Function Morphology, as de-
scribed in, e.g., Stump 2001)is the n-dimensional grammatical space of a paradigm.
For English verbs, for example, blocking is captured in the following way. Every
verbal word form is understood to be attached to a paradigm space, defined by the
inflectional features of English verbs: past and present participle,1,2,3, sg, pl. Some
verbs come with their paradigm space partially filled in, "lexically” as it were一 for
instance, in the past-tense space for write, the form wrote is already entered一but
empty slots are available for filling in by default affixes. In the case of the empty
progressive participle slot, this will result in write+ing.
(22)	Paradigm in the lexicon for write
V: WRITE	write
Infinitive	
Present ppL	
Past ppi.	written
Before lexical items are sent off to the syntax, empty paradigm spaces are filled
in by default morphology (bolded in the tables).
(23)	Paradigm in the lexicon for write
V: WRITE	write
Infinitive	write
Present ppi.	writing
Past ppi.	written
To apply such an analysis to derivational morphology, one has to allow der-
ivational features to define a paradigm space, such as [ 土 negative] for the im-
possible/^unpossible pairs or [ ± nominal] for their nominalizations. Words
with special negative or nominal forms will have their relevant paradigm slots
already filled in, blocking the productive insertion of the default form un- in
the negative slot, or the default form -ness in the nominalization slot, illustrated
in (24).
ON THE CAUSATIVE CONSTRUCTION ZZ
(24)	Paradigms in the lexicon for possible, likely, happy
A: POSSIBLE	possible
Negative	impossible
Nominal	possibility
A: LIKELY	likely
Negative	unlikely
Nominal	likelihood
A: HAPPY	happy
Negative	unhappy
Nominal	happiness
Miyagawa (1980,1984,1989) treated the blocking effect in Japanese causatives
with such a derivational paradigmatic structure, defined by a feature [ ± transitive];
without it, the blocking effect could not be captured. In terms of its position and
function in the model, Miyagawa's level of Paradigmatic Structure is the same level
of structure that paradigm-function morphologists work with, although Miyagawa
used it independently of that framework.
He proposed a paradigm space defined by intransitive, transitive, and di-
transitive features. For many verb stems, an irregular form already occupied the
"transitive” or "ditransitive” slot in the paradigm. Only if an irregular form did not
occupy that slot could a default -sase form be constructed to fill the gap.
(25)	Paradigm in the lexicon for the root ag
v： Jag	agar 'rise'
Intransitive	agar-
Transitive	nge-
Ditransitive	
(26)	Paradigm in the lexicon for the root sak
V: JSAK	sak- "bloom"
Intransitive	sak-
Transitive	sak-ase
Ditransitive	
)6 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
To account for the systematicity of the lexical V+snse forms, then, Miyagawa
proposed to adopt an extra layer of lexical structure. However, his theory went
beyond the lexical causatives to include the syntactic causatives as well.
Miyagawa argued that it cannot be a coincidence that these default V+sase
combinations are morphophonologically indistinguishable from productive
causatives. That is, according to their morphophonological properties, a lexical
causative formed with -sase is exactly the same as a productive causative formed
with -sase. He reasoned that syntactic causatives are spelled out as -sase because
-sase is just the Elsewhere, default form for a causative meaning: the lexical causative
suffix -sase and the productive causative suffix -sase are the same suffix. If lexical
causatives had nothing to do with syntactic causatives, there would be no reason for
the same morpheme to be involved in both.
Consequently, Miyagawa (1984) concluded that syntactic causatives had to be
created in the lexicon, in the paradigmatic structure, as well. However, all of the
questions discussed earlier concerning how to capture the biclausal properties of the
productive causatives within a lexicalist approach then became problematic within
his analysis. This led to his proposal that causatives are associated with parallel
monoclausal and biclausal structures. The theory became ever more complex.
2.2.5	Theoretical Options
We now are in a position to summarize the state of affairs systematically. V+sase
combinations can be lexical or productive. If productive, they behave biclausally
with respect to binding, control, scope, and idiom interpretation. If lexical, they
behave monoclausally. The lexical V+sase combination is in complementary dis-
tribution with the other lexical causative morphemes discussed by Jacobsen, such
as V+e, V+5, V+os, and so on, with -sase acting as the default suffix for lexical
causative formation when no other form exists. The default lexical -sase is mor-
phophonologically identical to the productive -sase.
Three possible analytical approaches seem open at this point:
1.	Treat the lexical and syntactic causatives completely separately. On this
approach, the V+sase lexical causatives would be relegated to the lexicon
with the rest of the lexical causatives. The morphological identity between
the default lexical causative morpheme and the syntactic causative mor-
pheme would be irrelevant. That is, Jacobsen just missed class XVII: Ql-sase.
2.	Unify the lexical and syntactic causatives by treating them both in the lex-
icon. On this approach, something other than "in the lexicon" has to dis-
tinguish the syntactic and lexical causatives.
3.	Unify the lexical and syntactic causatives by treating them both in the syntax.
On this approach, a theory of postsyntactic morphology would be needed.
Again, something other than "in the syntax" has to distinguish the two types.
Enter Distributed Morphology, Hale and Keyser's v°, and minimalism.
ON THE CAUSATIVE CONSTRUCTION 37
2.3	Late Insertion, the Elsewhere
Condition, vPs, and Phases
In this section, I describe how independently motivated theoretical proposals in
distinct domains of research turn out to naturally provide a unified account of
lexical and syntactic Japanese causatives.15 First I introduce the distinct proposals,
and then I show how they fit together.
2.3.1	Distributed Morphology, Late Insertion, and the
Elsewhere Principle
In Baker's Incorporation account and later work inspired by it, the syntax manip-
ulates and combines the lexical entries of complete morphemes, fully specified for
phonological, morphological, syntactic, and semantic properties. In this section, I
show how adopting a Late Insertion approach, according to which phonological
information is only inserted to realize syntactic terminal nodes later in the derivation,
allows the capture of paradigmatic blocking effects without the use of paradigms.
In Distributed Morphology (Halle and Marantz 1993 et seq.), the syntax ma-
nipulates and combines abstract feature bundles, selected by the grammar of the
individual language learner from an inventory provided by UG on the basis of
positive evidence. These feature bundles are the input to, and terminal nodes of, a
syntactic derivation.
After the syntax has completed its derivation, (via the Agree, Merge, and Copy
operations, per minimalist theory) and Spell-Out is reached, the syntactic struc-
ture, with (possibly slightly changed) feature bundles in its terminal nodes, is sent
off to PF/LF for interpretation.
An early step on the PF side is Lexical Insertion, at which the abstract bundles are
given phonological "clothing" prefatory to pronunciation. Vocabulary Items
(Vis)一 phonological strings identified as expressing certain features一compete to
realize the terminal nodes that the syntactic derivation has made available. At each
terminal node, there maybe many Vis whose feature specification is compatible with
the feature content of the terminal node. The VI with the most compatible features
(but no incompatible ones) realizes that node—it wins the competition and blocks
the other compatible Vis from occupying the node. When no other VI is available,
the default VI is inserted一the Elsewhere VI. A system that chooses a morpheme
based on feature specification this way is said to obey the Elsewhere Principle.
Here is a (syntactically very simplified) example derivation. Imagine an initial
Numeration consisting of feature bundles such as those listed in (27).
(27)	{[D +1,+pl, 4-nom], [t +past, +nom], [d +pl, +acc], [vKEEP, +acc]}
The syntax merges and moves these feature bundles to create a syntactic tree, in
which all the necessary feature-checking has been accomplished. After the syntax is
Z8 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
done with it, the (simplified) tree in (28) is handed off to Spell-Out. The Vis I, we,
it, kep-, keep, -ed, and them are all compatible with the available positions, but only
the most highly specified VI at each slot succeeds in actually realizing the terminal
node. The competition is illustrated at the bottom of the tree.
(28)
Di
T。
[+NOM]
[十 NOm]
Di
+1
+PL
+NOM
VP
V'
v°
KEEP
罕
D
+PL	-
|CC / I
Spell-out slots for
terminal nodes
we
I
it
-ed
kep
keep
them I Winning Vis
it
Adjacency:16
Morphophonology:
We kep -ed them
We kep-t 'em
Competing but losing
Vis-eligible for
insertion but not the
most highly specified
The theoretical attraction of such an approach is that it allows a natural account of
mirror principle effects, provides a straightforward relationship between syntax
and morphology and, most important, calls for only a single generative engine一it
requires no generative mechanisms in the lexicon. That is, there is no need for a
separate level of paradigmatic structure to generate inflected and/or derived word
forms, or to capture the blocking effect. The equivalent of a single slot of para-
digmatic space is provided by the syntactic terminal node and its feature specifi-
cation. The blocking effect is captured by the process of competition of compatible
Vis into the terminal node. The default, Elsewhere VI wins the competition only if
no more specific VI is compatible with that slot.
2.3.2	(Modified) Hale and Keyser (1993, 2002)-type vPs for
Causative/Inchoative Alternations
In the Distributed Morphology (DM) conception of blocking, the Vis in a given
competition must be competing to realize a slot that corresponds to a terminal
node in a syntactic tree. With respect to the lexical causative/inchoative pairs,
which behave syntactically like monomorphemic simplex verbs, there had
ON THE CAUSATIVE CONSTRUCTION Z9
been no previous suggestion in the literature that their syntactic representation
should be any more complex than simply V°. However, given DM assumptions, if
the causative morphemes in lexical causatives are competing with each other,
there must be a syntactic terminal node within the root+suffix complex for the
suffix alone一that is, the syntactic representation of the lexical causative verb
must involve one verbal projection for the root and a separate projection for the
suffix.
Hale and Keyser (1993, 2002) proposed that all transitive verbs—even mor-
phologically simplex ones一are made up of two separate heads: The main V°
introduces the internal arguments of the verb and projects to VP, and the external
argument is introduced in the specifier of a v° taking the VP as its complement.
In a slight revision to their account, Harley 1995a and Marantz 1997 proposed that
a v° was also present in inchoative constructions but that it was a distinct v°
that selected no external argument.17 The lower root J head-moves to attach to its
c-commanding v° head, creating a syntactically complex head-adjunction structure
with two terminal nodes. The two resulting structures for inchoative (unaccusative
intransitive) verbs and causative, agentive, transitive verbs are given in (29).
The relevance to the problem of where in the syntax to locate the inchoative/
causative suffixal morphology of Japanese, documented so extensively by Jacobsen,
is clear. That morphology is a realization of the two types of v° head illustrated
above.
2.3.3	Late Insertion and Lexical Causatives
The treatment of the blocking phenomenon in lexical causatives suggested by this
set of assumptions should now be clear. In a derivation that contains a "lexical"
causative,18 all the various causative morphemes compete to realize the vCAUS head
in the syntactic tree.19 Depending on the class membership of the causative root,
one particular causative morpheme wins一the one specified for co-occurrence
____________________
4〇 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
with roots of that particular class. If no class is specified for a given root一
the Elsewhere case一then the default -sase morpheme steps in to fill the gap. The
list of morphemes competing to realize vCAUS is given in (30); for completeness
the list of morphemes competing in the inchoative case to realize vBECome is given
in (31).
(30) Morphemes competing to realize vCAUS in Japanese
-0-	— CAUS / [ Ji+iv___v ]	(38 Jacobsen roots
on the list for -0-)
-e-	— CAUS / [ yjii+ni+xrv+xv_____v ](120 roots on list)
-s-	—	CAUS	/	[	Jv+vi+vn_____v ]	(47 roots on list)
-as-	—	CAUS	/	[	Jvn+ix+x_____v ]	(9】roots on list)
-os-	一	CAUS	/	[	Jxi_____v ]	(6 roots on list)
-se-	—	CAUS	/	[	Jxn____v ]	(6 roots on list)
-akas-	—	CAUS	/	[	Jxm____v ]	(4 roots on list)
-sase- <-> CAUS / Elsewhere	(no roots on list)
Blocking effect!
(31) Morphemes competing to realize ^become in Japanese
-e-	一 BECOME / [ Ji+ix+xii v	]	(79 Jacobsen roots
		on the list)
-ar-	一 BECOME / [ Vm+iv —v ]	(79 roots on list)
-r-	—BECOME / [ 7v 一v ]	(27 roots on list)
-re-	—BECOME / [ 7vi 一v]	(18 roots on list)
-ri-	—BECOME / [ Vvi! 一v ]	(2 roots on list)
-i-	i BECOME / [ Vx+xi v]	(14 roots on list)
-or-	-BECOME / [ Jxw 一v ]	(2 roots on list)
-are-	—BECOME / [ Jxv —v ]	(3 roots on list)
		(Elsewhere? See n. 20)
-0-	1 BECOME / [ yjii+vii+xii	v ] (88 roots on list)
		(Elsewhere?)
So, it is possible to treat the lexical causative as subject to syntactic decom-
position and thus capture the blocking effect. How does this help with the pro-
ductive causative? And how are the other distinctions between the two causatives to
be captured in this all-syntax approach?
2.3.4	Implications for Syntactic Causatives
If -sase- is simply an Elsewhere form of the agent-introducing vCAUS, and if all
syntactic causatives are realized with -sase-, then syntactic causatives are also a
realization of the agent-introducing vCAUS. The syntactic version of this vCAUS,
however, does not take a JP headed by a verb root as its complement but rather a
ON THE CAUSATIVE CONSTRUCTION
41
complement that has a thematically complete argument structure一another vP,
with its own independent agent argument. This is illustrated for a productive
causative of the simple transitive verb tabe- ^eat' in (32). Like all agentive transitive
verbs in Hale and Keyser's approach, tabe- is itself a realization of a root plus an
external-argument introducing v° head. In the case of tabe-, we assume that the v°
that introduces its external argument is realized by a null morpheme. (In a syntactic
causative of a lexically causative verb, that lower v° slot is filled by whatever
causative morpheme is appropriate to the lexical causative root, of course, as in,
e.g., kow-as-ase, [ [break-CAUS]vpi-CAUS]vp2> 'cause (someone) to break (some-
b. Taroo-ga Hanako-ni piza-o tabe-sase-ta.
Taroo-NOM Hanako-DAT pizza-ACC eat-CAUs-PST
'Taroo made Hanako eat pizza.'
In a syntactic causative, the matrix CAUS v° does not meet the structural
description for any special root-conditioned allomorphs of CAUS, because it is
not structurally adjacent to any root. The matrix CAUS is insulated from the root
by one layer of bracketing—it is separated from the root by the embedded v0.21
Consequently, in productive causatives, the prediction is always that the default
realization of the vCAUs morpheme will win the competition—productive causa-
tives will always be spelled out by the VI -sase-.
(33)	Matrix v° after head-to-head movement: [[ Jtabe____v]____v]
We are now in a position to propose clear definitional criteria for distinguishing
lexical and productive V+sase combinations in this framework:
(34)	a. uLexical" causative:	A CAUS v° that is immediately adjacent
to a root.
b. "productive" causative: A CAUS v° that is not adjacent to a root
(i.e., one that embeds a vP).
42 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Compare the lexical and syntactic causative structures in (35).
hanasai-o tutae
a\ Taroo-ga tenoura-o kae-s....
Taroo-NOM palm-ACC return-CAUS
'Taroo changed his attitude suddenly/	(c£ (15c))
b‘. Taroo-wa Hanako-ni hanasi-o tutae-sase-ta.
Taroo-TOP Hanako-DAT story-ACC convey-CAUS-PST
"Taroo made Hanako convey a story?
To distinguish between the syntactic properties of lexical and productive
causatives, then, it suffices to identify vP as the locus of the relevant syntactic
properties that suggest a biclausal approach. First, it has long been assumed that vP
is a locus for successive-cyclic A'-movement, and hence a possible target constit-
uent for quantifier scope. Second, given that vP introduces the external argument,
it is natural to associate subject-oriented binding preferences with vP, as well as
subject control into adverbials, perhaps supplemented with a c-command re-
striction. Finally, because vP is the modern equivalent of the former simple VP
projection, it is natural to think of VP adverbials as having two loci for scope in
productive causatives but only one in lexical causatives. In short, by ascribing these
properties to a particular functional projection, we are able to appeal to the same
type of explanation for their absence in the lexical causative as we appealed to in
explaining the single-clause effects on case assignment and NPI licensing in the
productive causative. The culprit is the absence of two instances of the relevant
syntactic projection in each case一TP in case of case assignment and NPI licensing
in productive causatives, and vP in case of subject control, adverbial modification,
quantification and binding in lexical causatives.22
2.3.5	Why Not a Vbecome Layer in Lexical Causatives?
Miyagawa (1994,1998) proposes that there is also an inchoative v° embedded under
the causative v° of a lexical causative, adopting a structure like that given in (36).
ON THE CAUSATIVE CONSTRUCTION
43
(36)
DP	v'
John
v°	vP
CAUS
v°	a/p
BECOME
DP	寸
the door	open
To capture the fact that inchoative morphology disappears in the lexical causative
member of the causative/inchoative pair for the vast majority of cases, Miyagawa
proposes that the lexical causative morphemes realize a complex segment, the
Vcaus+vbecome heads together. To accomplish this, the vCaus and vBEcome
morphemes must fuse into a single terminal node prior to insertion. In one case
where he discusses the lexical causative meaning 'bother1, iya-gar-sase, it appears as
if inchoative morphology, -gar-, is indeed embedded under the lexical causative
morpheme -sase; Miyagawa assumes that Fusion must then have failed in this one
case, justifying the account.
On the present approach, where the lexical causative v° and the inchoative v°
are interchangeable, rather than simultaneously present, we would have to assume
that -gar is not the Spell-Out of the inchoative v° head but some other morpheme.
This is necessary given the logic of the analysis above. If lexical causatives em-
bedded an inchoative v° rather than a bare JP, it would become impossible to
distinguish between syntactic causatives of inchoatives and lexical causatives.
Compare the structures, under the inchoative-inside-lexical-causatives hypothe-
sis, for the following two sentences (from Miyagawa 1989:130 [43a,b]). The avail-
ability of the adversity reading for (37a), as well as the irregular causativizer -os-,
indicates that ot-os- is a lexical causative; the absence of the adversity reading in
(37b), along with the default causativizer -sase-, indicates that ot-i-sase is a pro-
ductive causative.
(37)	a. Lexical
Boku-wa	booru-o gake kara ot-os-ita.
I-top	ball-ACC cli 压 from drop-CAUS-PST
‘I dropped the ball from the cliff?
'The ball dropped from the cliff, and I was adversely affected?
b. Productive
Boku-wa	booru-o gake-kara ot-i-sase-ta.
I-top	ball-ACC cliff from drop-BECOME-CAUS-PST
‘I caused the ball to drop from the cliff?
世The ball dropped from the cliff, and I was adversely affected?
On Miyagawa's (1994,1998) structures, where the lexical causative embeds the
inchoative, these two sentences would be represented as in (38).
44 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
If the lexical causative ot-os includes a vBECOME in its structure, then the
only difference between the lexical causative and the productive causative is
whether Fusion (a postsyntactic operation) has applied to the Vbecome and vCAUS
roots to ensure that they are spelled out by the single -os- morpheme. This
type of postsyntactic operation cannot account for the syntactic distinctions ob-
served between lexical and productive causatives in terms of adverbial scope,
control possibilities, availability of adversative readings, and so on. The lexical/
productive distinction must be more categorical than a mere postsyntactic mor-
phological diacritic, especially because it has such strong consequences for
meaning. The distinction must be represented at LF. Consequently, it is preferable
to treat the lexical causative as directly embedding the JP, hence lacking the
intervening vPbecome.
The notion that -gar in iya-gar-sase 'bother' is not the inchoative but some
other type of morpheme is supported by the fact that it seems to appear in psy-
chological predicates only, such as kuyasi-garu 'dumb-gar' (lit. 'regret'), samu-garu
'cold-gar' (lit. 'feel cold'), atsu-garu 'hot-gar' (lit. 'feel hot'), hoshi-garu 'want-gar'
(lit. 'feel like'), and kowa-garu 'fear-gar' (lit. 'fear') (Yosuke Sato, pers. comm.).
Indeed, Miyagawa (1989:157) notes that -gar- affixation only appears with these
adjectives when they have a non-first-person subject一in the first person, the -gar-
affix is not needed. This suggests perhaps some connection of -gar- to evidentiality
rather than to the BECOME v° predicate, because presumably the event/argument
structure of experiencing these emotions is identical no matter what the person
feature of the subject DP is.
2.3.6	Correlations with Other Proposals
in the Literature
One significant distinction between the lexical and syntactic causatives that I have
not discussed much yet is the possibility of idiomatization in the former and the
ON THE CAUSATIVE CONSTRUCTION 45
impossibility of it in the latter. In fact, this pattern fits well with independent
proposals in the literature by Kratzer (1996) and Marantz (1997), according to
which the agent-selecting vP is the boundary of a domain for special meaning
specification一no projection outside a vP can participate in an idiomatic specifi-
cation that depends on the root. This proposal was introduced to account for a
pattern of facts first observed in Marantz 1984: idiomatic meanings for verbs are
often conditioned by the object of a transitive verb ("kill the afternoon', "kill the
bottle', "kill an audience') but are seldom or never conditioned by the subject
associated with a transitive verb. The assumption that agent-introducing v° is an
interpretive boundary of this type can account for those facts and also predicts
the pattern of facts about idiomatization observed here: lexical causatives, with
nothing intervening between the causative head and the root, often idiomatize,
whereas productive causatives, with a vP between the causative head and the root,
never do.
Another proposal has to do with the conditioning of allomorphy by the root
only. So far, nothing I have said prevents a particular root in combination with
a particular v° from conditioning causative allomorphy for a productive causative
that takes that vP as its complement. However, that does not seem to occur:
productive causatives are always realized with the default causative morpheme
-sase.
Arad (2003) has claimed, based on evidence from Hebrew, that the domain
for special meanings一that is, the vP一is also a boundary domain for allomorphic
conditioning of this type: roots can only condition specific allomorphs of mor-
phemes that are syntactically directly adjacent to them. If this is true, it also predicts
that Japanese productive causatives could never be allomorphically conditioned by
the roots with which they occur.23
Both the proposal concerning vP as boundary for idiomatic semantic in-
terpretation and the proposal taking vP to be a boundary for allomorphic con-
ditioning correlate well with Chomsky's (2001)claim that vP is a phase edgea
boundary in the syntactic derivation at which the v° complement is sent for in-
terpretation to LF and PF and which is subsequently impenetrable to later syn-
tactic operations. Given that in lexical causatives the complement to v° consists of
a yj and its selected object, this constituent corresponds exactly to the V+Obj
sequence that Marantz's generalization claims is the locus of idiomatization. The
notion of interpretation by phase, then, can provide a theoretical basis for the
……………
2.3.7	The Beginning of the High/Low Attachment Analysis
The analysis of Japanese causatives described above was one of the first proposals
in a very fruitful line of inquiry that I call "high/low attachment analyses." Since
then, many analyses have appealed to the idea that attachment of a morpheme to
46 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
a higher functional projection results in regular morphology and compositional
meaning, whereas attachment of the same morpheme to a lower projection (often
the J) results in some allomorphy and potential meaning drift. Other early ex-
amples of such an analysis are the approach to English qf-ing and ncc-ing gerunds
presented in Kratzer 1996 and the approach to Chichewa statives and passives
sketched in Marantz 1997. Since then, such approaches have been extremely
fruitful in looking at all kinds of morphology on the derivational/inflectional,
unproductive/productive cusp in many unrelated languages: Travis (2000) used
such an approach to treat Malagasy lexical and syntactic causatives, in very much
the same spirit as outlined here for Japanese. Embick (2004) adopts the idea to
treat the distinction between stative, resultative, and passive participle formation in
English. Fortin (2004) applies it to Minnangkabu causatives. Jackson (2005) shows
it applies to statives and resultatives in Pima. Alexiadou and Anagnostopoulou
(2005) use it to treat adjectival participles in Greek. Svenonius (2005) continues the
trend, discussing high/low treatments for causatives in several languages.
2.4	Conclusion
I hope to have shown in this chapter that Japanese causatives have been extremely
influential in shaping developments in syntactic theory, indeed, in many syntactic
theories. Japanese causatives一even omitting the "lexical" ones一either force one
to do more syntax in the lexicon (Manning, Sag, and lida 1999) or more mor-
phology in the syntax (Baker 1988).
I have argued that a careful examination of lexical causatives forces one to
figure out a way to unify traditional idiosyncratic, irregular word formation with
regular, compositional syntax and yet maintain a principled distinction between
the two. A postsyntactic morphology—a Late Insertion approach一with recursive
vPs, allows a simple, unified treatment of all three types of lexical causatives, with
a principled understanding of the nature of the distinction between lexical and
syntactic causatives.
The analysis in general can be taken as additional evidence for the phasal status
of vP, and for successive-cyclic QR through vP, among other things.
NOTES FOR CHAPTER 2
I wish to express my gratitude to the workshop organizers, Shigeru Miyagawa and
Mamoru Saito, for inviting me to present at the Workshop on Linguistic Theory and the
Japanese Language in July 2005 at Harvard University, and for their valuable feedback, as
well as that of the audience there. Thanks also to Yosuke Sato and Kunio Nishiyama for
ON THE CAUSATIVE CONSTRUCTION
47
their detailed comments, which have improved the manuscript greatly. Caroline Heycock
and Akira Watanabe also provided important comments. Takaomi Kato, Yosuke Sato,
Hironobu Kasai, and Kazutoshi Ohno helped me with some of the Japanese example
sentences herein. Finally, many thanks to Mark Volpe for providing me with the intro-
ductory quotation from Shibatani. Any and all remaining shortcomings and mistakes are,
of course, my responsibility entirely.
1.	Kuroda 1981,1990 (as cited in Kuroda 2003) presents some examples from negation
and intervening particles to suggest that -sase- does have an independent existence as a
verbal morpheme; Miyagawa (1989:115^) and Kitagawa (1994:184^), followed by Manning,
Sag, and lida (1999:47), argue that in fact these are examples of the -ase- allomorph suffixed
to light verb s-, 'do'. Kuroda (2003, n.14) disagrees, ascribing Kitagawa's position to
grammaticality judgment differences.
2.	In the case of the moke-reading of a causative of a transitive verb, it seems that the
dative -ni on the Causee is the structural case marker -nr, not postpositional-ni (Sadakane
and Koizumi 1995). In Zef-reading causatives, with both transitive and intransitive root
verbs, the -ni on the Causee seems to be P -ni.
3.	An interesting piece of evidence showing the monoclausal nature of the case marking
of productive causatives is noted by Maiming, Sag, and lida (1999): when a productive
causative is suffixed with the potential/abilitative morpheme -e-, the embedded accusative
argument may be optionally marked with nominative case, rather than accusative~just like
the accusative arguments of monoclausal, morphologically simple transitive verbs suffixed
with the same morpheme. Example (i) illustrates this phenomenon.
(i)	Sensei-ga Taroo-ni tsukue-ga/o soujis-ase-re-naka-tta
teacher-nom Taroo-DAT desk-NOM/ACC clean-CAUSE-ABL-NEG-PAST
(koto).
(fact)
"The teacher was not able to make Taroo clean his desk.'
4.	See Nishiyama, this volume, for discussion of this problem with respect to other
types of morphologically complex words in Japanese.
5.	Akira Watanabe (pers. comm.) notes that this same problem for lexicalist treat-
ments of complex predicates arises with the affixal light-verb constructions in Japanese.
6.	Interestingly, it seems that this structure is not available for examples involving true
coordination, rather than disjunction (thanks to Takaomi Kato for these examples and
discussion):
(ii)	*Ken-wa	[Naomi-ni	[kesa	hurui huku-o
Ken-TOP	[Naomi-DAT	[this.morning	old clothes-ACC
sute]	[sakuban	kuroozetto-o	soozi]]-sase-ta.
throw.away [last.night	closet-ACC	cleaning] ] -sase-PST
'Ken made Naomi throw away her old clothes this morning and clean out
the closet last night.'
(iii)	* Yamada kyoozyu-wa	[betubetu-no	gakusei-ni	[toogoron-no
Yamada professor-TOP	[different-GEN	student-DAT	[syntax-GEN
ronbun-o yomi]	[oninron-no	ronbun-o	kak] ] -ase-ta.
paper-ACC read]	[phonology-GEN	paper-ACC	write]]-sase-PST
'Prof. Yamada made different students read a paper on syntax and write a
paper on phonology.'
48 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
In (Li), temporal modifiers are included that make the first VP temporally follow the
second; in (iii), betubetu 'different' is attached to the Causee argument. Both of these
controls are intended to enforce a true coordination structure, and the sentences are
ungrammatical. (See Takano 2004 on relevance of betubetu for ensuring that a given
sentence with a bare V-stem VP contains a true coordination structure rather than an
adjoined, VP-modifier position for the first VP). Similar examples without the temporal
modifiers or betebetu seem clearly to involve adjunction, as argued by Manning, Sag, and
lida (1999); they get a sequential 'After Xing, Y' or 'X, then Y' reading. Interestingly, the
same is true in Korean, which, unlike Japanese, has an overt coordination particle. It is
quite mysterious why coordination is not allowed under -sase but disjunction is― spe-
cially because, as Takano shows, coordination in Japanese can apply to bare verb stems
(i.e., under a single tense morpheme).
7.	Given that I have said that such an approach should treat all productive mor-
phology (especially inflectional morphology) as syntactically attached, I have adopted a
"Kase?" hypothesis for Japanese case particles in this tree. For discussion of how these case
morphemes can be licensed by particular case-marking heads, see Miyagawa 1999.
8.	Because productive causatives can undergo nominalization, this theory has to allow
the syntax to derive -kata 'way of' nominals, too.
9.	This basic picture, once established, leaves many questions to be solved concerning
the make/let distinction; the role of unergativity, unaccusativity, and agentivity; psych-
predicate causatives, restructuring effects, and more. See the survey literature cited above
and references therein.
10.	See also Matsumoto 200〇.
11.	The adversity interpretation is not available for these examples for at least some
speakers (Yosuke Sato, pers. comm.).
12.	Kunio Nishiyamia (pers. comm.) notes that some clearly monoclausal (and hence
lexical) causatives nonetheless do not have an adversity interpretation, such as sir-ase-ru
'inform' (lit. 'know-cause'). The idiomatization and adversity causative implications
are thus unidirectional: If a causative has an idiomatic interpretation or an adversative
interpretation, it is lexical; if it does not, the predicate's lexical or syntactic status is still
underdetermined. Tests involving the full constellation of monoclausal/biclausal properties
are necessary to establish lexical versus syntactic status in many individual cases. The testing
situation is complicated in cases where a root and the unaccusative/inchoative form of the
verb are phonologically identical, however, given that both the lexical reading (embedding
the root) and the syntactic reading (embedding the inchoative vP) may be available.
13.	Another clear example of blocking arises in the case of verb-specific honorific
morphology in Japanese, as for tabe 'eat'. It cannot be marked with the productive hon-
orific ^o-tabe-ni naru. Rather its irregular honorific form must be used: mesiagaru 'ea-
t.HON'. For discussion, see Volpe 2005.
14.	In such theories, there is an important distinction between the root lexeme itself,
which is the "real" lexical entry, and its word forms, which merely occupy the slots of its
paradigm. In theories that allow paradigms to attach derivational morphology, like
Miyagawa's, the word forms that fill the slots in a derivational paradigm are also them-
selves lexemes that have their own inflectional paradigms attached一paradigms within
paradigms, as it were.
15.	Most of the following is a mildly revised version of Miyagawa's (1994,1998)
analysis, which appeared in Harley 1995a. It has been updated to take recent minimalist
terminology into account, but the crucial mechanisms remain the same.
16.	But see Takano 2004.
ON THE CAUSATIVE CONSTRUCTION
49
17.	In the Distributed Morphology account of Harley 1995a and Marantz 1997, there is
no constituent V°, and hence no VP: a verb is created in the syntax by combining a J and a
v° head. The distinction between a light verb and a main verb, then, comes down to
whether the v° element has had a J element combined with it: main verbs are v°+J
combinations; light verbs like -sase- are pure v°. The question of whether any given verb in
a language is a realization of just v° or of v°+J, then, is an empirical question. For
instance, English make might be a v°,like -sase-, or a v°+J (=V) combination, like coerce
or permit. See also note 2〇.
18.	Despite the terminology, in the analysis presented below, the class of causatives I
have been calling "lexical" are formed in the syntax, and no presyntactic word-forming
lexical component is assumed. This is the major conceptual advantage of the analysis. For
terminological consistency, however, I continue referring to these monoclausal causatives
as "lexical."
19.	To make the accounts of the English and Japanese lexical causatives as parallel as
possible, let us assume that the v° head has had the J node adjoined to it by head-
movement. Because Japanese is head-final, however, the head-movement is not necessary
to get all the morphemes in the correct order; they could remain in situ but simply merge
under adjacency.
2〇• Sometimes, of course, the appropriate v() causative morpheme in a lexical causative
is itself the null v° morpheme, as for Jacobsen's classes I and IV (e.g., ak-0-U 'open.TR').
The question of why the foot ^Jak 'open' may also be embedded under v°BECOME (allo-
morph -e-) but the root ^Jtabe 'eat' apparently may not, despite also taking the 0 allo-
morph of the external-argument-selecting v°, can be answered in one of two ways. If-rare-,
the passive morpheme, is the Elsewhere form of v°BECOME, then it is perhaps the case that
yjtabe does alternate, with its passive form tabe-rare involving replacing the 0 v°CAUS
morpheme for a v°BEC〇ME, -rare-, thus explaining the suppression of the external argu-
ment, similar to the analysis of Persian light verbs presented in Folli, Harley, and Karimi
2005. Alternatively (if the productive passive is assumed to involve embedding vP, rather
than JP,like the productive causative), the failure of 小abe to alternate can be taken as an
indication that the immediate licensing environment for ^/tabe insertion does not allow a
v°become； for discussion on how to restrict the productivity of inchoative/causative al-
ternations in a syntactic approach to verb-formation, see Harley and Noyer 200〇.
21.	This is the case no matter whether the and embedded v° head move to the
matrix v°, or if they are attached just by virtue of their head-final adjacency in Japanese. In
either case, the same remarks obtain: a productive causative v° is never adjacent to a root
but always is separated from it by another v°, the one that comes lexically with that J.
22.	There are still generalizations about the various causatives that remain uncaptured
on this analysis. For instance, why does lexical -sase- always alternate with an inchoative
form whose inchoative sufiix is 0? In principle, a root could be on a special list for an
unaccusative morpheme like -r- or -e-, but not for a causative morpheme, and hence -r- or
-e- could in principle alternate with -sase-, yet this does not seem to occur. See Miyagawa
1998 for a proposal. Similarly, the haplological restriction on multiple occurrences of -sase
are unexplained— ne would expect that infinite recursion should be possibleas with
John made Mary make Joe make Sue eat pizza一but more than one syntactic -sase em-
bedding is ungrammatical (though Kuroda 1994 shows that a lexical -sase may combine
with one syntactic -sase).
23.	There are interesting reasons to question this precise formulation of both of
these claims, brought up by Volpe (2005). Lexical causatives can be the input to nomi-
nalization, with nominalizing morphemes conditioned by the particular lexical causative
5〇 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
involved, and subject to subsequent meaning drift. For example, the lexical causative chir-
as-u 'to scatter', when suffixed by nominalizing -i (.chirashi), refers idiomatically to 'leaf-
lets', not to any scattered item. Yet this idiomatic nominalization clearly includes the
causative suffix -as-, which should have been a barrier to special meaning assignment,
under the Marantz/Arad hypothesis. Pylkkanen (2002) proposes that the causative head
and agent-introducing heads are distinct, with the latter selecting the former as its com-
plement, and that only the agent-introducing head is the boundary for special meaning. It
is possible that her approach could resolve the conflict between Volpe's idiomatic nomi-
nalization facts (including Vcaus but not the agent head) and Miyagawa's verbal idio-
matization facts (assuming the productive causative embeds the agent-introducing phrase,
not just VcausP)-
REFERENCES
Alexiadou, Artemis, and Elena Anagnostopoulou. 2005. On the syntax and morphology of
Greek participles. Talk presented at the Workshop on the Morphosyntax of Modern
Greek, LSA Institute, July.
Arad, Maya. 2003. Locality constraints on the interpretation of roots: The case of Hebrew
denominal verbs. Natural Language & Linguistic Theory 21:737-778.
Baker, Mark.1988. Incorporation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Brody, Michael.200〇• Mirror Theory: Syntactic representation in perfect syntax. Linguistic
Inquiry 31:29-56.
Chomsky, Noam.1993. A Minimalist Program for linguistic theory. In The view from
Building 20: Essays in linguistics in honor of Sylvain Bromberger, ed. Kenneth Hale and
Samuel Jay Keyser, 1-52. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Chomsky, Noam. 2001.Derivation by phase. In Ken Hale: A life in language, ed. Michael
Kenstowicz, 1-52. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Cipollone, Domenic. 2001.Morphologically complex predicates in Japanese and what they
tell us about grammar architecture. In OSU Working Papers in Linguistics 56, ed.
Michael Daniels, David Dowty, Anna Feldman, and Vanessa Metcalf 1-52. Columbus:
Ohio State University, Department of Linguistics.
Dubinsky, Stan.1994. Predicate union and the syntax of Japanese causatives. Journal of
Linguistics 30:43-79.
Embick, David. 2004. On the structure of resultative participles in English. Linguistic
Inquiry 35(3)：355-392.
Folli, Rafaella, Heidi Harley, and Simin Karimi. 2005. Determinants of event structure in
Persian complex predicates. Lingua 115(10):1365-1401.
Fortin, Catherine R. 2004. Minangkabau causatives: Evidence for the 1-syntax/s-syntax
division. Talk presented at AFLA 2004, ZAS Berlin, April.
Hale, Kenneth, and Samuel Jay Keyser.1993. On argument structure and the lexical ex-
pression of syntactic relations. In The view from Building 20: Essays in linguistics in
honor of Sylvain Bromberger, ed. Kenneth Hale and Samuel Jay Keyser, 53-108.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Hale, Kenneth, and Samuel Jay Keyser. 2002. Prolegomena to a theory of argument structure.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
ON THE CAUSATIVE CONSTRUCTION
51
Halle, Morris, and Alec Marantz. 2003. Distributed Morphology and the pieces of in-
flection. In The view from Building 20: Essays in linguistics in honor of Sylvain Brom-
berger, ed. Kenneth Hale and Samuel Jay Keyser, 111-176. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
Harada, S. 1.1973. Counter equi NP deletion. Annual Bulletin 7:113-147. Research Institute
of Logopedics and Phoniatrics, Tokyo University.
Harley, Heidi. 1995a. Subjects, events, and licensing. Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cam-
bridge, Mass.
Harley, Heidi. 1995b. Sase bizarre: The structure of Japanese causatives. In Proceedings of the
Canadian Linguistic Society Meeting, ed. Paivi Koskinen, 221-232. Toronto: Toronto
Working Papers in Linguistics.
Harley, Heidi, and Rolf Noyer. 200〇• Licensing in the non-lexicalist lexicon. In The lexicon/
encyclopedia interface, ed. B. Peeters, 349-374. Amsterdam: Elsevier Press.
Jackson, Eric. 2005. Derived statives in Pima. Paper presented at the SSILA Annual
Meeting, January. http://www.linguistics.ucla.edu/people/grads/ejackson/SSILA05
PimaDerivedStatives.pdf.
Jacobsen, Wesley. M.1981.Transitivity in the Japanese verbal system. Doctoral dissertation,
University of Chicago.
Jacobsen, Wesley. M.1992. The transitive structure of events in Japanese. Studies in Jap-
anese Linguistics I. rFokyo: Kurosio.
Kitagawa, Yoshihisa.1986. Subjects in Japanese and English. Doctoral dissertation, Uni-
versity of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Kitagawa, Yoshihisa.1994. Subjects in Japanese and English. New York: Garland.
Kratzer, Angelika.1996. Severing the external argument from its verb. In Phrase structure
and the lexicon, ed. Johan Rooryck and Laurie Zaring, 109-137. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Kuno, Susumu.1973. The structure of the Japanese language. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Kuroda, S.-Y., 1965a. Causative forms in Japanese. Foundations of Language 1:30-5〇.
Kuroda, S.-Y. 1965b. Generative grammatical studies in the Japanese language. Doctoral
dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Kuroda, S.-Y.1981.Some recent issues in linguistic theory and Japanese syntax. Coyote
Papers 2:103-122.
Kuroda, S.-Y.199〇• Shieki no jodoshi no jiritsu-sei ni tsuite [On the independence of
causative auxiliaries]. In Bunpo to imi no aida: Kunihiro Tetsuya kyoju kanreki taikan
kinen ronbunshu [Between grammar and meaning: A collection of papers in honor of
Professor Tetsuya Kunihiro on the occasion of his retirement], 93-104. Tokyo: Kur-
osio.
Kuroda, S.-Y.1994. Lexical and productive causatives in Japanese: An examination of the
theory of paradigmatic structure. Journal of Japanese Linguistics 14:1-83.
Kuroda, S.-Y. 2003. Complex predicates and predicate raising. In Formal Japanese syntax
and Universal Grammar: The past 20 years, ed. Naoki Fukui, Lingua 113(4-6):447-48〇.
Manning, Christopher, Ivan Sag, and Masayo lida.1999. The lexical integrity of Japanese
causatives. In Studies in contemporary phrase structure grammar, ed. Robert D. Levine
and Georgia Green, 39-79. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Marantz, Alec.1984. On the nature of grammatical relations. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Marantz, Alec.1991.Case and licensing. In ESCOL '91: Proceedings of the 8th Eastern States
Conference on Linguistics, ed. German Westphal, Benjamin Ao, and Hee-Rahk Chae,
234-253. Somerville, Mass.: CLC Publications.
52 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Marantz, Alec.1997. No escape from syntax: Don't try a morphological analysis in the
privacy of your own lexicon. In UPenn Working Papers in Linguistics 4.2, Proceedings of
the 21st Annual Penn Linguistics Colloquium, ed. Alexis Dimitriadis, Laura Siegel,
Clarissa Surek-Clark, and Alexander Williams, 201-225. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania, Department of Linguistics.
Matsumoto, Yo. 200〇. On the crosslinguistic parameterization of causative predi-
cates: Implications from Japanese and other languages. In Argument realization,
ed. Miriam Butt and Tracy Holloway King, 135-169. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI
Publications.
Miyagawa, Shigeru.198〇• Complex verbs and the lexicon. Ph.D. dissertation, University of
Arizona, Tucson.
Miyagawa, Shigeru.1984. Blocking and Japanese causatives. Lingua 64:177-207.
Miyagawa, Shigeru.1989. Structure and Case marking in Japanese. New York: Academic
Press.
Miyagawa, Shigeru.1994. (S)ase as an Elsewhere causative. Program of the Conference on
Theoretical Linguistics and Japanese Language Teaching, 61-76. Tsuda University,
Tokyo.
Miyagawa, Shigeru.1998. (S)ase as an Elsewhere causative and the syntactic nature of
words. Journal of Japanese Linguistics 16:67-11〇.
Miyagawa, Shigeru.1999. Causatives. In The handbook of Japanese linguistics, ed. Natsuko
Tsujimura, 236-268. Oxford: Blackwell.
Murasugi, Keiko, Tomoko Hashimoto, and Sachiko Kato. 2004. On the acquisition of
causatives in Japanese. BU Conference on Language Development 28 Proceedings Sup-
plement. http://www.bu.edu/linguistics/APPLIED/BUCLD/supp.html.
Oehrle, Richard, T., and Hiroko Nishio.1981.Adversity. In Coyote Papers 2: Proceedings of
the Arizona Conference on Japanese Linguistics, ed. Ann K. Farmer and Chisato Kita-
gawa, 163-187. Tucson: University of Arizona Linguistics Circle.
Oshima, Shin.1979. Conditions on rules: Anaphora in Japanese. In Exploration in lin-
guistics: Papers in honor of Kazuko Inoue, ed. George Bedell, Eichi Kobayashi, and
Masatake Muraki, 423-448. Tokyo: Kenkyusha.
Pylkkanen, Liina. 2002. Introducing arguments. Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge,
Mass.
Sadakane, Kumi, and Masatoshi Koizumi.1995. On the nature of "dative" particle -ni in
Japanese. Linguistics 33:5-33.
Shibatani, Masayoshi.199〇• The languages in Japan. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Stump, Gregory T. 2001.Inflectional morphology: A theory of paradigm structure (Cam-
bridge Studies in Linguistics 93). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Svenonius, Peter. 2005. Two domains of causatives. Talk presented at CASTL, March 10.
http：〃 www.hum.uit.n0/a/sven0nius/papers/Sven0nius05Tw0D0mains.pdf.
Takano, Yuji. 2004. Coordination of verbs and two types verbal inflection. Linguistic
Inquiry 35(1):168-178.
Terada, Michiko.1991.Incorporation and argument structure in Japanese. Doctoral dis-
sertation, University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Travis, Lisa. 200〇. Event structure in syntax. In Events as grammatical objects: The con-
verging perspectives of lexical semantics and syntax, ed. Carol Tenny and James Pus-
tejovsky, 145-185. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI Publications.
ON THE CAUSATIVE CONSTRUCTION ZZ
Volpe, Mark. 2005. Japanese morphology and its theoretical consequences: Derivational
morphology in Distributed Morphology. Doctoral dissertation, Stony Brook Uni-
versity, New York.
Zenno, Yasushi.1985. Paradigmatic structure and Japanese idioms. Master's thesis, Ohio
State University, Columbus.
CHAPTER 3
JAPANESE 一心,
-GA, AND
INFORMATION
STRUCTURE
CAROLINE HEYCOCK
3.1	Introduction
The first nonintroductory chapter of Kuno 1973 opens with the statement, 0 The
distinction in meaning between wa and ga is a problem that perpetually troubles
both students and instructors of Japanese” (p. 37). To the list of those perpetually
troubled by the distribution and interpretation of these two morphemes can be
added theoretical linguists, who continue to grapple with the problem of ac-
counting for them in the most convincing and elegant way. This issue has become
of interest far beyond those who seek to understand the particular facts of Japanese,
because it has become a truism that Japanese has an overt marker for topic (wの,a
concept that is much appealed to in accounts of not only the pragmatics but also
the syntax and semantics of a wide range of languages, in many of which however
the evidence for the category "topic" is quite indirect. The hope then is that the
properties of Japanese wa might constitute a leading light for the understanding of
this concept.
JAPANESE - WA, -GA, AND INFORMATION STRUCTURE ZZ
3.2	Core Data
3.2.1	Thematic and Contrastive Wa
In Kuno 1973, which draws in this area heavily on the work of Kuroda (1965), two
uses of wa and two of ga are distinguished as follows (p. 38):1
(1)	a. wa for the theme of a sentence: "Speaking of..., talking about...”
John wa gakusei desu.
John wa student is
'Speaking of John, he is a student?
b.	wa for contrast: "X..., but..., as for X..."
John ga pai wa tabeta ga (keeki wa tabenakatta).
John ga pie wa ate	but cake wa ate-NEG
'John ate (the) pie, but he didn't eat (the) cake.'
c.	ga for neutral descriptions of actions or temporary states
Ame ga hutte imasu.
rain ga falling is
It is raining.'
d.	ga for exhaustive listing "X (and only X)... " "It is X that..."
John ga gakusei desu.
John ga student is
'(Of all the people under discussion) John (and only John) is a student. It
is John who is a student.'
uThematic" wa is so named because Kuno takes it to indicate the theme of the
sentence, in the sense of the Prague School. In this use, wa does not encode any
sense of contrast; with this in mind I use another common, less theory-specific
term for this interpretation of wa and refer to it from now on as noncontrastive wa.
The sentence in (la) can be used to convey information about John, apparently
without any implicature about the properties of any other individual, for example,
as an answer to the question, What do you know about John? Contrastive wa,
however, does generate implicatures concerning other entities in the discourse
model, as illustrated by this example from Hara 2006a: 2
(2)	a. Dare ga paatii ni kita ka?
who ga party to came q
£Who came to the party?'
b.	john wa kita.
John wa came
'As for John, he came.' (Implicature: It is possible that it is not the case that
John and Mary came. « I don't know about other people.)
c.	John ga kita.
John ga came
john came.' (Complete answer.)
56 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
The capitalization of john in (2b) indicates stress; according to Kuno, the con-
trastive reading of wa is always associated with "prominent intonation/5 whereas
this is absent from noncontrastive w-phrases. There seems to be comparatively
little literature on the contours associated with the different interpretations of wa
(or gn), but see Nakanishi 2004 tor some experimental and corpus evidence sup-
porting Kuno's intuition.
As Kuno notes, in some cases there is ambiguity between these two uses, which
may however be resolved by either stress or context, or both. Thus (2b), in another
context and without the stress on John, can be interpreted as a case of noncon-
trastive wa. However, contrastive wa is freer than noncontrastive wa in its distri-
bution, as will be shown, so that there is only partial overlap in the environments in
which they occur.
3.2.1.1 Clause types
Most generally, noncontrastive wa is a "root phenomenon." That is, it does not
appear in subordinate clauses, except in complements to certain verbs, such as say
and know. Thus Mori san does not necessarily get a contrastive interpretation in
(za), where the embedding verb is siru (know), although it does in the minimally
different (3b), where the embedding verb is zannen-ni omou (regret) (Kuroda
2005:19-20).
(3)	a. John wa Mori san wa Toyota no syain de aru koto 〇 sitte-iru.
John wa Mori san wa Toyota gen employee be fact acc knows
'John knows that Mori is an employee of Toyota.5
b. John wa Mori san wa Toyota no hira-syain de aru koto 〇
John wa Mori san wa Toyota gen flat-employee be fact acc
zannen-ni omotte iru.
regrets
'John regrets that Mori is a mere employee of Toyota.5
Kuroda's generalization is that noncontrastive wa can only occur in "statement-
making contexts55;2 Hoji (1985) refers to the complements of "bridge verbs.55 There
does not yet appear to be the kind of detailed listing of exactly what constitutes the
kind of statement-making contexts or the types of verbs that allow noncontras-
tive wa that exists for embedded root phenomena such as verb-second order in
the Germanic languages (see, e.g., Vikner 1995 and references therein). This issue,
broached in Whitman 1991,could clearly be pursued further as a contribution to a
theoretical understanding of embedded root phenomena (see Heycock 2006 for an
overview of some of the issues).
Contrastive wa, however, can occur in a wider range of subordinate clauses,
although apparently not all (for discussion of contexts where contrastive wa is
excluded, see Hara 2006a, 2006b).
JAPANESE -WA, -GA, AND INFORMATION STRUCTURE 勺
z.2.1.2 Iteration
According to Kuno (1973:48), noncontrastive wa does not iterate within a sentence,
which can therefore contain at most one instance. Contrastive wa, though, can
iterate. Further, whereas noncontrastive wa has to be sentence initial, contrastive
wa can be clause internal. Thus in the following example only the first wa-phrase is
noncontrastive:
(4)	Watasi wa tabako wa suimasu ga sake	wa nomimasen.
I	wa cigarette wa smoke but alcohol wa drink-NEG
‘I smoke, but I don't drink.'
However, there is some dispute as to whether noncontrastive wa really has to be
unique. Tomioka (to appear a) describes multiple noncontrastive w-phrases as
"not totally prohibited but rather rare." Kuroda (1988) goes further, taking iter-
ability to be a fundamental property of all wa-phrases. He gives the following
example as involving two noncontrastive 印。-phrases:
(5)	Paris de wa Masao wa Eiffel too	to Notre Dame-no too	ni nobotta.
Paris in wa Masao wa Eiffel tower and Notre Dame gen tower in climbed
£In Paris, Masao climbed up the Eiffel tower and the tower of Notre Dame.'
It is no coincidence that the w-phrases here are a locative adjunct and a sub-
ject.3 It is common to get a noncontrastive reading for a subject or a scene-
setting adverbial, but wa-marking of other arguments strongly favors the
contrastive reading, a fact that is well known but again not yet satisfactorily ex-
plained.4
3.2.1.3 Movement
Saito (1985) argues that sentences with initial nominal wa-phrases are ambiguous
in their derivation and structure: the w-phrase may have moved to the sentence-
initial position, leaving a trace, or it may be generated in the initial position, binding
an empty pronominal. Hoji (1985), building on this, argues that the difference
correlates with interpretation: wa-phrases that show the hallmarks of movement
(such as island sensitivity and reconstruction effects) receive only a contrastive in-
terpretation, whereas sentence-initial w-phrases that cannot have reached the
initial position by movement are unambiguously noncontrastive.
3.2.2	Exhaustive and Descriptive Ga
3.2.2.1	Correlation with predicate types
As noted earlier, Kuroda (1965) points out that ga sometimes, but not always, gives
a reading of exhaustive listing" and that there is a correlation between these
readings and the nature of the predicate: in a main clause, a gn-marked subject of a
58 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
stage-level predicate gets either an exhaustive-listing or neutral reading, whereas a
ga-marked subject of an individual-level predicate can only get the exhaustive-
listing reading.
(6)	a. John ga kita.
John ga came
'John came.' or "john came./It is John who came.'
b. John ga gakusei desu.
John ga student is
'john is a student./It is john who is a student.'
This restriction is almost certainly stated too categorically; some qualifications are
discussed in section 3.3.2.3.
z.2.2.2 Clause type
The pattern just noted is again, like the possibility of a noncontrastive interpre-
tation of w, a root phenomenon. To be more precise, it is only in clauses that are
unambiguously nonsubordinate that the exhaustive-listing reading is forced on the
subject of individual-level predicates; both in a clearly subordinate clause (such as
the antecedent of a conditional, for example) and in the type of clause that op-
tionally allows embedded root phenomena this reading is not forced but merely
available.
3.3	Questions of Analysis
Given the kind of data discussed in the previous section, a number of questions
immediately arise. First, the characterizations of the interpretations of ga and wa are
both disjunctive. Is this an irreducible fact, or is there some underlying unity to the
different uses or interpretations in each case? If so, what interactions give rise to the
apparent diversity? Second, these characterizations have appealed to the notions of
"exhaustive listing" and of "topic"; what definitions are being assumed?
3.3.1	Ga and Focus
It has become common。to assume that the exhaustive-listing reading of a ga-
phrase should be considered to amount to narrow focus on that constituent (that is,
focus that does not include any larger containing constituent). Unfortunately "fo-
cus" has an enormously wide range of meanings in the literature. Here it is used in a
sense that belongs to the pragmatic tradition that goes back to the Prague School,
where it means, very approximately, the informative, nonpresupposed, part of an
JAPANESE -WA, -GA, AND INFORMATION STRUCTURE 59
utterance. In this sense it is often also referred to as the rheme. It is crucial to bear in
mind that there is no requirement that the referents of focal constituents be tex-
tually new, so that there is no contradiction in analyzing me as the focus in (7B),
even though the speaker and the hearer are generally taken to be linguistically
salient in any conversation, and in this case the speaker has even been mentioned in
the same sentence.
(7)	A: Who did your parents contact?
B: My mother phoned me, of course.
As in this last example, in a typical question-answer pair, the focus of the answer is
the part that corresponds to the wh-phrase in the question.6 In (8) the foci of the
answers are indicated by bracketing.
(8)	a. A: Why didn't you answer the phone?
B: [F I was reading a great novel by yoshimoto].
b.	A: What were you doing all afternoon?
B: I [F was reading a great novel by yoshimoto].
c.	A: What were you reading?
B: I was reading [F a great novel by yoshimoto].
d.	A: Who is the author of the novel you were reading?
B: I was reading a great novel by [F yoshimoto].
The examples in (8) illustrate the well-known fact that in English focus (under-
stood in informational terms) can uproject" from the constituent bearing the
pitch accent, so that only the context indicates whether the focus of B's sentence is
the DP Yoshimoto or one of a number of larger constituents. However, projection
of focus is not unconstrained: for example, there is no "wide focus" or "focus-
projected" reading of an example like (9a), as shown by its infelicity as a response
to the question in (9b), in contrast to (9c).7
(9)	a. I was reading a [F long] novel.
b.	A: What were you reading?
B: #1 was reading a [F long] novel.
c.	A: What kind of novel were you reading?
B: I was reading a [F long] novel.
A possible redescription of the distinction between the exhaustive-listing and
neutral description ga, then, is that ga is a focus marker (the equivalent of an
English "A" accent, indicated by small caps in the examples just given) and that the
projection of focus is affected in some way by the nature of the predicate. Such a
proposal was made by Diesing (1988), who observed that the distribution of the
"neutral description" ga in Japanese appeared to mirror the distribution of focus
projection from subjects in English, where it has been argued to be restricted to the
subjects of unaccusative verbs and stage-level predicates. Thus, (10a,b) can only be
interpreted with narrow focus on the subject, but (ua,b) can also be interpreted
with wide focus, so that the entire sentence constitutes new information. That is,
6〇 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
the sentences in (11), but not those in (io), have one focus structure that makes
them acceptable answers to questions such as, What happened/was happening? and
Why are the chefs running for the door?
(10)	a. [F The emperor] was playing pool.
b. [F blowfish] are poisonous.
(11)	a. [F [F The emperor] arrived].
b. [F [F blowfish] are available].
These examples, Diesing argued, exemplify the same phenomenon as Kuno's ex-
amples in (6), repeated here as (12).
(12)	a. [F John ga] gakusei desu.
John ga student is
John is a student./It is john who is a student?
b. [F [F John ga] kita].
John ga came
"John came? or 'john came./It is John who came?
Diesing's proposal was that focus cannot project from the external subject position
(the position in which the subjects of unergative and transitive verbs and indi-
vidual-level predicates originate); but the subjects of unaccusative verbs and stage-
level predicates originate in a lower position inside the VP. Assuming that the trace
of the subject is visible to focus projection, focus is able to project from the VP-
internal traces in (11a,b) and (12b). This structural difference is then the expla-
nation for the correlation of the different readings of Fa-phrases with predicate
types noticed by Kuroda and described in section z.2.2.1.
One further advantage of assimilating the exhaustive-listing reading of ga
to narrow focus is that the kind of explanations that have been developed to
explain the readings of the latter一possibly encoded in different ways in different
languages一can simply be extended to Japanese, as pointed out by Shibatani
(1990:270-271).
Taking the exhaustive-listing reading of ga to be an instance of narrow focus
does not, however, entail that ga is itself a focus marker (only that it is compatible
with being contained in a focused constituent). Indeed, there are considerable and
well-known problems with the analysis of ga as a focus marker.
First, as Shibatani observes, it does not occur freely on constituents other than
the subject. For that reason, it is very widely assumed to be a case marker, entirely
parallel to the accusative case marker 〇,8 Second, although the correlation with
predicate-type seems to mirror the pattern of focus projection in English, the
correlation with clause-type (see section z.2.2.2) does not. That is, whereas the Fa-
marked subject of an individual-level predicate in a subordinate clause is not
necessarily interpreted with narrow focus, the embedded subject of such a predicate
in English continues to disallow focus projection, so that there is an ambiguity in
the scope of the focus in (13b) that is not evident in (13a).
JAPANESE -WA, -GA, AND INFORMATION STRUCTURE 61
(13)	a. I only said that [F blowfish] were poisonous.
b. I only said that [F [F blowfish] were available].
There is no natural extension of any theory of focus projection that can explain
why or how there should be a main clause-subordinate clause asymmetry in
Japanese in this respect, should ga-marking indeed encode focus in the way that the
A accent does in English.
Heycock 1993 proposes a weaker link between ga marking and information
structure. There it is argued that ga does not encode information status except in
an indirect, negative sense; a ga-marked subject (like an 〇- or nz-marked constit-
uent) is, by definition, not w-marked. Fhat paper then makes the following
additional assumptions:
1.	Nominals, but not predicates, that are topics must be marked with wa.
2.	Every sentence, but not every clause, must have a topic (whether overt or null).
3.	Topics and foci are necessarily disjoint (this follows from Vallduvi s defi-
nition of topic/link and focus, discussed below).
4.	Stage-level predicates, but not individual-level predicates, have a Da-
vidsonian event argument that is available as a topic.
Given these assumptions, a sentence with a stage-level predicate such as (14) can
have the Davidsonian event argument as the topic; the subject may therefore be the
focus, but the focus could equally well be all the overt material.9
(14)	[f [f John ga] kita].
John ga came
'john came.'
When the predicate is stage-level, however, there is no Davidsonian argument
available. In (15), therefore, the only available topic is the predicate (if the subject
were topic, it would be marked with wa). This leaves the subject as the only
possible focus, so that wide focus on the entire sentence is excluded.
(15)	[F John ga] kasikoi.
John ga smart
'john is smart.'
Finally, given that the requirement for a topic is a requirement on sentences, rather
than clauses, it is possible for the clause in (15) to have an all-focus reading if it is
embedded, since the requirement for a topic can now be satisfied by some other
element in the sentence.10
This analysis also accounts for the observation that in a matrix clause with no wk-
phrase and multiple nominatives, only the first nominative has to be interpreted as
being in focus, whereas the others do not necessarily receive this interpretation.
(16)	Nisi no hoo ga ame ga taihen desu.
west gen alternative nom rain nom great is
'It is in the west that the rain is a nuisance.'
62 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Again, in the absence of a wa-phrase the predicate must be taken to be the topic.
On the assumption that in Japanese a clause can be abstracted over to produce an
(individual-level) sentential predicate (see Heycock and Doron 2003 for discus-
sion), noninitial nominatives, although they cannot be topics themselves―Ise they
would have to be marked with wa一can be included in a predicate that is the topic.
But in this case at least the highest nominative must be excluded from the topic and
therefore treated as focal, because the sentence requires not only a link/topic but
also a focus.
Essentially the same assumptions are used by Tomioka (2000, to appear a) to
explain the contrast between (17), which is ambiguous between a locative and a
part-whole reading, and (18), which has only the locative reading unless enzin ga
(engine ga) is read with narrow focus, and also to explain why this contrast does
not obtain in subordinate clauses (where both readings are possible for both
orders, without any particular focus assignment):
(17)	Torakku ni enzin-ga aru.
truck loc engine-GA exist
Locative: fThere is an engine in the/a truck (possibly on its bed).'
Part-whole: 'The/a truck has an engine (as one of its essential parts).'
(18)	Enzin ga torakku ni aru.
engine ga truck	log exist
Locative: 'There is an engine in the truck (possibly on the truck's bed).'
Part-whole: 'The/a truck has an engine (as one of its essential parts).'
(Only possible with narrow focus on enzin.)
This account additionally exploits the fact that wa may optionally be omitted but
that, when this is the case, the result is a bare PP or bare (non-case-marked)
nominal, so torakku ni (in the/a truck) in (17) can be interpreted as a topic, but
enzin ga (engine ga) in (18) cannot. The possibility of interpreting torakku ni in
(17) as a topic immediately explains why it does not have to have a narrow focus
reading, but the lack of this possibility for enzin ga in (18) is still not quite enough
to explain why it has to have a narrow focus reading if the sentence is given a part-
whole interpretation. After all, it seems that on the locative reading of (18) the
sentence can get an "all focus" interpretation. Here the argument parallels that
given in Heycock 1993 for examples like (15). As the part-whole relation is more or
less permanent, it is not compatible with an event argument; this then is not
an available topic for (18) with the part-whole interpretation. That leaves as the
only possible topic the remainder of the sentence—torakku-ni aru (the truck
has)一so that enzin is forced to constitute the focus. The locative reading, however,
allows an event argument, which can function as the topic, allowing for an "all
focus" reading of the overt material. The distinction between the two readings
disappears in subordinate clauses because in such cases the topic of the sentence
may be within the matrix, so that the lack of an event-topic in the subordinate
JAPANESE -WA, -GA, AND INFORMATION STRUCTURE 6)
clause no longer forces some other part of that clause to be the topic and the ga-
phrase to constitute the focus.
To summarize: there is a fairly general consensus (modulo the dissent, men-
tioned previously, of Kuroda 2005 and Vermeulen 2005) that ga should not be
singled out as carrying any semantic or pragmatic information; its alternation with
w is only privileged with respect to the alternation between, say, 〇 (the accusative
marker) and wa in the sense that it appears that subjects are an unmarked choice of
topic.
3.3.2	Wa and Topic
If the range of definitions and uses of the word "focus" is wide, the situation is
possibly even worse for "topic"; the discussion here is necessarily limited to a small
subset of the definitions in the literature, which are discussed because of their
relevance to the work on Japanese (and vice versa).
z.3.2.1 Topic as anchor for information
The notion of topic that is appealed to in Heycock 1993 and Tomioka 2000, to
appear a, and to appear b is Vallduvf s concept of link. For Vallduvi, the partici-
pants in a discourse each maintain a knowledge store that is taken to be a Heimian
collection of entity-denoting file cards, each card containing information relevant
to the entity. The role of information packaging is to aid the hearer by giving
instructions as to how to update this database. At the level of information struc-
ture, where these instructions are encoded, a sentence may be articulated into focus
and ground, and the ground may itself be composed of a link and a tail. The link
points to a specific file card where the (new) information carried by a given
sentence is to be entered; the focus is that information; and the ground gives further
information about where in the record the new information is to be entered. Note
that for Vallduvi the only one of these elements that is obligatory in every sentence
is the focus (see McNally 1998b for discussion of the necessarily default nature of
focus as an update instruction). Heycock's proposal, adopted also by Tomioka (to
appear a), that every sentence must have a link, even if phonetically null, is a
modification of Vallduvi s framework.
Vallduvf s notion of link embodies in a quite direct way the intuition that a
sentence topic is what the sentence is "about." The proposal of Portner and Ya-
bushita (1998,2001)is similar to Vallduvi's, as they state, in that they also take topics
to be entities, with which information is associated. Rather than positing a distinct
level of representation (Vallduvfs Information Structure), however, they instead
propose an enriched notion of the common ground of a discourse, defined as a
set of infinite sequences of pairs, where each pair consists of an entity (the link)
and a set of possible worlds (the information entered with respect to that link).
Portner and Yabushita support this view of topics (at the least, of noncontrastive
64 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
w-marked phrases in Japanese) by sequences of sentences showing that discourse
entities can most felicitously be picked out by information that was contributed
while the entity in question was encoded as a topic. However, as they acknowledge,
intuitions about these discourses are not clear cut. Portner and Yabushita also show
that their adaptation of the file-card approach to topics can explain the obligatory
wide scope for the wa-phrase in (19b), which contrasts with the minimally different
(19a).11
(19)	a.	John	dake	ga	kuru	to	omotteita.
John	only	ga	come	that	thought
T thought that only John would come.'
b.	John	dake	wa	kuru	to	omotteita.
John	only	top come	that thought
"John is the only one who I thought would come?
One further support for this way of approaching noncontrastive wa is that certain
quantified expressions appear to be incompatible with noncontrastive wa. Kuno
(1973) points this out for oozei no X 'many X' and dareka 'somebody', and Tomioka
(to appear b) gives a longer list of what he calls anti-Topic Items (ATIs) and seeks
to account for their incompatibility in terms of the properties of links.
z.z.2.2 Topic as expressing an active mental representation
Portner (2007) proposes a modified view of topics-as-entities, in which topicali-
zation encodes an expressive meaning in the sense of Potts (2005):
(20)	"(I report that) my/the speaker's mental representation of X is active."
This approach is consistent with (although it does not entail)a less structured
linguistic representation of the common ground of a discourse; on this approach,
the notion of "filing" information about an entity under a particular heading
becomes a pragmatic effect that is achieved indirectly (as a perlocutionary,
rather than illocutionary, act), through the explicit mention of the speaker's mental
state. In relating sentence topics to the speaker's mental state, rather than to in-
structions to update the hearer's representation, Portner suggests a system that is
potentially much more consistent with Kuroda's view of w-phrases, discussed in
section 3.3.3.1, although the motivations for this outlook appear to be quite di「
ferent. Portner makes the interesting point that the possibility of topics in em-
bedded contexts argues for a speaker-oriented account, given that not only verbs
such as tell or say but also think allow embedded topics, as shown for Japanese wa-
phrases by this example from Kuno, which allows an indirect speech interpreta-
tion:12
(21)	John wa boku wa oobaka to omotte iru.
John wa I	wa idiot	that thinking is
'John thinks that I am a fool.'
JAPANESE -"A, -GA, AND INFORMATION STRUCTURE 65
The crucial point is that, whereas tell and say may introduce an addressee, this is
not true of think; however, what they all do have in common is that they introduce
the referent of the subject as a deictic center, as the speaker is the deictic center for
an unembedded clause. Whether this approach could incorporate some aspects at
least of Kuroda's view of the interpretation of w-phrases as the subject of cate-
gorical judgments would depend largely on how the notion of the speaker's mental
representation being active was cashed out.
33.2.3 Topic as question (under discussion)
An alternative view to topics as (pointers to) entities is that topics are anaphoric
to open questions^ typically modeled as sets of propositions (see Portner and Ya-
bushita 1998, McNally 1998a for useful overviews). This approach is most associated
with von Fintel1994, Luring 1999, and Roberts 1996,1998; this definition of topic
seems also to some extent to correspond to Steedman's (2000a, 2000b) theme.
Researchers on Japanese have not as yet tended to adopt this view of topic as a
way of explicating the distribution and interpretation of noncontrastive wa. The
main exception is the proposal of Fiengo and McClure (2002); although they couch
their analysis in terms of an Austinian theory of assertive speech act types, the
dimension that is taken to explain the distribution of wa (not just noncontrastive
w: Fiengo and McClure, like Shibatani 1990, aim to give a unified account of both
interpretations) is direction of fit, which distinguishes what is given from what is
produced. The definition of these Austinian terms is not made very clear, but they
propose exactly the question-answer heuristic: if the sentence That bird is a nut-
hatch is produced as an answer to What do you call that bird?, the predicate is a
nuthatch is "produced" whereas the subject is "given." It thus seems that, at least as
a first approximation, produced — focus/rheme, and given — ground (in Vallduvi's
terminology).13 And their account of wa is then that wa is placed on an NP if and
only if that NP refers to an item that is given (Fiengo and McClure 2002:13).
Crucial to their account are the equivalent or close parallel of two assumptions
explicitly made also in Heycock 1993: they assume that in performing an assertive
speech act a speaker must not only "produce" something (every utterance must
have a focus/rheme) but must also take another thing as given (cf. assumption 2 in
section 3.3.1); and they note that a predicate, unlike an NP, can be "given" without
being marked with wa (cf. assumption 1).
The lack of a clear definition for what is "given" makes it hard to see how this
analysis handles the problem that what is wa marked in Japanese typically does not
include all the ground (nonquestioned, presupposed, not-at-issue) material. For
example, (22B) is a (pedantic) answer to the question in (22A); the variant in (22C)
is, as Fiengo and McClure note, not a natural answer, and the w-marked object
can only be read as highly contrastive:
(22)	A: Dare ga keeki 〇 tabeta no?
who ga cake acc ate q
"Who ate (the) cake?'
66 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
B:	John	ga	keeki 〇	tabeta.
John	ga	cake acc	ate
"John	ate	(the) cake.'
C:	#John	ga	keeki wa	tabeta.
John	ga	cake wa	ate
"John ate (the) cake.'
The question here is why in the straightforward answer the object keeki 'cake' is
not marked with wa, as it appears to be a part of the presupposition of the answer,
just as much as the verb. Fiengo and McClure, however, state that although the
cake is previously mentioned, it is not "given" in the Austinian sense, and they
caution against reducing Austin's distinctions to others (p. 39). It is not obvious
from their proposal, however, what definition of "given" makes the necessary cut
here.
The lack of an obvious distinction between elements within the ground
is thus one problem for a question-under-discussion theory of noncontrastive
wa-phrases/topics. Another, pointed out in Portner and Yabushita 1998, is that
noncontrastive w-phrases can occur in questions. In the case of an example like
(23), the question that is presupposed by the topic (or that the topic is anaphoric
to) is identical to the question actually asked; this seems paradoxical.14
(23)	John wa nani 〇 yatta no?
John wa what acc did q
4What did John do?'
Finally, Roberts's (1996,1998) question-under-discussion analysis of Jackendoff's
"B" intonation contour (Steedman's L+H* LH% "theme" tune) in English is
suggested in McNally 1998a as a possible cross-linguistically valid account of topic-
marking. In this account, a "contrastive topic" like China in (24), marked by the B
accent, is in fact a focus, just like the A-accented element April, so that the second
speaker indicates that the presupposed "superquestion" is in fact Where is Bill going
when?.
(24)	(No prior discourse, at least on a related subject).
A: When is Bill going to China?
B: Well, he's going to [B china] in [A april].
The additional function of the B accent on an argument is to indicate that the
speaker is choosing first to pick from the alternative set corresponding to that
argument in setting up a subquestion (here When is Bill going to China?) as part of a
strategy to answer the superquestion. This account of" contrastive topics" in terms
of a strategy of subquestions is, however, explicitly intended to account only for
contrastive topics. It is therefore unclear how it could shed any light on the use of
wa in situations where no such interpretation is at issue (I return to the question of
contrastive topics in section 3.3.4).
JAPANESE -WA, -GA, AND INFORMATION STRUCTURE 67
However, it should perhaps be noted that although Heycock 1993 and To-
mioka 2000, to appear a, and to appear b adopt Vallduvf s theory of topics/links in
their accounts, it is crucial for both that predicates can function as topics, given
that this is the basis for the accounts of narrow focus on the subject in examples like
(15) and (18), repeated here as (25a,b).
(25)	a. [F John ga] kasikoi.
John ga smart
'john is smart?
b. Enzin ga torakku ni aru.
engine ga truck loc exist
Locative: 'There is an engine in a truck (possibly on the truck's bed).'
Part-whole: 'The/a truck has an engine (as one of its essential parts).'
(Only possible with narrow focus on enzin.)
It is not clear that this is really consistent with the entity view of topics (although, of
course, properties can be anaphorically referred to in discourse and so at least are
able to contribute discourse entities). Matsuda (1997) resolves this by proposing
that in such sentences the predicate is actually a nominalized clause, as schematized
in (26a)一in fact, the same headless relative (although a certain amount of syn-
tactic/morphological detail must be dealt with) that occurs in the initial position in
the specificational sentence in (26b).15 (26b) is argued to be derived from the same
basic structure as (26a) by overt topicalization of the headless relative (see den
Dikken 2006 for a very similar derivation for specificational sentences in English).
Because Matsuda adopts the common assumption that there is a structurally de-
fined position for topics at the left periphery of CP, she further argues that (26a)
involves LF-movement of the free relative to this position.
(26)	a. John ga [CP Opi [IP [PrP 有 kasikoi ] -no].
John ga	smart nmz
john is smart.'
b. Kasikoi no wa John da.
smart nmz John ind
"The smart one is john.'
However, in later work, Matsuda (2003) raises an interesting problem for this type
of approach: namely, that it seems to predict that the two sentences in (27) should
have identical Information Structures:
(27)	a. Are, isya wa Hiromi da.
oh doctor wa Hiromi ind
'Oh, the doctor is Hiromi.'
b. #Are, Hiromi ga isya	da.
oh Hiromi ga doctor ind
'Oh, hiromi is the doctor.'
68 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
However, she argues that if two speakers are looking at a scene containing a baseball
player, a policeman, and a doctor, and one of them suddenly realizes that the one in
the white coat is their mutual friend Hiromi, (27a) is a felicitous response but (27b)
is not.
This asymmetry is an interesting one and certainly a challenge for analysis.16
However, it is debatable whether the effect should be attributed to the behavior
of topics/wa-phrases. Copular sentences like (27a,b) raise notoriously thorny
problems, despite their surface simplicity (see, e.g., Higgins 1979, Moro 1997,
Heycock and Kroch 1999, Schlenker 2003, den Dikken 2006, and references
therein), and it is far from clear that the two noun phrases have the same se-
mantic status. In particular, the initial phrase alone carries a presupposition of
existence; and this asymmetry persists even in subordinate clauses where wa
marking is not an issue. For example, in the scenario set out in (28), there is a sharp
difference in the acceptability of the two continuations: but note that in neither
case is topichood at issue, given that the relevant clause is the antecedent of
a conditional and its subject therefore not marked with wa (and not a topic, on any
theory).
(28)	Scenario: the speaker and the hearer both know that Ken has a single sister,
and that her name is Kimiko, but they do not know whether she is younger
or older than Ken. They are debating whether she would have been old
enough to see the moon landing.
a.	Mosi Kimiko ga Ken no imooto	datta to	sitara,
if	Kimiko ga Ken gen little-sister was comp make-coND
nenrei-teki ni itte tuki-tyakuriku 〇 miteta hazu
age-wise to speak moonlanding acc saw	expectation
ga nai.
ga exists-NEG
'If Kimiko is Ken's little sister, she couldn't have seen the moon landing.'
b.	#Mosi Ken no imooto	ga Kimiko datta to	sitara,
if Ken gen little-sister ga Kimiko was comp make-coND
nenrei-teki ni itte tuki-tyakuriku 〇 miteta hazu	ga nai.
age-wise to speak moonlanding acc saw expectation ga exists-neg
If Ken's little sister is Kimiko, she couldn't have seen the moon landing.'
This contrast shows that nonpresuppositional use of Ken no imooto 'Ken's little
sister' is possible in the second position in the copular sentence but not in the
subject position. It follows that the interpretation when the "same" phrase is to-
picalized from the two positions is not predicted to be equivalent. This alone is
sufficient to predict that pairs like (27a,b) also may not be equivalent.
English, of course, shows exactly the same effect (the translation of (28b) is
infelicitous in the given scenario and contrasts with that of (28a)). But note that the
Japanese examples show that this fact does not have to do with the topic status of
any element in the clause, given that it obtains also in this subordinate clause.
Thus, whereas copular sentences containing only two noun phrases may seem to be
JAPANESE - WA, -GA, AND INFORMATION STRUCTURE 69
the simplest, most minimal structures for investigating information structure, in
fact they embody asymmetries that appear to be independent of whatever is en-
coded by wa (a fact of no little interest for those interested in the syntax of
specificational sentences).
Returning to the possibility of nonnominal topics: the fact that predicates may
(according to Heycock and Tomioka) be noncontrastive topics is perhaps recon-
cilable with a view of topics as entity denoting, given a sufficiently inclusive notion
of "entity." Potentially more troubling are cases with a covert/null topic, such as
this example from Tomioka (to appear a), who argues that the broad focus reading
available for A's answer shows that there must be such a topic and seems to suggest
that this topic must be sentential or propositional in nature:
(29)	A: Motto anzen-ni ki-o	tuketa-hoo-ga ii-desu-yo.
more safety-dat attention-ACC pay-rather-GA good-cop-PART
'You'd better pay more attention to your safety.'
B: Soo-desu-ka?
so-cop-q
'Really?'
A: Ee. Tatoeba,	kagi-ga toire-no mado-ni	nai-de-syoo?
yes for example lock-GA toilet-GEN window-LOC neg-cop-part
Abunai-desu-yo.
dangerous-cop-PART
'Yes. For instance, the bathroom window doesn't have a lock, right?
That's dangerous.'
It is, however, notable that examples with null topics show asymmetries that par-
allel cases with overt nominal topics. Thus, for example, the contrast between (30B)
and(3oBz)一where the nominative is possible in the former with a broad focus
reading but can only yield a (disfavored in this context) narrow focus reading in the
latter—seems to parallel the contrast that Kuno (1973) pointed out between (31a)
and (31b).17
(30)	A: Doosite sonna-ni hayaku kaeritai no?
why so early leave-want q
"Why do you want to leave so early?'
B: [F Miti-ga abunai].
roads-GA dangerous
"The roads are dangerous?
Bl: ?#[FNewarkga] abunai.
Newark ga dangerous
"Newark's dangerous.'
(31)	a. Kono kurasu wa dansei ga yoku dekiru.
this class wa males ga well can
'Speaking of this class, the boys do well.' [Not necessarily narrow focus
on boys.]
7〇 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
b. Kono kurasu wa John ga yoku dekiru.
this class wa John ga well can
'Speaking of this class, john does well.' [Necessarily narrow focus on
John.]
If the contrast between the definite and the proper name in subject position derives
from the possibility of a null possessive coreferential with a topic in the former case
only, this parallel could be taken as evidence in favor of an entity-type topic in
examples like (30B) as well (suggesting that the topic in (31b) has a special status in
not "counting" as the link for the sentence). However, in the absence of a worked-
out account, this remains for now at the level of speculation.
3.3.3	Wa as the Marker of a Categorical Judgment
A notable critique of the assumption that the distribution and interpretation of wa
are to be explained in terms of information structure (whether this is viewed as a
distinct level of representation, as in Vallduvi 1992, or as an articulation of the
common ground, as in Portner and Yabushita 1998) has been enunciated over
several decades by Kuroda (1965,1972,1990,1992,2005). Kuroda proposes that there
are two types of judgments, which he describes as cognitive or mental acts (Kuroda
2005:15): categorical/predicational judgments and thetic/descriptive judgments.
These judgments are expressed by utterances in which the speaker commits him-
or herself to the truth of the propositions that they are said to represent, in a type of
speech act. On the common assumption that speech acts are not generally the right
type of object to combine with other linguistic objects, this means that judgments
are generally not expressed in embedded clauses. In the most recent reworking ofhis
ideas on judgment types, Kuroda maintains that sentences containing a noncon-
trastive wa (w-topicalized sentences) invariably express categorical/predicational
judgments. Sentences that do not may either express thetic/descriptive judgments
(as must be the case when they appear as matrix clauses) or, in a context where a
judgment is not made (as, for example, in an embedded clause), they may simply
represent propositions.18
The notions of categorical/predicational and thetic/descriptive judgments are,
in Kuroda's view, entirely independent of discourse notions of topic and focus. Note
that this is not necessarily the case for other linguists who have appealed to these
concepts since they were introduced into linguistic theory by Kuroda from
the philosophical work of Franz Brentano and Anton Marty; thetic sentences are
frequently assumed to be defined as "all focus" utterances. In Kuroda 2005, in
particular, arguments are given in two directions against the equation of noncon-
trastive w-phrases and information-structural concept of topic/link (these argu-
ments would also apply to the kind of theory proposed in Fiengo and McClure 2002
as I understand it): Kuroda argues both that w-phrases may constitute informa-
tionally defined foci, and that gn-phrases may constitute informationally defined
topics. Further, he argues that the exhaustive-listing interpretation of ga is inde-
pendent of focus一and a fortiori is not the result of a configuration of narrow focus.
JAPANESE -WA, -GA, AND INFORMATION STRUCTURE /I
Evidence against the hypothesis that wa is a topic marker is constituted by
dialogues in which a w-phrase in an answer corresponds to the w/i-phrase in the
question, the classic diagnostic for focus. Example (32) is one instance (Kuroda
2005:(5),⑹).
(32)	A: Dare ga oo-ganemoti desu ka?
who ga big-rich	is q
"Who is very rich?'
B: Microsoft no syatyoo no Gates-san wa/#ga ooganemoti desu.
Microsoft gen president gen Gates-HON wa/ga big-rich is
'Mr. Gates, the president of Microsoft, is very rich.'
The force of this as a counterexample depends on Microsoft no syatyoo no Gates-san
wa not being taken as a contrastive topic; Kuroda argues that it does not carry the
implicatures that are characteristic of contrastive topics (p. 8), but this judgment
appears to be a delicate one, not shared by all speakers.19
Evidence against the hypothesis that a ga-phrase cannot constitute a topic
comes from examples such as (33) (Kuroda 2005:(18)), where ano hito 'that person'
is given in the question and is the expected topic of the answer:
(33)	A: Ano hito wa dare desu ka?
that person wa who is q
'Who is that person?'
B: Ano hito
that person
Gates-san
Gates-HON
'That person is that famous president of Microsoft, Mr. Gates.'
wa/ga ano yuumeina Microsoft no syatyoo no
wa/ga that famous Microsoft gen president gen
desu yo
is EMPH
This last example is also used as evidence that the exhaustive-listing implicature is not
the result of narrow focus, because if ano hito ga is not the focus of B's response but
nevertheless gets an exhaustive-listing reading, this must mean that this reading is
derived in some other way. However, Kuroda notes that the use of ga in such
examples is only acceptable when the nature of the predicate (possibly together with
world knowledge) entails that only one entity could satisfy it.rThis is, of course, true in
(33) but false in (34), which therefore only allows for wa in (34C) (absent a particular
context in which there is known to be only one office worker) (Kuroda 2005:11).
(34)	A: Mori-san wa Toyota no dareka/hito desu.
Mori-HON wa Toyota gen somone/person is
'Mori-san is someone from Toyota.'
B: Mori-san wa Toyota no nan desu ka?
Mori-HON wa Toyota gen what is q
'Who/what of Toyota is he?'
C: Mori-san wa/#ga zimuin desu.
Mori-HON wa/ga office worker is
'Mori-san is an office worker.'
72 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Thus it appears from this description that ga when used on a topic carries a
presupposition of uniqueness. This certainly does not follow from the information-
structural view of how ga functions; it is not immediately clear whether it follows
from Kuroda's basic assumptions or has to be stated as an independent principle. It
should also be noted that if the name of an unfamiliar person (e.g., Miller san to
yuu hito 'a person called Miller') is substituted for Gates, the use oiga in (33B) is
strongly dispreferred (Satoshi Tomioka, pers. comm.), which suggests that the
answer in (33B) with ga is possible only to the extent that Gates is taken to be the
topic in some wider context.20
Kuroda's own proposal, as stated before, is that wa is used only to express the
subject of a categorical judgment; ga is used either in the expression of a thetic/
descriptive judgment or (the Elsewhere case) in a context where no assertion is
being made, as in (most) subordinate clauses. Descriptive judgments are said to
"affirm" either what is given in perception (this is the most commonly cited type of
example of a thetic sentence) or what is "given in the conceptual understanding of
a cognitive agent." This latter characterization is important because it is necessary
for extending the notion of thetic/descriptive judgment to the responses to
questions: in particular, to account for the use oiga on the subject of an individual
level predicate in an example like R's answer in (35) (Kuroda 2005:33).
(35)	Q: Dare ga Nihon iti no sakka desu ka?
who ga Japan one gen author is	q
"Who is Japan's greatest writer?'
R: Natsume Soseki ga Nihon iti no sakka desu.
Natsume Soseki ga Japan one gen author is
"Natsume Soseki is Japan's greatest writer.'
Kuroda's idea is that the inquiry "brings into R's awareness" the conceptual sit-
uation of Natsume Soseki being the greatest writer, and R responds by describing
this "conceptually grasped" scene. Given that Kuroda notes that R might also
respond as in (36), however, he further argues that an answer can also consist of the
expression of a categorical judgment about an author.
(36)	R: Nogami Yaeko wa, kaigai de sirarete imasen ga, Nihon iti no
Nogami Yaeko wa abroad loc known is-NEG but Japan one gen
sakka desu.
author is
'Nogami Yaeko, though she is not known abroad, is Japan's greatest
writer.'
The possibility of (36) as a response in the context of (35Q) is certainly problematic
for the information-structural account of wa. Possibly the line that could be
pursued by a defender of such an account is that this could be an instance of a
hearer employing a set of "packaging instructions" for the answer that are not
those suggested by the questioner. That something like this might be at issue is
suggested also by Kuroda's other example (2005:10):
JAPANESE - WA, -GA, AND INFORMATION STRUCTURE 73
(37)	A: Tokorode, dare ga Nihon iti no sakka desyoo?
by-the-way who ga Japan one gen author be-would
'By the way, who would be Japan's greatest writer?5
B is silent for a while, pondering the question, then says:
B: Un, soo da, Nogami Yaeko wa Nihon iti no sakka desu yo.
yes so is Nogami Yaeko wa Japan one gen author is emph
'Yes, that's right, Nogami Yaeko is Japan's greatest writer, I would say.'
B begins her or his answer by apparently agreeing with something: but it cannot be
with the question. So, it seems that B is presenting her or his announcement as
confirmation of something that the original questioner is asked to accommodate as
having been under discussion.
Of course, if responses to questions are allowed freely to embody an infor-
mation structure that is quite different from that suggested by the immediate
context, an account in terms of information structure loses all predictive power. It
seems to me at this stage that the pervasiveness of the problem posed by the kind of
example that Kuroda adduces remains to be fully determined, and that some
theoretically inspired corpus-based work could be very useful in this area.
As far as the exhaustive-listing reading is concerned, Kuroda maintains that it
is an implicature that follows from a maximality constraint on descriptions that
requires that "a description is to be chosen that makes the grasped situation a
maximal fit" (2005:38). Thus the sentence in (38) implicates that Mori-san is the
only office worker from Toyota in the context.
(38)	Mori-san ga Toyota no zimuin desu.
Mori-san ga Toyota gen office worker is
'Mori-san is an office worker at Toyota.'
This maximality constraint does have to be stipulated to apply to the subject
argument only, given that there is no parallel exhaustiveness implicature from
objects (or for that matter from the predicate itself). There does not seem to be any
account of the difference between stage- and individual-level predicates with re-
spect to this kind of implicature, however; in fact, it is stated that the maximality
constraint applies equally in both cases (Kuroda 2005:39). What is to be made then
of the intuition that there is a difference between sentences like (14) and (15),
repeated here as (39a,b)?
(39)	a. John ga kita.
John ga came
'john came.'
b. John ga kasikoi.
John ga smart
'john is smart.'
Kuroda's claim about examples like (39a) is that there is an exhaustiveness im-
plicature with respect to the subject but that the hearer accommodates a restricted
domain within which this exhaustiveness holds: "We take the relevant context of
74 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
the utterance to be narrower: the perceived situation that is described contains only
one person.... The hearer can understand that the speaker's visual perception is so
narrowed as to make this situation a maximal fit" (p. 39). Just as was observed
above with respect to weakening the analysis offered by the information-structural
account, the risk here is that the analysis loses its predictive power. In particular, is
there an account of why the "conceptually grasped" situation in an example like
(39b) should not also be understood to be narrowed? Without such an account, the
intuition that there is a difference between cases with stage- and individual-level
predicates, to the extent that it is robust, is unexplained.
3.3.4	Contrastive Wa
Thus far, I have mainly restricted the discussion to noncontrastive wa. Treating
noncontrastive and contrastive wa separately is a common strategy, but at least
some authors have attempted to achieve a unified analysis of wa一see, in partic-
ular, Shibatani 1990 and Fiengo and McClure 2002. Before looking at the facts and
analysis of Japanese, it is probably worth clarifying some important concepts.
3.3.4.1	Contrastive themes and contrastive rhemes
First, and most important, it is necessary to appreciate that contrast is a dimension
that is, at least pretheoretically, orthogonal to the theme/rheme or topic/focus di-
mension(s). This point is made explicitly by Fiengo and McClure (2002:24-27) but is
perhaps most clearly (if informally) set out in Vallduvi and Vilkuna 1998 (see also
Kiss 1996).21 Vallduvi and Vilkuna argue that much of the discussion of focus has
been confused by the conflation of two different concepts: the notion of focus/rheme
in the sense I have been using it here on the one hand, and a use that comes more
from the semantics literature, where it refers to an operatorlike element that cru-
cially ranges over a set of alternatives. Vallduvi and Vilkuna propose that these two
concepts should be clearly distinguished and that, in fact, operators ranging over
alternative sets can be found associated both with thematic and with rhematic
domains. They propose for such operator constructions the term kontrast. Kontrast
in association with rhematicity results in "contrastive focus," or what has sometimes
been called identificational focus or (Vallduvi and Vilkuna's term) identificational
kontrast; contrast in association with thematicity results in "contrastive topics."
One type of evidence for an independent category of kontrast comes from
Finnish, where Vallduvi and Vilkuna argue that there is a distinct CP-initial po-
sition for kontrast that does not distinguish between theme and rheme, as illus-
trated by these examples (Vallduvi and Vilkuna 1998:90—91).*
(4〇) What things did Anna get for her birthday?
Anna sai [R kukkia].
"Anna got flowers?
(41) What is it that Anna got for her birthday?
[R kukkia] Anna sai.
JAPANESE -WA, -GA, AND INFORMATION STRUCTURE 75
(42) What about flowers? Did Anna have to buy some or did she get them for
free?
[Context: the speaker knows that Anna got some of the decorations for free
and that others she had to buy.]
Kukkia Anna [R sai].
The claim is that in (41) kukkia is a contrastive focus, whereas in (42) it is a
contrastive theme.23
33.4.2	Contrastive wa as a contrastive theme
With this background, it seems reasonably clear that Japanese contrastive wa
marks elements that are both kontrastive and thematic; it does not mark con-
trastive rhemes.24 Thus the question, Which boy left, Ken or Tamio? cannot be
answered with (43) without generating the implicature that the speaker is not
sure about Tamio, just as is the case for the use of the B accent in English in this
context.
43. #Ken wa kaetta.
Ken wa left
'Ken left?
This fact makes it attractive to look for an analysis that can unify the non-
contrastive use of wa and this contrastive use. A further motivation is that at least
sentence-initial contrastive w-phrases appear to be able to satisfy the requirement
that a sentence have a topic/link, given that (44) is well formed, and the w-phrases
have the typical contrastive interpretation.
(44)	Mary-wa kasikoi ga John wa kasikoku nai.
Mary wa smart but John wa smart	neg
'Mary is smart but John is not?
Finally, as noted by Watanabe (2003:549), the initial position in a German verb-
second sentence shares with Japanese wa marking the property that subjects can
occur there with no implication of contrast, whereas internal arguments seem to be
interpreted as contrastive topics;25 to the extent that this parallel is strong (detailed
investigation remains to be done) this makes the postulation of simple ambiguity
for Japanese wa less plausible, because it would then be a coincidence that a
particular syntactic position in German induced just the same ambiguity.
As mentioned earlier, Fiengo and McClure attempt a unified analysis, against
the background of a definition of wa-phrases in terms of an Austinian notion of
givenness that appears to resemble Vallduvf s notion of ground or the concept of
an open question. Their proposal runs something as follows:
1.	When making an assertive speech act, the speaker must produce something
(provide a rheme) and take another thing as given.
2.	The default/simplest mapping between syntactic structure and speech act
maps the constituent in sentence-initial position to the given item.
76 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
3.	Marking any other part of the sentence as referring to a given item, because
it is not required by statement number 1 above, implicates a contrast with
some other item, which, when combined with the rest of the sentence,
would have resulted in a false statement (a predicate whose sense did not
match一another Austinian term一the item referred to by the sentence-
initial given constituent).
The first two assumptions are needed to explain why (matrix) sentence-initial wa-
phrases do not generate implicatures of contrast. Note that the reference to syn-
tactic structure is also necessary and does not follow from anything else: it is a
stipulation about the syntax of givenness. Also notice that the third statement
could equally well read, "Taking the referent of any other part of the sentence as
referring to a given item (and therefore marking it with wa)...because being
given is a necessary and sufficient condition for being marked with wa. This is
where we come back to the problem of understanding exactly what givenness
amounts to; it cannot be the same as what is common to all the propositions that
make up the open question.
If we give up on the attempt to provide a fully unified analysis, contrastive topics
seem to be amenable to a treatment in terms of a question-under-discussion ap-
proach (a hypothesis also put forward in Tomioka 2000, and which is largely con-
sistent with Vallduvi and Vilkuna's description of the nature of +kontrast + theme
elements, because the question-under-discussion approach assumes the kind of al-
ternative semantics taken to be definitional of kontrast). For some recent work on
this type of approach to contrastive topics in Japanese, see Hara 2006a, 2006b.
Let me offer a brief speculative comment about contrastive wa before con-
cluding. It has been known at least since Kuno 1973 that contrast can "project in
Japanese. This is true of the sentence that Kuno gave to exemplify contrastive wa:
(45)	Ame wa hutte imasu ga (taisita	koto wa arimasen).
rain-WA falling is	but important matter wa exists-NEG
'It is raining, but it isn't much.'
He gives an even more striking example in a footnote, attributing it to Minoru
Nakau:
(46)	Ame wa hutte imasu ga kasa	wa motte ikimasen.
rain-WA falling is	but umbrella wa take go-NEG
'It is raining, but I'm not taking my umbrella with me.'
Although wa attaches to the noun ame 'rain', it is clear that this constituent is not
contrasted with other elements in a set of alternatives; the contrast seems to be
between situations. For English speakers, the following example is also striking, in
that it is clear that in English the peak of the B accent is on the verb came, whereas
in Japanese wa attaches to the quantified subject (locating the peak of the B accent
on the corresponding element in the English sentence yields a highly infelicitous
utterance), but it seems that a similar effect is achieved in the two languages:
JAPANESE - WA, -GA, AND INFORMATION STRUCTURE 77
(47)	A: How was the party?
B: Minna wa kita kedo tumaranakatta.
everyone wa came but boring-PST
"Everyone came but it was boring?
C: Everyone [B came], but it was boring.
Cz: #[B everyone] came, but it was boring.
This phenomenon remains to be properly described and explained. But one could
entertain the speculation that noncontrastive topics (always, recall, constituents
that are in the highest position in the sentential tree) are simply contrastive topics
where contrast has been able to project to a high enough position that it outscopes
practically everything and contrasts only one proposition with another (this is
perhaps similar to the proposal in Shibatani 1990). That is to say, although Fiengo
and McClure, for example, start from noncontrastive wa and attempt to derive
contrastive readings from it (by some kind of implicature), it is possible to attempt
a move in the other direction一and given the appeal of recent work on contrastive
topics in English and German, there is a strong attraction in attempting to reduce
all cases to the contrastive one. Whether this reduction can be achieved is a
question that remains open at present.
3.4	Implications
In recent years the study of information structure, once perceived as clearly the
domain of a separate pragmatic module of language, has moved more and more
into the mainstream of semantics. This has clearly been the case for the concepts of
topic and focus. To make serious progress on the questions that arise around these
concepts (including the question of what they might tell us about the boundaries
of semantics and pragmatics), it is evident that there should be some degree of
consensus as to how they are defined. Particularly in the case of topic, it seems clear
that movement in this direction has been hampered by the fact that in English
there is very little straightforward evidence for the utility of the concept at all. In
Japanese, however, it is extremely common for syntacticians at least to refer to wa
as a "topic marker" without feeling the need for further explication. One strategy
that research on Japanese makes available, therefore, is to consider the distribution
and interpretation of w-phrases in light of the predictions of available theories of
topic to determine whether the data from Japanese constitute a reason for choosing
one over another (or rejecting all in favor of a new approach). The discussion in
this chapter has attempted to indicate the implications of various aspects of the
Japanese data in this light. It is clear that there is considerable scope for further
research. In particular, a formal treatment of the relation between contrastive and
noncontrastive wa is badly needed, both for a satisfactory description of Japanese
78 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
and more generally for the light that it might shed on the concept of topic writ
large.
NOTES FOR CHAPTER 3
I would like to record my gratitude to Yurie Hara, Kaori Miura, Satsuki Nakai, Mits Ota,
Satoshi Tomioka, Yuki Watanabe, John Whitman, and Shuichi Yatabe for their help with
various aspects of this chapter. They bear no responsibility for the use that I have made of
their comments and judgments.
1.	The example of contrastive wa is not that given by Kuno; I have substituted another
(from Fiengo and McClure 2002) for reasons that are discussed in section 3.4.
Kuno, in fact, distinguishes three, not two, uses ofga. The third is the use ofgn to mark
what appear to be the internal arguments of stative transitive verbs. This use is essentially
orthogonal to any issues discussed here, and so it is set aside.
2.	Note that this phrasing should not be taken to exclude the possibility of wa oc-
curring in questions, which it freely does (as long as it is not attached to the vv/i-phrase
itself):
(i)	Mitiko wa nani 〇 site imasu ka?
Mitiko wa what acc doing is q
"What is Mitiko doing?'
3.	Hoji (1985) claimed that PP wa phrases are necessarily contrastive, and this claim is
taken up by various authors since (e.g., Portner and Yabushita 1998), but the literature that
deals explicitly with "scene-setting" adjuncts seems unanimous that PPs in this function
may have a noncontrastive reading.
4.	The same observation has been made of the initial position in the main clause of
Germanic verb-second languages, also a position associated with topics."
5.	Common, but not universal. In particular, Kuroda (2005:41) argues that the "ex-
haustive listing" interpretation of ga phrases is not related to focus.
6.	Note that the correspondence between the w/z-phrase in a question and the focus in
an appropriate answer is a useful heuristic but is not actually definitional. On the one hand,
it is very generally assumed that all sentences must include a focus (see McNally 1998b for
useful discussion), but not all are produced as the answers to overt questions; on the other
hand, there are appropriate answers to questions whose information structure cannot be
derived from the form of the overt question is such a simple way. A trivial example is (ii).
(ii)	A: What did you buy today?
B: I didn't go shopping.
7.	The question of how to account for exactly when focus can "project is a far more
complex subject than can be dealt with here; for two important but very different accounts,
see Schwarzschild 1999 and Steedman 2000a. For the present purposes, the parallel between
the interpretations of the English and Japanese examples is the most crucial point, re-
gardless of exactly how they are derived.
8.	But see Vermeulen 2005 for an analysis of gn as a marker for focus when attached to
adjuncts in the "multiple nominative" construction.
JAPANESE - WA, -GA, AND INFORMATION STRUCTURE 79
9.	Presumably the focus could also be the predicate alone, a possibility not discussed
in Heycock 1993. In this case, the subject would have to be the tail in Validuvi's termi-
nology.
10.	It should be noted that, here as elsewhere, the concepts of stage- and individual-
level predicates that are appealed to are not unproblematic. In particular, adjectives that
express transient states can be the predicates of all-focus sentences like (14); this is also true
of English. This is consistent with the discussion in the text if such adjectives are taken to be
stage-level. At the same time, it is often proposed that stage-level predicates license a weak
reading for bare plural subjects. So, we would expect that the same predicates that license
the all-fbcus sentences also license weak (existential) readings for bare plurals. But, as
noted in McNally 1998c, this is not the case, as shown by the absence of (pragmatically
appropriate) existential readings in examples like (iii):
(iii)	a. The diners complained because plates were dirty/greasy.
b. Turn on the dryer again because shirts are still damp.
11.	Given that think is the kind of verb that tends to allow embedded root phenomena,
it is actually not clear why the topic should not just take the highest scope within the
subordinate clause.
12.	This example also allows the direct-quote interpretation John thinks T am a fool”;
this is irrelevant for the argument here.
13.	As in all theories of topic as. question-under-discussion, Fiengo and McClure
note that the question heuristic is only a way to set up a context that (almost) guarantees
that the utterance supplied as answer is a speech act of a certain type, but that the
same speech act can occur in discourse without there being an overt question in the
context.
14.	One might try to salvage this by appealing to the notion of accommodation; but
such a move risks weakening the proposal to the point of vacuity.
15.	Matsuda uses the term specificational to refer to any sentence with obligatory
narrow focus, in a similar vein to Declerck 1988; here I stick to the less inclusive definition
where specificational sentences are a type of copular sentence.
16.	To my ear, there is an effect in English as well, although it is weak.
17.	Heycock 1993 notes a similar pattern with respect to focal stress on the subject in
English in these contexts.
18.	Kuroda generally limits his discussion of these judgment types to declaratives; it is
not exactly clear how questions, for example, would fit into this categorization.
19.	The # indicator of infelicity for the ga version is Kuroda's, which indicates that this
choice implicates that Gates is the unique individual in the discourse context with the given
property and that a context in which this would be the case is marked."
2〇. Kuroda argues explicitly against such an interpretation of (33B), citing the fact that
it could be followed by an explicit statement that A may not know who Gates is, such as to
wa ittemo, seken sirazu no anata no koto dakaray Gates-san to itte mo dare da ka siranai
desyoo "but, as unconcerned about the real world as you are, you would not know who Mr.
Gates is, but it needs to be shown that such a follow-up is not necessarily interpreted as a
repair, indicating that B realizes that the presupposition of her/his statement (that A knows
Gates's identity) may be incorrect.
21.Steedman (2000a, 2000b) also argues that there can be sets of alternatives asso-
ciated with the theme as well as the rheme. He differs from Vallduvi and Vilkuna, however,
in taking the rheme alternative set to be an essential part of the definition of rhematicity,
and thus in not distinguishing between two different types of rheme.
8〇 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
22.	In these examples, the R subscript indicates rheme. Vallduvi and Vilkuna note that
in (40) and (41) there is only one perceived intonational peak but that in (42) there are two,
just as there are in English cases with contrastive topics 1汰e (iv).
(iv)	A: Where did you buy the decorations?
B: The flowers I bought, the candles I got from my mother.
Unlike in English, however, Vallduvi and Vilkuna state that there is no difference in
intonation contour between the two intonation peaks in Finnish examples like (42).
23.	Vallduvi and Vilkuna further cite Japanese as providing evidence for the inde-
pendence of focus, arguing that the possible co-occurrence of wa with dake 'only', widely
assumed to be a "focus sensitive particle," in examples like (19b) above demonstrates that
such "focus" sensitive elements actually associate with kontrast. A simple equation of dake
and only is not possible however (Futagi 2004); how exactly dake interacts with wa and
focus requires further research.
24.	In this, Japanese wa may differ from Korean nun, which Han 1998 argues can be
interpreted both as a contrastive topic and a contrastive focus. As an example of contrastive
focus, Han states that (v) is a possible answer to the question Who does John like? if the
speaker wishes to convey that John does not like other individuals in the context.
(v)	John-i Mary-nun coahanta.
John-NOM Mary-nun likes
'John likes Mary (but not others).'
The crucial question though is whether the interpretation of nun in (v) is distinct from
that of wa in examples like (2b). Further arguments that Korean nun and Japanese wa are
not functionally equivalent can be found in, for example, Choi 1997 and Shimojo and Choi
2000, but further research in on this question is still needed.
25.	Although Watanabe does not mention this, scene-setting adverbials behave like
subjects in both languages in not forcing a contrastive interpretation, as noted previously.
REFERENCES
Luring, Daniel.1999. Topic. In Focus: Linguistic, cognitive, and computational perspectives,
ed. Peter Bosch and Rob van der Sandt, 142-165. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Choi, Hye-Won.1997. Topic and focus in Korean: The information partition by phrase
structure and morphology. In Japanese/Korean Linguistics 6, ed. Ho-Min Sohn and
John Haig, 545-561. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI Publications.
Declerck, Renaat.1988. Studies on copular sentences, clefts, and pseudo-clefts. Dordrecht:
Leuven University Press.
den Dikken, Marcel.2006 Relators and linkers: The syntax of predication, predicate inversion,
and copulas. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Diesing, Molly.1988. Bare plural subjects and the stage/individual contrast. In Genericity in
natural language: Proceedings of the 1988 Tubingen Conference, ed. Manfred Krifka.
SNS-Bericht, 88-42, Universitat Tubingen,rFubingen, Germany.
Fiengo, Robert, and William McClure. 2002. On how to use -wa. Journal of East Asian
Linguistics 11:5-41.
JAPANESE - WA, -GA, AND INFORMATION STRUCTURE 81
Fintel, Kai von.1994. Restrictions on quantifier domains. Doctoral dissertation, University
of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Futagi, Yoko. 2004. Japanese focus particles at the syntax-semantics interface. Doctoral
dissertation, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, N.J.
Han, Chung-hye.1998. Asymmetry in the interpretation of -(n)un in Korean. In Japanese/
Korean Linguistics 7, ed. Noriko Akatsuka, Hajime Hoji, Shoichi Iwasaki, Sung-Ock
Sohn, and Susan Strauss, 1-15. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI Publications.
Hara, Yurie. 2006a. Implicature unsuspendable: Japanese contrastive wa. In Proceedings of
2004 Texas Linguistics Society conference, ed. Pascal Denis, Eric McCready, Alexis
Palmer, and Brian Reese, 35-45. Somerville, Mass.: Cascadilla Proceedings Project.
Hara, Yurie. 2006b. Japanese discourse items at interfaces. Doctoral dissertation, Uni-
versity of Delaware, Newark.
Heycock, Caroline.1993. Focus projection in Japanese. In Proceedings of NELS 24, ed.
Merce Gonzalez, 159-187. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA Publications.
Heycock, Caroline. 2006. Embedded root phenomena. In The Blackwell companion to
syntax: Vol. 2, ed. Martin Everaert and Henk van Riemsdijk, 174-209. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Heycock, Caroline, and E. Doron. 2003. Categorical subjects. Gengo Kenkyu 123:95-135.
Heycock, Caroline, and Anthony Kroch.1999. Pseudocleft connectedness: Implications for
the LF interface level. Linguistic Inquiry 30(3):365-397.
Higgins, Francis Roger.1979. The pseudo-cleft construction in English. New York: Garland.
[Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.,1973.]
Hoji, Hajime.1985. Logical Form constraints and configurational structures in Japanese.
Doctoral dissertation, University of Washington, Seattle.
Kiss, Katalin E.1996. The focus operator and information focus. Working papers in the
theory of grammar 3.2. Budapest: Research Institute for Linguistics, Hungarian
Academy of Sciences.
Kuno, Susumo.1973. The structure of the Japanese language. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Kuroda, S.-Y.1965. Generative grammatical studies in the Japanese language. Doctoral
dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Kuroda, S.-Y.1972. The categorical and the thetic judgment. Foundations of Language
9:153-183.
Kuroda, S.-Y.1988. Whether we agree or not: A comparative syntax of English and Jap-
anese. Lingvisticae Investigationes 12:1-47.
Kuroda, S.-Y.199〇. Cognitive and syntactic bases of topicalized and nontopicalized sen-
tences in Japanese. In Japanese/Korean Linguistics 1,cd. Hajime Hoji, 1-26. Stanford,
Calif.: CSLI Publications.
Kuroda, S.-Y.1992. Japanese syntax and semantics. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Kuroda, S.-Y. 2005. Focusing on the matter of topic: A study of wa and ga in Japanese.
Journal of East Asian Linguistics 14:1-58.
Matsuda, Yuki.1997. Representation of focus and presupposition in Japanese. Doctoral
dissertation, University of Southern California, Los Angeles.
Matsuda, Yuki. 2003. Predication and discourse functions of focusing in Japanese. In
Japanese/Korean Linguistics 11,ed. Patricia Clancy, 381-393. Stanford, Calif: CSLI
Publications.
McNally, Louise. 1998a. On recent formal analyses of topic. In The Tbilisi Symposium on
Language, Logic, and Computation: Selected papers, ed. Jonathan Ginzburg, Zurab
Khasidashvili, Carl Vogel, and Jean-Jacques Levy, 147-16〇. Stanford, Calif: CSLI
Publications.
82 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
McNally, Louise. 1998b. On the linguistic encoding of information packaging instructions.
In The limits of syntax (Syntax and Semantics 29), ed. Peter Culicover and Louise
McNally, 161-183. San Diego, Calif.: Academic Press.
McNally, Louise. 1998c. Stativity and theticity. In Events and grammar, ed. Susan Rothstein,
293-307. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Moro, Andrea.1997. The raising of predicates: Predicative noun phrases and the theory of
clause structure. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nakanishi, K. 2004. Prosody and scope interpretations of the topic marker wa in Japanese.
In Topic and Focus: Cross-linguistic perspectives on intonation and meaning, ed.
Chungmin Lee, Matthew Gordon, and Daniel Luring, 177-193. Dordrecht: Springer.
Portner, Paul.2007. Instructions for interpretation as separate performatives. In On in-
formation structure^ meaning, and form, ed. Kerstin Schwabe and Susanne Winkler,
407-425. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Portner, Paul, and Katsuhiko Yabushita.1998. The semantics and pragmatics of topic
phrases. Linguistics and Philosophy 21:117-157.
Portner, Paul, and Katsuhiko Yabushita. 2001.Specific indefinites and the information
structure theory of topics. Journal of Semantics 18:271-297.
Potts, Christopher. 2005. The logic of conventional implicatures. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Roberts, Craige.1996. Information structure in discourse: Towards an integrated formal
theory of pragmatics. In OSU working papers in linguistics 49: Papers in semantics, ed.
Jae-Hak Yoon and Andreas Kathol, 91-136. Columbus: The Ohio State University.
Roberts, Craige.1998. Information structure in discourse: Towards an integrated formal
theory of pragmatics. [Revised version of Roberts 1996.1 http://semanticsarchive.net/.
Saito, Mamoru.1985. Some asymmetries in Japanese and their theoretical consequences.
Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Schlenker, Phillipe. 2003. Clausal equations (a note on the connectivity problem). Natural
Language & Linguistic Theory 21:157-214.
Schwarzschild, Roger.1999. Givenness, AvoidF, and other constraints on the placement of
Accent. Natural Language Semantics 7:141-177.
Shibatani, M.199〇• The languages of Japan. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Skimojo, Mitsuaki, and Hye-Won Choi. 200〇• On asymmetry in topic marking: The case
of Japanese wa and Korean nun. In Proceedings of the Chicago Linguistic Society 36.1:
The main session, ed. Arika Okrent and John Boyle, 455—467. Chicago: Chicago Lin-
guistic Society.
Steedman, Mark. 2000a. Information structure and the syntax-phonology interface. Lin-
guistic Inquiry 31(4)049-690.
Steedman, Mark. 2000b. The syntactic process. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Tomioka, Satoshi. 200〇• Information structure and disambiguation in Japanese. In Pro-
ceedings of WCCFL 20, ed. Karine Megerdoomian and Leora Anne Bar-el, 101-114.
Somerville, Mass.: Cascadilla Press.
Tomioka, Satoshi.rFo appear (a). The Japanese existential possession: A case study of
pragmatic disambiguation. Lingua.
Tomioka. Satoshi. To appear (b). Pragmatics of LF-intervention effects: Japanese and
Korean wh-interrogates. Journal of Pragmatics.
Vallduvi, E.1992. The informational component. New York: Garland.
Vallduvi,E., and M. Vilkuna 1998. On rheme and kontrast. In The limits of syntax (Syntax
and Semantics 29), ed. Peter Culicover and Louise McNally, 79-108. San Diego, Calif.:
Academic Press.
JAPANESE - WA, -GA, AND INFORMATION STRUCTURE 8)
Vermeulen, R. 2005. Possessive and adjunct multiple nominative constructions in Japa-
nese. Lingua 115:1329-1363.
Vikner, Sten.1995. Verb movement and expletive subjects in the Germanic languages. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Watanabe, Akira. 2003. Wh and operator constructions in Japanese. Lingua 113:519-558.
Whitman, John.1991.String vacuous V to Comp. Paper presented at GLOW, Leiden
University, the Netherlands.
CHAPTER 4
LEXICAL CLASSES IN
PHONOLOGY
JUNKO ITO AND
ARMIN MESTER
4.1	Introduction
Linguistic descriptions of natural languages routinely face the necessity to draw
distinctions between different lexical classes一such as Latinate versus native roots
in English, to which affixes like noun-forming -ation are sensitive (hat variation,
but *[nat buri]ation, etc.; see Ito and Mester 19956:818 for relevant examples from a
variety of different languages). Details vary from language to language, but the
basic observation is the same: Not all morphemes participate in the major mor-
phological and phonological processes to the same degree.
The status of such morpheme classes, or lexical strata, in the synchronic
grammar has long been a controversial issue in linguistics, and the Japanese lan-
guage has played a key role in these discussions, partially because lexical class
distinctions are so prominent here and so clearly visible, even in the writing system.
The examples in (1)(from Ito and Mester 2003:122) illustrate the phenomenon with
the perhaps most well-known case of this kind in Japanese, where native mor-
phemes undergo a widespread morphophonemic process of compound voicing
(rendaku), but nonnative morphemes (both Sino-Japanese items and Western
loans) do not.1
LEXICAL CLASSES IN PHONOLOGY 85
(1) Native morphemes: Compound voicing	Nonnative morphemes: No compound voicing
a. kane	nise-gane	kin	nise-kin
'money' 'counterfeit money' b. tana	garasu-dana 'shelf'	'glass shelf'	'money' 'counterfeit money' keesu garasu-keesu 'case' 'glass case'
With the shift in phonology from a rule-based derivational framework to a
system of ranked and violable constraints that came with the rise of Optimality
Theory (OT), a new perspective on this topic has developed in recent years.
We here take up some of the issues connected with this change in theoretical
focus, some of its theoretical consequences, and its empirical predictions and
problems.
Ito and Mester 1995a, with further development in Fukazawa 1998 and Ito and
Mester 1999, among others, argue that the distinguishing formal property of lexical
strata in an optimality-theoretic grammar is stratum-specific faithfulness ranking,
within an otherwise invariant hierarchy of markedness constraints (see Inkelas,
Orgun, and Zoll1997, Pater 2000, and Anttila 2002 for interesting alternative
proposals sharing the same basic approach). The result is a containment hierarchy of
inventories of the kind depicted in (2): The more markedness constraints are active
on a given stratum (by dominating stratum-specific faithfulness), the more struc-
tures are ruled out, and the smaller the inventory associated with the stratum.
/ /(^Mi » ヽ・•・>	 ,ノ			 )» M2 » M3 »	M4 » M5 » F-C »)M
			 ー ーr
于ー		エ	一	Z /
A: full inventory	～7	r 	•と	/	
only Mj active	B: subinventory	/ ►
	M], M2, M3 active 1 C: smallest subinventory ' I	I
	| M], M2, M3, M4, M5 active | 	1	P
The empirical interest of nested inventory structures as in (2)lies in the fact that
they seem to provide good models for the vocabularies of natural languages, which
can in many cases be shown to be organized in this way. This is shown in (3), which
86 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
summarizes some of our main findings for the lexicon of Japanese: The Yamato
(native) inventory is the most restrictive, observing all three constraints relating to
voicing; Sino-Japanese items are exempt from the postnasal voicing requirement
and fall into two subcategories, depending on whether they observe compound
voicing; and the Foreign vocabulary is exempt from all three constraints.
a. OCP(voi)
b. Realize-
M(orpheme)
Foreign
No
Sino-
Japanese
A
Yes
No
Sino-
Japanese
B
Yes
Yes
Yamato
Yes
Yes
Observes multiple
obstruent voicing
ban
Here: realizes
compound voicing
morpheme
c. No-NQ
Containment
relations
between the
inventories
Yes
No
Observes postnasal
voicing requirement
4.2	Description of Core Data
Previewing our main results, grammars that give rise to such nested inventory
structures have a stratally differentiated faithfulness component of the kind given
in (4) for Japanese, where we write F for foreign, SJ for Sino-Japanese, CSJ for
Common Sino-Japanese, and Y for Yamato or native.
(4) Ident » OCP » Ident » Realize »	Ident » No » Ident » No
-F	(voi) -SJ -Morpheme -CSJ -NQ -Y	-VoiObs
That OCP(voi) is active on Y-morphemes and SJ-morphemes is shown in (5a,b),2
whereas F-morphemes are free to have two voiced obstruents (5c).
(5) a. tako	'octopus'	*dago
wge	'splinter'	*doge
geta	'clog'	*geda
b. getu	'month'	*gedzu
geki	'theater'	*gegi
doku	'poison'	*dogu
butu	'thing'	*budzu
LEXICAL CLASSES IN PHONOLOGY 87
c. daburu	'double*
baggu	'bag'
bebii	'baby'
baabekyuu 'barbecue'
Although (5a,b) suggest that markedness is active—schematically, mark»faith一
this is contradicted by (5c). Stratal faithfulness means that, instead of a whole-scale
deactivation of markedness (Faith»Mark), we find only partial deactivation: Faith-
a»MARK»FAiTH, with undifferentiated faithfulness remaining in its dominated
position. This crucially requires the existence of a lexical class a (here, foreign
items) that is recognizable for the learner by a combination of properties, including
both phonotactics and morpheme combinatorics (native stems mostly combining
with native suffixes, etc.). The extent to which the behavior of novel forms can be
predicted on the basis of their shape alone is unclear (see Pierrehumbert 2006 for a
case of statistical predictability involving velar softening in English; see also Pater
2005 for an explicit procedure for constructing such indexed constraints on the
basis of universal constraints in the course of learning). For the present case, this
means high-ranking faithfulness Ident-F for F-items dominates OCP(voi):
⑹ Ident-F » OCP(voi) » Ident
This ranking allows for double voiced obstruency in F-indexed items such as daburu
'double', but for a hypothetical input /dogu/ not indexed for F (and ultimately,
within the fully developed stratal system, indexed for SJ or Y) and hence subject to
general faithfulness, the grammar takes corrective action and outputs a less marked
structure (either doku or tog以,depending on the verdict of other constraints).
(7) a. daburu 'double,
/daburu/p	Ident-F	OCP(voi)	Ident
A	daburu		*	
taburu	*1		★
b. Hypothetical input /dogu/
/dogu/y/sj	Ident-F	OCP(voi)	Ident
dogu		*1	
A	doku			*
►	togu			*
toku			

88 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
The next constraint to consider is No-NQ which militates against sequences
consisting of nasals followed by voiceless obstruents. As (8) shows, it is active on Y-
items (8a) (No-NQ » Ident一we take Y-items to be associated with unindexed 10-
Faithfulness, unless there is a specific reason to introduce a specific Ident-y),3 but
not on SJ- or F-items (8b,c) (Ident-f, Ident-sj » No-NQ.
(8) a. tonbo 'dragonfly' *tonpo
kangae 'thought' *kankae
cf. voicing alternations such as:
/yom+te/-> [yonde]	'read'-GERUND
/yom+ta/-> [yonda]	'read'-PAST
/yom+tara/— [yondara] 'read'-coNDiTiONAL
/yom+tari/-> [yondari] 'read'-NONEXHAUSTivE listing
b. gen+ki	'health(y)'
kan+koo	'sightseeing'
den+pa	'electric wave'
san+po	'walk'
sen+soo	'war'
han+too	'peninsula'
c. panku	'puncture, flat tire'
torankiraizaa	'tranquilizer'
syanpuu	'shampoo'
konpyuutaa	'computer'
konsaato	'concert'
sentaa	'center'
bentyaa	'venture (firm)'
This means that a new species of stratified faithfulness, Ident-SJ, has
emerged out of general Ident and lodges above No-NQ preserving the relations
encoded in (6); that is, beneath OCP(voi) (different from Ident-F). The
new subgrammar obtained is (9), where the box encloses the newly added con-
straints.
(9) Ident-F » OCP(voi)» Ident-SJ » No-NQ » Ident
The tableaux in (10) illustrate how this grammar segregates Y-, SJ-, and F-items>
respectively.
(10) a. sinde 'die-GERUND'
/sin-te/y	Ident-F	Ident-SJ	No-NC	Ident
sinte			*1	
A	sinde				*
LEXICAL CLASSES IN PHONOLOGY 89
b. kankoo 'sightseeing'
/kankoo/Sj	Ident-F	Ident-SJ	No-NC	Ident
A kankoo			*	
kangoo		*1		x-
c. sentaa 'center'
/sentaa/F	Ident-F	Ident-SJ	No-NC	Ident
A sentaa			*	
sendaa	*1			X-
It is often seen as a problem for lexical strata that their boundaries are fuzzy.
Nativization of loanwords is a gradual affair, which makes it difficult to draw a clear
line in the lexicon to separate native from nonnative items. In Japanese, a well-
known problem of this kind arises in connection with the distribution of
compound voicing, usually considered to be restricted to Yamato items. We here
assume a basic analysis developed elsewhere (Ito and Mester 1986, 2003) that un-
derstands compound voicing as the manifestation of a grammatical linking mor-
pheme (/ori+R[voi] +kami/ -> [origami] 'paper folding', etc.) whose realization is
governed by the constraint Realize-M(orpheme). Lack of compound voicing in
SJ-items means that Realize-M is dominated by Ident-SJ, as in (11), preventing a
change in the voicing feature. Illustrative examples appear in (12).
(11) IDENT-F » OCP(VOI) » IDENT-SJ » REALIZE-M, No-Nq » IDENT
(12) a. sinbun haitatu 'newspaper delivery'
/sinbun +R+ haitatu/sj	OCP(voi)	Ident-SJ	Realize-M	Ident
A sinbun haitatu			X-	
sinbun baitatu		*1		X-
b. ike bana 'flower arrangement'
/ike +R+ hana/y	OCP( voi)	Ident-SJ	Realize-M	Ident
ike hana			*1	
A ike bana				X-
9〇 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
toohu
husoku
kotatu
Partial nativization phenomena and transitional strata therefore provide important
support for this model.
'Realize No ]
-Morpheme, -NQ J
Ident » OCP» Ident
-F (voi) -SJ
The overall grammar developed so far has the ranking shown in (13).
Ident » No
-Y -VoiObs
(13)	Ident » OCP» Ident
-F (voi) -SJ
That we are dealing here with aspects of the synchronic grammar as acquired
by contemporary speakers, and not just with quasi-sedimentary layers of history
visible in the vocabulary of the language, is shown by numerous cases where
lexical class membership diverges from etymological origin. Some examples are
given in (14). Takayama (1999) argues that such native look-alikes are phono-
tactically indistinguishable from Y-morphemes and have, in fact, changed stratal
membership.
(14)	Nonnative undergoers of compound voicing
a.	Older Western loans: iroha tgaruta "syllabary playing cards' (karuta), ama
gappa "rain cape,(kappa)
b.	Loans from Chinese: no giku "wild chrysanthemum,(k永以),tya gasi"tea
sweets,(kasi)
c.	Recent Western loans: take zukii4 "bamboo skis,(sukii)
But lexical distinctions are more fine-grained than whole-scale nativization, and it
is an important test for any model whether it provides enough flexibility to draw all
the necessary distinctions. The grammar in (13) makes a clear prediction: A further
stratal distinction could in principle be made by faithfulness ranking between the
(so far unranked) constraints realize-morpheme and No-NQ.
It is therefore of great interest that this is precisely what we find: a class of Sino-
Japanese items in everyday use (some examples are given in (15)) that have become
nativized enough to undergo compound voicing but are still special in other
respects, as seen by the fact that they fail to conform to No-NQ.
oyako-genka "parent-child quarrel,
yoohuku-dansu "drawers for clothes,
zidoosya-gaisya "car company,
"pointed carver,
"hot tofu,
"lack of sleep,
"electric table warmer,
(15) kenka <quarrel,
tansu drawers,
kaisya "company,
hootyoo carver,
"tofu,
"lack,
deba-bootyoo
yu-doohu
ne-busoku
"table warmer,denki-gotatu
Takayama (1999) argues that these items belong to a separate substratum, here
referred to as Common Sino-Japanese (CSJ). The final version of the grammar is
given in (16), where faithfulness is fully distributed over the markedness hierarchy.
(16)
Realize »	Ident»	No
-M	-CSJ	-NC
Ident » No
-Y -VoiObs
LEXICAL CLASSES IN PHONOLOGY
91
4.3	Controversies Regarding
Analysis
Recent work on lexical classes in phonology, spurred, in part, by the detailed
analyses and proposals regarding the Japanese lexicon, has led to fresh questions
and various types of inquiries. These range from the specific formal im-
plementation within Optimality Theory to the implications of such a system in the
broader arena of linguistic inquiry including psycholinguistic studies, language
acquisition, and diachronic change. We here briefly take up some of the issues that
have received most attention.
4.3.1	Indexed Faithfulness versus Co-grammars
The formal expression of lexical classes by means of indexed faithfulness, motivated
in some detail in the previous section, is based on Correspondence Theory
(McCarthy and Prince 1995). Lexical strata result from splitting up individual con-
straints into stratum-specific indexed versions (Fukazawa 1998; Ito and Mester 1999,
2003; Pater 2000, among others). Besides this correspondence-theoretic version, an
alternative formal implementation within OT is the "co-grammar” approach ad-
vocated by a number of researchers including Anttila 2002, Inkelas, Orgun, and Zoll
1997, and Ito and Mester 1995b. In this view, lexical strata result from a class of slightly
different stratum-specific grammars (co-grammars), with different rankings of
constraints, which collectively form a family of grammars. This is illustrated in (17)
for the body of data discussed in the previous section. Instead of a single grammar
(see (16)) with multiple indexed faithfulness constraints, there are multiple co-
grammars with a single but differently ranked faithfulness constraint.
(17)	Multiple co-grammars with a single faithfulness constraint:
Co-grammar 1(Y)	Co-grammar 2 (CSJ)	Co-grammar 3 (SJ)	Co-grammar 4 (F)
			Ident i
OCP(voi)	OCP(voi)	OCP(voi) 1	1 OCP(voi)
		Ident	
Realize-	Realize-	1 Realize-	Realize-
Morpheme	Morpheme	Morpheme	Morpheme
	Ident 1		
No-NC	No-NC	No-NC	No-NC
1 Ident			
1 NoVoicedObs	NoVoicedObs	NoVoicedObs	NoVoicedObs
92 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
For a co-grammar approach to be a viable alternative to the single-grammar
approach, it would be necessary to flesh out the theory in more detail so that
questions regarding the extent to which co-phonologies differ and how they in-
teract can be answered (for proposals along these lines, see Orgun 1996). Which
constraints can be reranked? The co-grammars in (17) only rerank faithfulness
constraints (a proposal first made in Ito and Mester 1995b on the basis of other
facts in Japanese), but is this a necessity? How are forms composed of morphemes
from different strata evaluated? Stratal organization of the lexicon does not mean
stratal uniformity of morphological structures. For example, for a compound form
like [supootu dayori] 'sports tidings', co-grammar 4 would have to deal with the
first member from the Foreign stratum, and co-grammar 1 would have to deal with
the second member from the Yamato stratum. Which co-grammar would deal
with the accentuation of the entire compound? These are implementation ques-
tions that can no doubt be resolved, but it remains true that these complications do
not arise in the single model grammar.
4.3.2	Indexed Faithfulness versus Indexed Markedness
Closely related questions arise in the single grammar model in connection with the
concept of indexation itself, however. In the model presented in the previous
section and argued for in more detail in Ito and Mester 2003 and earlier work based
on Japanese phonology, indexation of constraints is restricted to faithfulness
constraints, but it is an open question whether indexation is also an option for
markedness constraints. Should indexation be available to both faithfulness and
markedness or to only one or the other type of constraint? Restrictiveness demands
that we consider this question carefully and not automatically adopt the most
permissive approach without argument. Several researchers have taken the position
that it is not always possible to capture all the facts with one type or the other. Thus
Pater (2000) has argued that both types of indexed constraints are necessary to
capture the details of secondary stresses in English (see also Anttila 2002 on Finnish
and Anttila and Cho 1998 on English). However, if indexation is restricted to a
certain type of constraint in some way, does the restriction follow from something
else in the theory?
Stepping back from the pros and cons that arise from the一real or apparent—
descriptive necessities raised by particular phenomena, we focus here on some of
the basic implications of a stratal faithfulness approach versus a stratal markedness
approach for the overall theory. To take a simple example, consider the well-
known palatalization in Japanese of coronal plosives and fricatives before [i],
which applies to native and nativized words (mat-i-masu — matj-i-masu "wait,
polite present') but not to recent loanwords {paatii -> ^paatjii1 party'). The con-
straints and rankings necessary for the two approaches are given in (18) and (19))
using "Pal" as an informal abbreviation for the well-known constraint demanding
palatalization of coronals before high front vowels.
LEXICAL CLASSES IN PHONOLOGY
93
(18)	Indexed faithfulness:
iDENT-loan » Pal » Ident
(19)	Indexed markedness:
PAL-native » Ident » Pal
In the indexed faithfulness approach (18), the general faithfulness constraint Ident
ranked below the markedness constraint Pal ensures palatalization in the (un-
marked) native items, whereas the special (indexed) faithfulness constraint ranked
above Pal prohibits palatalization for the loan items. However, in the indexed
markedness approach (19), the special (indexed) markedness constraint Pal ranked
above faithfulness ensures palatalization in native items, whereas the general
markedness Pal ranked below faithfulness is unable to enforce palatalization
outside of the native stratum. Although both approaches capture this simple pal-
atalization case, some considerations militate against the idea of indexed mark-
edness. First, faithfulness constraints have two arguments一an input and an
output—so indexation to certain classes of inputs is a natural development. This is
not so for markedness constraints, which apply strictly to outputs. Second, re-
lativization of markedness to a specific domain raises the possibility of templatic
constraints, such as NoCoda/Reduplicant, and thereby the specter of patho-
logical backcopying (McCarthy and Prince 1999:258-267), with mouse reduplicated
as mou-mou through a ranking such as Nocoda/Red, Max-BR » Max-IO » No-
Coda (see Ito and Mester 1999:90-91 for a fuller development of these two points).
Third, indexed markedness constraints resurrect the language-particular processes
of rule-based phonology (McCawley 1968, Chomsky and Halle 1968, among others)
where "palatalization” is earmarked to apply only to [+native] forms: t[+na-
native] — tj / —i. Abolishment of language-particular processes is an important
achievement of OT; their reintroduction as ranked constraints must raise theo-
retical concerns. Finally, indexed faithfulness treats ("native”)palatalization before
[i] as the general case, which contrasts with ("foreign") nonpalatalization as the
special case. This is just the opposite of the special-general relation with indexed
markedness, which singles out palatalization before [i] as the special case. The latter
is odd because such palatalization is the unmarked situation, universally and in
each individual language. Indexed markedness turns this state of affairs on its head.
4.3.3	Indexed Faithfulness and Default M»F Ranking
Stratification is one way of maintaining a version of the low (default, dominated)
position of F even in the face of counterevidence—whenever it is possible to
confine the counterevidence within a stratum a whose inhabitants have other
things in common. Instead of immediately collapsing in the face of anti-M data
(20a), stratification entails trying out option (20b).
(20)	a. M » F -> F » M
b. M » F -> F-a » M » F
94 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
This can be seen as an instance of the M » F ranking default (Smolensky 1996),
available only when the members of stratum a have several characteristics in
common, not just their identical behavior with respect to a single constraint. The
latter point should follow from the economy considerations concerning the overall
grammar, and it forestalls the possibility of pseudo-strata (such as *V010bs-
observing pick vs.*VoiOBS-violating pig in English).
4.3.4	Indexed Faithfulness and Restrictiveness
It is sometimes said that limiting stratal indexation to faithfulness doesn't amount
to much because most phonological effects result from interaction of markedness
with faithfulness. The justification of this criticism is in a sense proportional to the
power of the faithfulness component一in the extreme case, in a model of OT where
faithfulness is as fine-grained as markedness, with 1dent[+F] and Ident[-F] for
every imaginable property F, it is indeed fully justified. But such models of OT
stumble over their own feet for other reasons一a version of OT that reflects
markedness in a shadow world of faithfulness constraints is redundant and
problematic, a fallback to rule-based phonology with its structural descriptions
("markedness”)and associated structural changes ("faithfulness"), with "A -> B /
C __ D" translated as "[M] *CAD » [F] *(A—>B)".
In a theory with general and highly symmetric faithfulness constraints con-
fronting highly diversified markedness constraints, one faithfulness constraint
impinges on many markedness constraints (not just on "its associated M"). Here
limiting indexation to faithfulness constraints is a genuine restriction because it
severely limits the set of possible strata in a grammar. Theories with unconstrained
faithfulness components, though, lead to the proliferation of stratal distinctions
and are overly powerful on general grounds.
4.3.5	Loanword Adaptation and Perceptual Assimilation
This chapter has so far been concerned with questions regarding the formal theory
of grammar: How does the computational system of an OT-grammar interact with
a nonhomogeneous lexicon? Loan adaptation provided interesting data for the
investigation of this question. We now consider some issues concerning the
relation between the architecture of a (relatively) stable synchronic system of
lexicon+grammar and the diverse factors involved in loanword adaptation. There
has been a recent upsurge of work with a somewhat different focus that is concerned
with the close empirical observation of concrete loanword adaptation processes.
These kinds of investigations (see Dupoux et al.1999; Jacobs and Gussenhoven
2000; Kang 2003; Kenstowicz 2003, 2004; Paradis 1995; Paradis and LaCharite 1997;
Peperkamp and Dupoux 2003; Silverman 1992; Smith 2006, to appear; Yip 1993)
2002; among others) are of interest here for what they can tell us about the pho-
LEXICAL CLASSES IN PHONOLOGY
95
nological component of the grammar and its relation to the perceptual system. This
literature presents a wide variety of competing claims, from perception-only to
phonology-only approaches, with various intermediate positions.
Of particular interest is a recent proposal developed by Peperkamp and Du-
poux (2003) that regards all loanword adaptation as perception-based. Consider a
typical case of loanword adaptation in Japanese一in particular, what has tradi-
tionally been analyzed as phonological epenthesis to break up illicit clusters and
avoid illicit codas. A well-known case often cited in introductory linguistics
textbooks is the disyllabic English word Christmas becoming pentasyllable in the
loanword [.ku.ri.su.ma.su.] in Japanese.
The perception-only approach claims that Japanese speakers literally hear
three epenthetic vowels in Christmas—first, by mapping the acoustic input to a
representation in terms of available native phonetic categories, which do not in-
clude [kr], [sm], and [s#] and instead substitute [kur], [sum], and [su#]; and
second, by subsequently mapping this percept to a full-fledged underlying repre-
sentation (UR), with all epenthetic vowels already in place. Under this view, there
is no phonological process of epenthesis involved; the grammar needs no separate
stratum for loanwords and no separate faithfulness constraints regulating the
foreign stratum in the phonology—it's all in the ears of the beholder, so to speak.
It turns out, however, that this claim is not supported by the available evi-
dence. It has long been known that native speakers' first language molds not only
their production but also their perception of unfamiliar sounds and sound com-
binations in other languages (in the foundational work of modern phonology,
Trubetzkoy [1939:47-50] already presents a detailed and insightful analysis of
relevant examples). In recent psycholinguistic work, this has come to be known as
"perceptual assimilation" (see Best, McRoberts, and Goodell 2001 and work cited
there). Speakers of Japanese are no exception. For example, Japanese phonotactics
does not admit VCCV sequences like abza (with a first C not a nasal place-
assimilated to the second C), whereas French phonotactics does. Both languages
admit VC[u]CV sequences like ab[u]za. Dupoux et al.(1999) have shown that
Japanese listeners do much worse than French listeners in discriminating between
VCCV stimuli and VC[u]CV stimuli. But it is a far cry from this fact to the idea in
Peperkamp and Dupoux 2003 that the epenthetic vowels in a word like [kur-
isumasu] are literally part of the percept when hearing Christmas and become
automatically part of the UR of the corresponding loanword.
First, if epenthetic vowels were perceptually given and hence indistinguishable
from nonepenthetic vowels for speakers of Japanese, there would be no way they
could be treated differently by the phonology for some purpose. However, they are
treated differently in accent assignment, where we see clear evidence for the op-
eration of a constraint of the HeadDep variety (Alderete 1995,1999) militating
against accent falling on vowels without a correspondent in the source word (see
Katayama 1995,1998 and Kubozono 1996; their findings have been further con-
firmed in Shinohara 2000 with loan experiments on the basis of French inputs; see
also Kenstowicz 2003 for discussion).
96 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Second, if loanword epenthesis were purely perceptual, it should be ines-
capable as a repair for illicit codas in source words. Smith (2006, to appear) shows
that this is by no means the case, adducing deletion/epenthesis doublets like [ri-
surin]<glycerine' next to epenthesizing [gurisurin], or [ausai] 'outside' next to
[autosaido]. She goes on to distinguish between auditory and orthographic loans,
arguing that it is precisely the deletion versions that constitute perceptual dele-
tions and hence auditory loans, as opposed to the epenthesizing variants, which
are orthography-based. Seen in this light, the attempt to anchor the epenthetic
vowels of a word like kurisumasu in perception might have the story exactly
backward.
Auditory-orthographic doublets like those cited by Smith 2006 can easily be
multiplied. Thus an online dictionary gives two kana transcriptions for the English
loanword "good": [guu] and [guddo], with slightly different meanings; [guu] is
used as an exclamation ("good!"), whereas [guddo] is found mostly in nativized
compounds such as [guddo aidea] 'good idea'? Other common loanword excla-
mations tend to show deletions (all right -> [〇：rai], don't mind — [don mai]
'never mind', encouraging shouts in sports when a team member makes a mistake).
For older loans, deletion seems in fact to be the norm. An NHK dialect survey notes
a Taisho period (early twentieth century) loan for 'go ahead' [goo hee].6 One of the
most interesting linguistic testimonies of the first systematic contacts between
speakers of Japanese and Westerners are the so-called Yokohama kotobaj the vo-
cabulary used by nineteenth-century Yokohama merchants to communicate with
their American and European trading partners. Examples appear in (21).
(21) Yokohama kotoba (Kanagawa Prefecture Social Studies
Research Council1996)
	Yokohama loan	Modern loan
(ice) cream	kurin	kuriimu
five	fai	faibu
eight	ei	eito
The Yokohama kotoba in the column on the left should be compared with the
currently used variants of these loanwords listed on the right. Where we find final
epenthesis in the currently used loanword, the Yokohama version of 'cream'
contains a final moraic nasal, and the codas for the numbers 'five' and 'eight' are
simply deleted.
Why this difference?rIhe syllable structure restrictions have not changed, and
neither the perception-only approach nor the grammar-only approach can give a
plausible answer. It seems difficult to argue that the perception of nineteenth-
century Japanese speakers was radically different from that of twentieth-century
Japanese speakers, in such a way that at some point the latter started hearing
epenthetic vowels. In terms of the indexed faithfulness grammar, the difference can
LEXICAL CLASSES IN PHONOLOGY
97
certainly be encoded in the relative ranking of MAX-segment (constraint against
deletion) and DEP-segment (constraint against insertion), but such a change
cannot be motivated in any other part of Japanese phonology.
A more illuminating interpretation takes up the idea that at least two different
strategies for loanword adaptation are available to speakers: (i) perception loan
adaptation, the main strategy of the Yokohama loans; and (ii) phonemic loan
adaptation, which became the prevalent loanword strategy in Japanese and is based
on a rationalization of English orthography, which diverges from both British and
American pronunciation habits in several respects.
The goals of the two types of loanword adaptation are different. The Yokohama
kotoba vocabulary is aimed at communicating with speakers of English and is
therefore as close to the pronunciation of the source word as Japanese syllable
structure would allow. But how do we measure closeness? From a segmental
perspective, it is not clear which is more faithful to the source word一the deleting
version has too few consonants, the epenthesizing version too many vowels. But in
fact, the Yokohama loans have a crucial point in their favor: They are more faithful
to the English source in their prosodic (syllabic) makeup—the source words five
and eight in (21) are monosyllabic, and so are the consonant deletion versions [fai]
and [ei]. However, the phonemic (and orthographic) form of the source word is
hard to recover from these items. This, then, is a type of Output-Output prosodic
correspondence, which reflects the fact that the nineteenth-century Yokohama
kotoba are auditory loans.
The epenthesizing loanwords that populate the current Japanese language are
mostly used to communicate with other speakers of Japanese, and they are strongly
based on spelling, with well-defined strategies for placing the epenthetic vowels so
that all source consonants are protected from deletion. There is no attempt to
preserve the prosodic structure of the source words (epenthesis almost inevitably
changes the number and shape of syllables). Instead, the phonemic (and ortho-
graphic) form of the source word is largely recoverable (apart from segmental
neutralizations such as 1,r>r).
Overall, there can be no question that the perception-based account is on the
right track in certain areas of loanword phonology such as the cases illustrated in
(21)	. The epenthesis strategy seen in the overwhelming number of Japanese loans,
however, seems to involve more than just perceptual adaptation. Other areas where
perception plays a direct role are not difficult to find. Consider the facts in (22).
(22)	Palatalization of velars before original [ae]
/_[招 cf. /_「]
[k'atto] 'cat' [katto] 'cut'
[gJamburu] 'gamble' [gamu] 'gum'
The English front low vowel [ae] triggers a significant degree of allophonic pala-
talization of preceding velars, which is perceived by speakers of Japanese and
preserved in the Japanese loanword. The motivation here is clearly not contrast-
based: If the reason for the palatalization was to distinguish 'cat' and 'cut' {kyatto
98 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
vs. katto), then labials should also follow this pattern. But they do not, as shown in
(23). Our interpretation here is that palatalization of labials before [se] is negligible,
and hence no perceptual effect is expected in the loanwords.
(23) No palatalization of labials before original[缶]
/一[到	/_「】
[batto], *[Hatto] 'bat' [batto] 'but'
[panda], *[p'anda] 'panda' [pantji] 'punch'
4.4 Implications for
the General Theory
The stratified grammar developed and argued for in section 4.2 (repeated here in
(24)) identifies the relevant voicing-related markedness constraints and interleaved
indexed faithfulness constraints.
(24) Stratified grammar (repeated from (16))
Ident » OCP » Ident » Realize » Ident » No » Ident » No
-F	(voi) -SJ -M	-LSI -NG -Y -VoiObs
In this (partial) grammar, ident-F is ranked highest, which ensures that F-items
can surface with violations of the voicing-related markedness constraints, such as
OCP(voi) and No-NQ The ranking in (24) does not exist in a vacuum, however,
but is part of the overall grammar of Japanese. As is usual in OT, it is always
possible for other aspects of the overall constraint system to lead to the selection of
a different winner.
Here we take up two cases where new generalizations have emerged that are at
first glance problematic for (24)一namely, cases where OCP(voi) and No-NQ
appear to be observed in F-items, even though the model with high-ranking
Ident-F predicts otherwise. We show that the overall model not only successfully
deals with these cases, but actually already predicts that they should be possible.
4.4.1	TETU I: Contextual Markedness
As a theory of ranked and violable constraints, OT makes a clear prediction: ident-F,
even though highest ranked so far, can still be trumped by an even higher-ranking
markedness constraint, which would manifest itself in a kind of Emergence-of-the-
Unmarked effect (TETU; see McCarthy and Prince 1995) in the foreign stratum. A
case in point is the novel finding by Nishimura (2001)regarding the constraint
against voiced geminates (a constraint never violated in Y and SJ items). Starting with
the observation in Ito and Mester 1995a,1999 that this constraint is also responsible
LEXICAL CLASSES IN PHONOLOGY
99
for the devoicing of geminates found in some assimilated F-items (such as bakku
'bag' and betto 'bed'), Nishimura surveyed recent loanword patterns through Google
searches and found that geminate devoicing is especially frequent in one specific type
of loanwords: those containing a second voiced obstruent besides the geminate
voiced obstruent. This is schematically illustrated by the contrast shown in (25).
(25)	hotto doggu 〜hotto dokku 'hotdog'8
hamu eggu 〜 ・hamu ekku 'ham and eggs'
This finding is surprising because OCP(voi) should be inactive on such F-items,
given the ranking Ident-F » OCP(voi). The tendency to devoice in the context of
additional obstruent voicing is confirmed in (26), which replicates Nishimura's
search at a later date.
(26)	Google hits on 7/23/05,11:40 a.m. EST
		# of hits	%
Voiced	hotto doggu	129,000	68
Devoiced	hotto dokku	62,000	32
			
		# of hits	%
Voiced	hamu eggu	27,100	999
Devoiced	hamu ekku	25	0.1
To capture these facts, Nishimura (2001)proposes a contextual markedness con-
straint against voiced obstruent geminates in co-occurrence with another voiced
obstruent.9 rPhis constraint, variably ranked with respect to Ident-F, can force a
violation of the latter and map /doggu/ to [dokku], with a devoicing geminate (and
without an OCP(voi) violation). The result shows that even highly ranked indexed
faithfulness can be trumped by a contextual version of a lower-ranking markedness
constraint.
4.4.2	TETU II: Allomorphy and Faithfulness
Neutralization
A second kind of TETU-effect occurs in situations where faithfulness, instead of
being trumped by markedness, is neutralized in some other way. The result is that
dominated markedness, otherwise muted, suddenly becomes decisive.
A case in point is an interesting generalization first noted by Tateishi (2001,
2003) concerning the ways in which the English plural-5 suffix appears in loan-
words. Japanese does not have a regular plural marker, and English words that
100
THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
are usually pluralized are sometimes borrowed with the plural marker intact
{doonattsu 'donuts', piinattsu 'peanuts'), a cross-linguistically common event
(Campbell 1999:57-88), sometimes without (surippaa 'slippers', koon fureeku
'cornflakes'); in still other cases, both pluralized and nonpluralized forms are
found (27). As a result, loanword Japanese has come to possess a quasi-suffix
expressing some kind of plurality.
With plural suffix	Without plural suffix
[kyattsu] 'Cats (title of musical) [kyatto fuudol 'cat food'
[handzu appu] "hands up'	[hando kuriimu] "hand cream'
Loanwords with -su/zu, with the expected epenthesis, are found among the grow-
ing F-items. Tateishi (2001,2003) noted that the distribution of the two variants in
the loanwords does not necessarily follow the distribution of the corresponding
English elements一that is, voiced after voiced, and voiceless after voiceless. In par-
ticular, the voiceless variant is sometimes found in unexpected environments:
(28)	English source word Japanese loan word
men's [z]	menzu ~ *mensu
ladies' [z]	rediisu ~ rediizu
The results of a Google search for co-occurrences of the different versions, in
katakana syllabary, of "men's/ladies'" and "Dragons/Tigers" (names of baseball
teams) appear in (29) and (30).
(29)	"men's, ladies'" Google search (7/23/2005, 2:18 p.m. EST)
men-zu, redii-su	1,870,000 99.6701%
men-zu, redii-zu	5,570	0.2969%
men-su, redii-su	611	0.0326%
men-su, redii-zu	8	0.0004%
(30)	"Dragons, Tigers" Google search (7/23/2005, 2:35P.M. EST)
doragon-zu, taigaa-su 48,60 0 97.6335%
doragon-zu, taigaa-zu 807	1.6212%
doragon-su, taigaa-su 361	0.7252%
doragon-su, taigaa-zu 10	0.0201%
Here [-zu] occurs after nasal-final loanwords, and [-su] elsewhere一quite different
from the allophonic rule in English. The generalization is not without exceptions
but apparently solid enough to warrant a systematic explanation. Even though
divergent from what is found in English, it might still reflect some phonetic
property of the English models, similar to the way final vowel epenthesis in plosive-
final English loans in Korean appears to correlate with the probability that the
corresponding plosive is released in American English (see Kang 2003). In the
present case, however, this mode of explanation seems less attractive: We are not
aware of relevant empirical studies, but the idea that the postnasal-[z] of Dragons
LEXICAL CLASSES IN PHONOLOGY
101
should be consistently more strongly voiced than the postvocalic -[z] of Tigers
seems farfetched.
Setting aside the possibility of explaining the distribution as learned through
diligent observation of American English pronunciation habits, we turn to another
attractive mode of explanation一the constraints of universal phonology, as ranked
in the grammar of Japanese. The -su/zu pattern obviously conforms to the post-
nasal voicing pattern familiar from the native stratum of Japanese (see (8)-(io)
above). This suggests, and all recent analyses (Tateishi 2001,2003; Fukazawa, Ki-
tahara, and Ota 2002, and the one developed here10) agree on this point, that what
we are dealing with is an F-item on which No-NQ is in some way active. But in
what way? This is where our hypothesis departs from the other two, who see this as
a case of restratification, arguing that the foreign quasi-suffix has either joined the
Y-items (Tateishi 2003) or is subject to lower-ranking affixal ident (Fukazawa,
Kitahara, and Ota 2002). Either way, the ident responsible for /-su/ ranks below
No-NQ. These are certainly viable analyses, but there is some concern whether it is
really correct to declare -su/zu a native suffix (in the face of speakers' intuitions
declaring it to be distinctly "foreign"), and in general a proliferation of faithfulness
constraints dealing with single elements should give us pause.
Is there a simpler alternative? We claim that there is: In English, the -5 plural
morpheme is realized as voiced or voiceless, depending on the environment. The
crucial voiced/voiceless distinctions in the phonological environment are lost
in Japanese because of epenthesis: (Boston) Pop[s] — poppusu, (Chicago) Cub[z]
t kabusu. As a result, both allomorphs are borrowed as a lexically listed pair /-su,
-zu/. But once this is the case, the ranking [Ident-F » ... » No-NQ » Ident-Y » N0-
VoiObs], already firmly anchored in the grammar (see (24)), predicts the distri-
bution that Tateishi discovered. Allomorph listing means that allomorph selection is
purely phonologically conditioned. With faithfulness (i.e., Ident-F) neutralized, as
far as voicing is concerned, the subhierarchy [No-NQ » Ident-Y » No-VoiObs]
means voiced after nasals (doragon-zuf (31)),otherwise voiceless (taigaa-su (32)).
(31) /doragon/, !-zuy -su!	Ident-F	No-NC	Ident	No-VoiObs
A doragon zu				(*d *g) *z
doragon su		*1		(*d *g)
(32) /taigaa/y /-zu, -su/	Ident-F	No-NC	Ident	No-VoiObs
taigaa zu				(*g) *z!
A taigaa su				(*g)
102
THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Exceptions are cases of straight borrowing of voiced [-zu], such as syuu-zu
'shoes’」i This avoids both construction-specific rules and unenlightening listing of
allomorph environments and follows the OT analysis of allomorphy and lexical
selection in many earlier studies, beginning with Mester 1994 for Latin (see Anttila
1997; Burzio 1994,1997; Kager 1996; Mascaro 1996a, 1996b; Perlmutter 1998; Russell
1995; Tranel 1996a, 1996b,1998; among others). This leads to a TETU-effect for such
listed pairs of allomorphs (Mascaro 1996b)一here, postnasal voicing in tandem
with default voicelessness一in thoroughly foreign territory, where ident-F oth-
erwise prevents any changes in voicing. Similar TETU-effects with affixal elements
in Japanese arise with Sino-Japanese counters (Ito and Mester 2003:138—141) and
verbal suffixes (Ito and Mester 2004).
Overall, taking on phonological processes in their actual lexical complexity,
including the patterning and lexical distribution of the various kinds of under-
application and overapplication, is a fruitful enterprise. It leads to a deeper
understanding of the way phonology, as a computational system of ranked con-
straints, interacts with the lexicon. This interaction is mediated through indexed
faithfulness constraints, which provides the phonology with the means to fold the
nonuniformities of a historically grown stratified lexicon into a single coherent
synchronic system. The architecture of OT allows us to understand why peripheral
items like loanwords can be both more marked than native words in some respects
and less marked in others (TETU-effects). Far from being a problem for the theory,
these are in fact points in its favor in that new generalizations are found that would
otherwise not have been discovered.
NOTES FOR CHAPTER 4
1.	Here and throughout, unless otherwise noted, we use the broad transcription for
Japanese proposed and explicated in detail in Ito Mester 2003 (pp. 6-11).
2.	SJ-morphemes in fact observe an even stronger requirement: C2 cannot be a voiced
obstruent.
3.	But see Kawahara, Nishimura, and Ono 2003 for arguments that faithfulness con-
straints for Sino-Japanese are ranked lower than those for Yamato.
4.	A Kanazawa dialect form, according to the NHK series Furusato Nihon-no kotoba
(2000-2001). http：〃www.asahi-net.0r.jp/~QM4H-IIM/ktb_frmd.htm/.
5,http:〃www.excite.co.jp/dictionary/japanese/.
6.	http:-www.asahi-net.or.jp/〜QM4H-IIM/ktb_fi*_a.htm.
7.	http://www.search-japan.com/honmoku/rekisi/rekisii.html#rekisi_7.
8.	A familiar example is burudokku tonkatu soosu® 'Bulldog tonkatsu sauce'.
9.	See also Kawahara 2005 for an interesting faithfulness-based restatement of Nish-
imura's original observation.
10.	First presented in class lectures at the 2005 LSA Linguistic Institute at MIT/Har-
vard University (July-August 2005).
LEXICAL CLASSES IN PHONOLOGY 103
ii.There appear to be other moderately productive criteria. For example, postvocalic
[zu] is more likely if there is no other voiced obstruent in the word—for example, wookaa-
’Walkers', (a 2007 NHK TV drama about the Shikoku 88-temple pilgrimage) versus
taigaa-su 'Tigers' (a baseball team) with a word-internal voiced [g] triggering an OCP-like
effect.
REFERENCES
Alderete, John.1995. Faithfulness to prosodic heads. Rutgers Optimality Archive, ROA-94-
0000. http：〃roa.rutgers.edu/.
Alderete, John.1999. Head dependence in stress-epenthesis interaction. In The derivational
residue in phonological Optimality Theory, ed. Ben Hermans and Marc van Oos-
tendorp, 29-5〇. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Anttila, Arto.1997. Deriving variation from grammar. In Variation, change, and phono-
logical Theory, ed. Frans Hinskens, Roeland van Hout, and W. Leo Wetzels, 35-68.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Anttila, Arto. 2002. Morphologically conditioned phonological alternations. Natural
Language & Linguistic Theory 20:1-42.
Anttila, Arto, and Young-Mee Yu Cho.1998. Variation and change in optimality theory.
Lingua 104:31-56.
Best, Catherine T., Gerald W. McRoberts, and Elizabeth Goodell.2001.Discrimination of
non-native consonant contrasts varying in perceptual assimilation to the listener's
native phonological system. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 109:775-794.
Burzio, Luigi.1994. Principles of English stress. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Burzio, Luigi.1997. Cycles, non-derived-environment blocking, and correspondence. Ms.,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Md.
Campbell, Lyle.1999. Historical linguistics: An introduction. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Chomsky, Noam, and Morris Halle.1968. The sound pattern of English. New York: Harper
& Row.
Dupoux, Emmanuel, Kazuhiko Kakehi, Yuki Hirose, Christophe Pallier, and Jacques
Mehler.1999. Epenthetic vowels in Japanese: A perceptual illusion? Journal of Ex-
perimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 25:1568-1578.
Fukazawa, Haruka.1998. Multiple input-output faithfulness relations in Japanese. Rutgers
Optimality Archive, ROA-260-0698, http://roa.rutgers.edu/.
Fukazawa, Haruka, Maiuyu Kitahara, and Mitsuhiko Ota. 2002. Constraint-based mod-
elling of split phonological systems. Phonological Studies 5:115-12〇.
Inkelas, Sharon, Orhan Orgun, and Cheryl Zoll.1997. The implications of lexical excep-
tions for the nature of grammar. In Derivations and constraints in phonology, ed. Iggy
Roca, 393-418. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ito, Junko, and Armin Mester.1986. The phonology of voicing in Japanese: Theoretical
consequences for morphological accessibility. Linguistic Inquiry 17：49~73-
Ito, Junko, and Armin Mester. 1995a. The core-periphery structure of the lexicon and
constraints on reranking. In Papers in Optimality Theory, ed. Jill Beckman, Suzanne
Urbanczyk, and Laura Walsh, 181-21〇. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA Publications.
Ito, Junko, and Armin Mester. 1995b. Japanese phonology. In The handbook of phonological
theory, ed. John Goldsmith, 817-838. Oxford: Blackwell.
104 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Ito, Junko, and Armin Mester.1999. The phonological lexicon. In The handbook of Japanese
linguistics^ ed. Natsuko Tsujimura, 62-10〇. Oxford: Blackwell.
Ito, Junko, and Armin Mester. 2003. Japanese morphophonemics: Markedness and word
structure. Linguistic Inquiry Monograph 41.Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Ito, Junko, and Armin Mester. 2004. Morphological contrast and merger: Ranuki in Jap-
anese. Journal of Japanese Linguistics 20:1-18.
Jacobs, Haike, and Carlos Gussenhoven. 200〇. Loan phonology: Perception, salience, the
lexicon, and OT. In Optimality Theory: Phonology, syntax, and acquisition, ed. Jost
Dekkers, Frank van der Leeuw, and Jeroen van de Weijer, 193-209. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Kager, Rene.1996. On affix allomorphy and syllable counting. Rutgers Optimality Archive,
ROA-88, http:-roa.rutgers.edu/.
Kanagawa Prefecture Social Studies Research Council.1996. Kanagawa-ken-no re-
kishisampo [History walks through Kanagawa Prefecture]. Rekishisampo 14. Tokyo:
Yamakawa Publishing.
Kang, Yoonjung. 2003. Perceptual similarity in loanword adaptation: English postvocalic
word-final stops in Korean. Phonology 20:219-273.
Katayama, Motoko.1995. Loanword accent and minimal reranking in Japanese. In Pho-
nology at Santa Cruz: Papers on stress, accent, and alignment, ed. Rachel Walker, Ove
Lorentz, and Haruo Kubozono, 1-12. Santa Cruz: Linguistics Research Center, Uni-
versity of California.
Katayama, Motoko.1998. Optimality Theory and Japanese loanword phonology. Doctoral
dissertation, University of California, Santa Cruz.
Kawahara, Shigeto. 2005. A faithfulness ranking projected from a perceptibility scale: The
case of [H-voice] in Japanese. Rutgers Optimality Archive, ROA 749-0605. http:#
roa.rutgers.edu/.
Kawahara, Shigeto, Kohei Nishimura, and Hajime Ono. 2003. Unveiling the unmarkedness
of Sino-Japanese. In Japanese/Korean Linguistics 12, ed. William McLure, 140-151.
Stanford, Calif.: CSLI Publications.
Kenstowicz, Michael.2003. Salience and similarity in loanword adaptation: A case study
from Fijian. Rutgers Optimality Archive, ROA-609, http://roa.rutgers.edu/.
Kenstowicz, Michael.2004. Issues in loanword phonology. Paper presented at the Phonetic
Society of Japan workshop, Tokyo University of Foreign Studies, December.
Kubozono, Haruo.1996. Syllable and accent in Japanese: Evidence from loanword ac-
centuation. Bulletin of the Phonetic Society of Japan 211:71-82.
Mascaro, Joan. 1996a. External allomorphy and contraction in Romance. Probus 8:181-
205.
Mascaro, Joan. 1996b. External allomorphy as emergence of the unmarked. In Current
trends in phonology: Models and methods, ed. lacques Durand and Bernard
Laks, 473-483. University of Salford, Manchester: European Studies Research
Institute.
McCarthy, John J., and Alan S. Prince.1995. Faithfulness and reduplicative identity. In
University of Massachusetts occasional papers in linguistics 18, ed. Jill Beckman, Suzanne
Urbanczyk, and Laura Walsh, 249-384. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA Publications.
McCarthy, John J., and Alan S. Prince.1999. Faithfulness and identity in prosodic mor-
phology. In The prosody-morphology interface, ed. Harry van der Hulst, Rene Kager,
and Wim Zonneveld, 218-309. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McCawley, James D.1968. The phonological component of a grammar of Japanese. The
Hague: Mouton.
LEXICAL CLASSES IN PHONOLOGY
!〇5
Mester, Armin.1994. The quantitative trochee in Latin. Natural Language & Linguistic
Theory 12:1-61.
Nishimura, Kohei. 2001.Lyman's Law in Japanese loanwords. Paper presented at PAIK
(Phonology Association in Kansai), Kobe University, Kobe, Japan, October.
Orgun, Orhan.1996. Sign-based morphology and phonology, with special attention to
Optimality Theory. Doctoral dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.
Paradis, Carole.1995. Derivational constraints in phonology: Evidence from loanwords and
implications. In CLS 31,ed. Audra Dainora, Rachel Hemphill, Barbara Luka, Barbara
Need, and Sheri Pargman, 360-374. Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society.
Paradis, Carole, and Darlene LaCharite.1997. Preservation and minimality in loanword
adaptation. Journal of Linguistics 33:379-43〇.
Pater, Joe. 200〇. Nonuniformity in English secondary stress: The role of ranked and
lexically specific constraints. Phonology 17:237-274.
Pater, Joe. 2005. The locus of exceptionality: Morpheme-specific phonology as constraint
indexation. Ms., University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Peperkamp, Sharon, and Emmanuel Dupoux. 2003. Reinterpreting loanword adaptations:
The role of perception. Proceedings of the International Congress of Phonetic Sciences 15,
367-37〇. Barcelona, Spain: Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona.
Perlmutter, David M.1998. Interfaces: Explanation of allomorphy and the architecture of
grammars. In Morphology and its relation to phonology and syntax, ed. Steven G.
Lapointe, Diane K. Brentari, and Patrick M. Farrell, 307-338. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI
Publications.
Pierrehumbert, Janet. 2006. The statistical basis of an unnatural alternation. In Laboratory
phonology 8, ed. Louis Goldstein, Douglas H. Whalen, and Catherine T. Best, 81-106.
The Hague: Mouton de Gruyter.
Russell, Kevin.1995. Morphemes and candidates in Optimality Theory. Rutgers Optimality
Archive, ROA-44, http://roa.rutgers.edu/.
Shinohara, Shigeko. 200〇. Default accentuation and foot structure in Japanese: Evidence
from adaptations of French words. Journal of East Asian Linguistics 9:55-96.
Silverman, Daniel.1992. Multiple scansions in loanword phonology: Evidence from
Cantonese. Phonology 9:289-328.
Smith, Jennifer L. 2006. Loanword adaptation is not all perception: Evidence from Japa-
nese loan doublets. In Japanese/Korean Linguistics 14, ed. Timothy J. Vance and
Kimberly A. Jones, 63-74. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI Publications.
Smith, Jennifer L. To appear. Source similarity in loanword adaptation:
Correspondence Theory and the posited source-language representation. In
Phonological argumentation: Essays on evidence and motivation^ ed. Steve Parker.
London: Equinox.
Smolensky, Paul.1996. The initial state and "Richness of the Base" in Optimality Theory.
Rutgers Optimality Archive, ROA-154-1196, http://roa.rutgers.edu.
Fakayama, Tomoaki.1999. Shakuyoogo-no rendaku/koo'onka-ni-tsuite [On rendaku and
sortition in loanwords]. In Report of the Special Research Project for the Typological
Investigation of Languages and Cultures of the East and West: Part 1,375-385. Tsukuba,
Japan: Tsukuba University.
Fateishi, Koichi. 2001.On'in jisho kurasu seeyaku no bunpu ni tsuite [On the distribution
of constraints for phonological sub-lexica]. Paper presented at the 26th meeting of the
Kansai Linguistic Society, Ryukoku University, Kyoto, October.
Fateishi, Koichi. 2003. Phonological patterns and lexical strata. Paper presented at CIL
XVII, Prague, July.
106 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Tranel, Bernard. 1996a. French liaison and elision revisited: A unified account within
Optimality Theory. In Aspects of Romance linguistics, ed. Claudia Parodi, Carlos
Quicoli, Mario Saltarelli, and Maria-Luisa Zubizarreta, 433-455- Washington, D.C.:
Georgetown University Press.
Tranel, Bernard. 1996b. Exceptionality in Optimality Theory and final consonants in
French. In Grammatical theory and Romance languages, ed. Karen Zagona, 275-291.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Tranel, Bernard.1998. Suppletion and OT: On the issue of the syntax/phonology inter-
action. In Proceedings of the West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics 16, ed. Emily
Curtis, James Lyle, and Gabriel Webster, 415-429. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI Publications.
Trubetzkoy, Nikolai Sergeevich.1939. Grundzuge der Phonologie. Traveaux du Cercle Lin-
guistique de Prague 7. (Reprinted by Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, Gottingen,1967.)
Yip, Moira.1993. Cantonese loanword phonology and Optimality Theory. Journal of East
Asian Linguistics 2:261-292.
Yip, Moira. 2002. Perceptual influences in Cantonese loanword phonology. Journal of the
Phonetic Society of Japan 6:4-21.
CHAPTER 5
ON VERB RAISING
HIDEKI KISHIMOTO
5.1	Introduction
In the literature, there has been a lively debate as to whether Japanese has verb
raising (V-to-T raising).1 Japanese is a strict SOV language in which all verbal
heads cluster together at the right periphery of the clause. Owing to this word-
order property, overt verb raising一even if it exists一does not change surface string
in Japanese, so that conventional heuristics for verb raising in Indo-European
languages, that is, diagnostics to assess the verb's position relative to certain types
of negative and adverbial expressions, are not available. The rigidly head-final
character of the language makes it difficult to confirm the presence or absence of
verb raising. Opinions are still divided between two extremes. Some researchers
(e.g., Otani and Whitman 1991;Koizumi 1995, 2000) hold that Japanese has overt
verb raising, but others (e.g., Sakai 1998; Aoyagi 1998; Fukui and Takano 1998;
Fukui and Sakai 2003; Kishimoto 2001,2005) maintain that it does not. In this
chapter, I survey the major issues for verb raising in Japanese by looking closely at
the constructions that are claimed to diagnose verb position.
5.2	The Core Data
In Japanese, the usual tools used to locate verb position in English and other Indo-
European languages are not applicable. As a result, some familiar generalizations
concerning head raising observed in European languages (e.g., Holmberg's gen-
eralization, the interplay of verb raising and object shift) cannot be easily verified in

108 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Japanese.2 Thus, we need to appeal to other measures to assess the presence or
absence of overt verb raising. In this section, I look at three constructions that have
been discussed in the Japanese linguistic literature and delineate how they might
answer the question of whether overt verb raising takes place in Japanese.
First of all, Otani and Whitman (1991),who advocate an "overt verb raising"
view, suggest that verb raising should be induced prior to LF in light of the
interpretations available in a null-object construction like (ib) when (la) serves as a
preceding sentence.
(1)	a. John「wa [zibunrno tegami-o] sute-ta.
John-Top self-GEN letter-Acc discard-past
'John threw out self's letter/
b. Mary-mo [e] sute-ta.
Mary-ALSO discard-PAST
'Mary also threw out? (— Mary, also threw out her, letter/John's letter.)
The null-object construction (ib)—where the direct object is missing on the
surface一has a bound variable (i.e., sloppy) reading in which the possessor of the
null object refers to Mary as well as a strict reading in which the possessor refers to
John. Otani and Whitman suggest that these strict and sloppy readings are
equivalent to those obtained for the possessor of the null object in the English VP-
ellipsis construction in (2b).
(2)	a. John threw out his letters.
b. Mary did [vp [v e] [NP e]] too. (— Mary, threw out her, letters/John's
letters.)
They argue that the parallelism in the interpretations between (ib) and (2b) can be
neatly captured if (ib) involves VP-ellipsis, despite the fact that the verb is not
elided. They suggest that the verb is extracted from the VP-ellipsis site, as a con-
sequence of overt V-raising, as in (3).
(3)	[Mary-mo [yp な]suterta]
In (3), the verb is located outside VP. Thus, even if VP-ellipsis takes place, the verb
remains undeleted.
According to Otani and Whitman, the absence of a sloppy identity reading in
(4b) lends support to their "overt verb raising" view.
(4)	a. John「wa [NY Times-ga zibun「no kizi-o	inyoosi-te i-ru
John-Top NY Times-NOM self^GEN article-ACC quote	be-PRES
to] kii-ta.
comp hear-past
"Johnj heard that The NY Times is quoting sel&'s article?
b. Bill-mo	[NY Times-^a	[e] inyoosi-te	i-ru	to]	kii-ta.
Bill-also	NY Times-NOM quote	be-PRES	comp	hear-past
'Billi also heard that The NY Times is quoting (John's article/*hiSi article).'
ON VERB RAISING
1〇9
When preceded by (4a), (4b) is not construed as having a sloppy identity reading,
which suggests that a locality condition is imposed on sloppy identity. A paral-
lelism between Japanese and English is also found here, because (zb)一unlike
(5a)一does not have a sloppy identity reading, as noted by Williams (1977).
(5)	a. Johnj thinks that Bill likes himj, and Mary does [Vp e] too.
b. Johni thinks that Bill likes him^ and Mary thinks Bill does [yp e] too.
In Williams 1977, the interpretive effects of VP-ellipsis are accounted for by ap-
pealing to the Derived VP Rule and the (optional) Pronoun Rule. First, let us
consider how the English example in (2b) is treated in Williams's framework.
Abstracting away from some irrelevant details, the application of the Derived VP
Rule to (2a) gives rise to (6a), and further, if the Pronoun Rule一which turns a
pronoun into a variable一applies to (6a), (6b) is derived.
(6)	a. John [yp Xx(x throw out his letter)]
b. John [yp 人x(x throw out x's letter)]
If the VP structures in (6) are copied onto the gapped VP in (2b), we can derive the
following representations.
(7)	a. Mary did [yp んx(x throw out his letter)]
b. Mary did [VP Ax(x throw out x's letter)]
In (7a) the pronoun his refers to John, so that a strict reading obtains. In (7b)
the variable x is bound by the lambda (ん)operator, which yields a sloppy read-
ing in which the possessor of the letter refers to Mary. The two representa-
tions in (7) account for why both the sloppy and nonsloppy readings are possible
in (2b).
Turning to (5a,b), the two possible representations of the first clause are given
in (8), which are formed from the application of the Derived VP Rule and the
optional Pronoun Rule.
(8)	a. John [yp Xx(x think that Bill[VP Xy(y like him)])]
b. John [yp 人x(x think that Bill [yp Xy(y like x)])]
If the matrix VP constituents in (8)一which exclude only the matrix subject一are
copied onto the gap in the second clause in (za), the following representations are
derived.
(9)	a. Mary does [yp 人x(x think that Bill [yp んy(y like him)])] too.
b. Mary does [VP んx(x think that Bill [yp Xy(y like x)])] too.
In (9a), the pronoun him in the embedded verb refers to John, which leads to
a nonsloppy reading. In (9b), the variable x in the position of the embedded
object is bound by the lambda operator in the matrix clause, which gives rise
to a sloppy identity reading in which the missing embedded object is taken to refer
to Mary. This explains why both sloppy and nonsloppy readings are available
in(5a)・
110
THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
In (5b), in contrast, a sloppy reading is absent. This can be explained as follows.
First, the Derived VP Rule applies to the matrix VP in the second clause, deriving
the representations in (10).
(10)	Mary does [yp Xz(z think that Bill does [yp e])] too.
After the representation in (10) is derived, the embedded VP material in (8)一
either [Xy(y like x)] (on the sloppy reading) or [Xy(y like him)] (on the
strict identity reading where him refers to John)一can be copied onto the gapped
VP.
(11)	a. *Mary does [Vp Xz(z think that Bill does [yp Xy(y like x)])] too.
b. Mary does [VP Xz(z think that Bill does [yp Xy(y like him)])] too.
The LF representation in (11a) is ill-formed, however, because the embedded VP
contains the variable x that is left unbound. Thus, the only legitimate representation
for (5b) is (11b), which entails that only the nonsloppy reading is available for (zb).
Otani and Whitman (1991)argue that analogous interpretive operations apply
to the null-object construction in Japanese, the only substantial difference being
that overt verb raising is induced. For instance, in (la), the verb first moves out of
VP, and then the Derived VP Rule and the optional Pronoun Rule apply to the
verbless VP constituent, which yields the following representations.
(12)	a. John-wa [VP Xx(x zibun-no tegami-o %)] sutey-ta.
b. John-wa [yp Xx(x x-no tegami-o fy)] sutey-ta.
If the VP structures in (12) are mapped onto the gap in (ib), where the verb is also
raised out of VP, the following representations are derived.
(13)	a. Mary-mo [yp Xx(x zibun-no tegami-o ty)] sutev-ta.
b. Mary-mo [yp Ax(x x-no tegami-o ty)] sutev-ta.
Because these are well-formed representations, (ib) can have both the sloppy
reading (where the possessor of the letter counts as Mary) and the nonsloppy
reading (where the possessor refers to John). In this particular case, the verb
position does not affect the possibility of interpretations, so legitimate represen-
tations for both readings could be derived even if the verb is not raised out of VP.
Nevertheless, Otani and Whitman argue that overt verb raising is necessary, be-
cause the verb in the gapped clause does not have to be identical to the verb in its
antecedent clause, as illustrated in (14).
(14)	a. Jane「ga [zibun「no kodomo-o taien-s-ase-ta]	node,
Jane-NOM self-GEN	child-ACC withdraw-CAUSE-PAST since
"Since Jane, withdrew selfs child from kindergarten,
b. Mary-wa [[e] nyuuen-s-ase-ta].
Mary-Top enroll-CAUSE-PAST
'Maryj enrolled sei与/Janefs child in kindergarten?
ON VERB RAISING
Ill
If the VP-gap does not contain the verb, it is naturally expected that a sloppy
reading is possible under VP-ellipsis, even if the verb in (14b) is not identical to the
one in the preceding sentence in (14a).
In a case like (4), the interpretive operations apply in the same manner as (5b),
the only crucial difference being that the verb is overtly moved out ofVP. First, the
representations in (15) are derived from (4a) by applying overt verb raising, the
Derived VP Rule, and the optional Pronoun Rule.3
(15)	a. John-wa [Vp Xx(x[NYT-ga [Vp Ay(y zibun-no kizi-o %)] inyoosi-te-iruv
to])ん]kiiv-ta]
b. John-wa [Vp Xx(x[NYT-ga [Vp Xy(y x-no kizi-o %)] inyoosi-te-iruv to])
ん]kiiv-ta]
Example (4b) contains a gap in the embedded clause. If the embedded VP con-
stituents in (15) are copied onto the gap in (4b) after Derived VP Rule is applied to
the matrix clause, the following representations are derived.
(16)	a. Bill-mo [Vp んz(z[NYT-ga [vp 入y(y zibun-no kizi-o tv)] inyoosi-te-iruv
to])ん]kiiv-ta]
b. *Bill-mo [yp Xz(z[NYT-ga [yp Ay(y x-no kizi-o 皈)]inyoosi-te-iruv to])
ん]kiiv-ta]
The representation in (16b) is ruled out, however, on the grounds that an unbound
variable occurs in the embedded VP. Given that (16a) is the sole legitimate rep-
resentation, only the nonsloppy identity reading in which the missing object is
understood to refer to Johns article is permitted for (4b).
The crucial fact is that the main verb is overtly realized in the null-object
construction in (ib), even though (ib) permits both sloppy and nonsloppy read-
ings. Otani and Whitman (1991)claim that the facts of the null-object construc-
tions lend empirical support to the overt verb-raising view, because their appro-
priate interpretation can be made only if the verb is raised out of VP before
reaching the LF level where the elided VP material is restored.
Let us turn now to Koizumi's (1995, 2000) argument for overt verb raising.
Koizumi presents an argument in favor of overt verb raising (up to C), in the light
of unorthodox coordinate constructions such as (17).
(17)	a. Mary-ga [[John-ni ringo-o	2-tu] to [Bob-ni banana-o 3-bon]]
Mary-NOM John-DAT apple-ACC 2-cl and Bob-DAT banana-ACC 3-CL
age-ta.
give-PAST
"Mary gave two apples to John and three bananas to Bob.'
b. [[Mary-ga ringo-o	2-tu] to [Nancy-ga banana-o 3-bon]] tabe-ta.
Mary-NOM apple-ACC 2-cl and Nancy-NOM banana-ACC 3-cl	eat-PAST
'Mary ate two apples, and Nancy, three bananas.'
112 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
In (17a), the direct and indirect objects are coordinated, so Koizumi (2000) sug-
gests that the verb is overtly raised to I (=T), as illustrated in (18).
Notice that in the coordinate construction, the verb must be moved out of the two
conjuncts in an "across-the-board” manner. The same type of coordinate structure
obtains in (17b), in which the two conjuncts contain the subject as well as the
object, but exclude the verb.4 On the premise that subjects are overtly raised to
Spec,TP (-IP), Koizumi suggests that (17b) involves TP-coordination and that the
verb is overtly raised up to the C-head position.
It is easy to confirm that the verb does not constitute a part of the second
conjunct in (17a,b). This can be checked, for instance, by way of scrambling the
coordinate structure, as illustrated in (19).
(19)	a. [[John-ni ringo-o	2-tu] to [Bob-ni banana-o z-bon^j
John-DAT apple-ACC 2-cl and Bob-DAT banana-ACC 3-CL
Mary-ga な age-ta.
Mary-NOM give-PAST
Lit. '[Two apples to John and three bananas to Bob] Mary gave?
b. [[Mary-ga ringo-o	2-tu] to [Nancy-ga banana-o 3-bon]]j
Mary-NOM apple-ACC 2-cl and Nancy-NOM banana-ACC z-CL
Becky-ga t, tabe-ta to	omot-te i-ru	(koto).
Becky-NOM eat-PAST comp think	be-PRES (fact)
Lit. c[[Mary two apples] and [Nancy three bananas] ] Becky believes
that ate.'
In both examples in (19), the coordinate structure can be fronted while leaving the
verb behind. If the verb were located inside the second conjunct, the conjoined
constituents could not be moved to the front.
Koizumi (1995, 2000) presents essentially the same argument for overt verb
raising up to C in light of cleft sentences that place a multiple number of phrases in
focus position, which are exemplified in (20).
ON VERB RAISING
113
(20)	a.	Mary-ga	age-ta	no-wa	[John-ni	ringo-o	3-tu]	da.
Mary-NOM	give-PAST nl-top	John-DAT	apple-ACC	3-CL	cop
Lit. 'It is [three apples to John] that Mary gave?
b.	Age-ta	no-wa	[Mary-ga	John-ni	ringo-o	3-tu]	da.
give-PAST	nl-top	Mary-NOM	John-DAT	apple-ACC	3-CL	cop
Lit. 'It is [Mary three apples to John] that gave?
In (20a), the direct and indirect objects appear in focus position. According to
Koizumi (2000))this is indicative of the fact that the VP constituent一out of which
the verb is extracted一is clefted. In (20b), the moved constituent is the TP con-
taining the subject in addition to the direct and indirect objects, so the verb should
be raised to C.
Koizumi argues that the verb cannot be head-raised beyond a finite C, in light
of the unacceptability of (21), in which the matrix clause is coordinated along with
its complement clause.
(21)	*[Mary-ga [John-ga ringo-o	2-tu] ] to [Nancy-ga [Bob-ga
Mary-NOM John-NOM apple-ACC 2-cl and Nancy-NOM Bob-NOM
banana-o 3-bon]] kat-ta	to	omot-te i-ru	(koto).
banana-ACC 3-CL	buy-PAST	comp believe be-PRES (fact)
'Mary believes that John bought two apples, and Nancy believes that Bob
bought tree bananas?
As shown in (21), the matrix argument cannot co-occur with the embedded ar-
guments within a single conjunct. Likewise, (22), in which both matrix and em-
bedded arguments are moved into the focus position, is deviant.
(22)	キ Kat-ta	to	it-ta	no-wa	[Mary-ga	Nancy-ni	[John-ga
buy-PAST	comp	say-PAST nl-top	Mary-NOM	Nancy-dat	John-NOM
ringo-o	3-tu]]	da.
apple-Acc	3-CL	cop
Lit. 'It is [Mary to Nancy John three apples] that said that bought?
In (21) and (22), if the embedded verb is raised to the matrix C together with the
embedded C, the entire verbal complex should be located outside the matrix TP
constituent. If this is the case, the matrix TP constituent can be moved or coor-
dinated, and (21) and (22) would be expected to be well formed. However, given
that both examples are unacceptable, contrary to expectation, Koizumi concludes
that a clausemate condition is imposed on verb raising and that the verb cannot be
head-raised beyond a tensed clause boundary.
Finally, Sakai (1998) and Aoyagi (1998) argue against overt verb raising. Their
arguments are primarily drawn from the differences in verbal morphology that arise
depending on the presence or absence of an intervening adverbial particle.5
(23)	a. John-ga ringo-o tabe-ta.
John-NOM apple-Acc eat-past
'John ate the apple?
114 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
b. John-ga ringo-o tabe-mo/-sae/-dake sz-ta.
John-NOM apple-ACC eat-also/-even/-only do-PAST
'John also/even/only ate the apple?
In arguing fbr the absence of overt verb raising, Sakai and Aoyagi both take up the
question of whether a verbal complex—in this case, a verb+tense sequence一is
formed via head raising or morphological merger. They claim that the adverbial
particles occurring after the verb should be viewed as cliticlike elements adjoined to
VP, rather than taking VP as a complement.6
(24)	VP
VP	Part
I	I	.
V	-mo/sae/dake
Sakai and Aoyagi	maintain	that overt head raising is constrained by the Head
Movement Constraint (HMC) and that head movement of X to Y is blocked by an
intervening head Z but not by a nonhead. (Note that an adverbial adjunct typically
does not block head movement, as exemplified by a French example like Jean
embrassej souvent t, Marie john often kisses Mary'.) Given that Japanese does not
have verbal strings where the verb occurs to the right of its associated adverbial
particle, Sakai and Aoyagi claim that the verb+tense sequence in (23a) is formed
via morphological merger without syntactic head raising (see Marantz 1989). In
their analyses, the supporting verb suru in (23b) is inserted due to the disruption of
linear adjacency by an intervening adverbial particle. Sakai remarks that if the
verbal complex is formed via head raising, there is no need to resort to the sup-
porting verb suru to produce a well-formed output.
This analysis crucially relies on the assumption that, in (23b), the focus par-
ticles are adjoined to VP. According to Sakai, this assumption is justified by the fact
that a focus particle can be attached to various constituents such as NP and VP
without changing the category of its host, as seen in (25).
(25)	a. Takasi-ga ringo-mo/-sae/-dake tabe-ta.
Takasi-NOM apple-also/-even/-only eat-PAST
"Takasi ate also/even/only an apple.'
b. Takasi-ga ringo-o tabe-ta-to-mo/-sae/-dake
Takasi-NOM apple-ACC eat-PAST-coMP-also/-even/-only
iw-are-ta.
say-PASS-PAST
'It is also/even/only said that Takashi ate an apple.'
As further support to the claim that the addition of adverbial particles involves
adjunction, Sakai presents data on the distribution of negative forms like mail
masen 'not'.
ON VERB RAISING
115
(26)	a. Takasi-wa ringo-o tabe-masen.
Takasi-rop apple-ACC eat-POLiTE.NEG
"Takasi does not eat apples?
b. Ringo-ga oisiku-ari-masen.
apple-NOM delicious-be-POLiTE.NEG
'The apples are not delicious.J
The negative suffix masen can only take a verbal predicate as its complement.
When masen occurs with an adjectival predicate, as in (26b), the insertion of the
verb aru to support an adjective is necessary to satisfy the selectional requirement
of masen. Notably, the verb aru is required even when a particle is added to an
adjective, as seen in (27).
(27)	Ringo-ga oisiku-mo/-sae/-dake-arz-masen.
apple-NOM delicious-also/-even/-only-be-POLiTE.NEG
'The apples are not also/even/only delicious/
When an adverbial particle is added after the verb in (26a), the required supporting
verb is suru but not aru, as shown in (28).
(28)	Takasi-wa ringo-o tabe-mo/-sae/-dake-5Z-masen.
Takasi-rop apple-ACC eat-also/-even/-only-do-POLiTE.NEG
'Takasi does not eat also/even/only apples?
This would not be expected if the added particle had its own projection selecting its
host as a complement. Sakai claims that because the choice of the supporting verb
does not vary whether or not an adverbial particle is added, the adverbial particles
in (23b) are modifiers adjoined to VP, and hence they do not determine the
categorical status of their host.
In essence, Sakai and Aoyagi argue for a "non-raising verb” view, claiming that
V and T are coalesced into a single verbal cluster V-T via morphological merger—
that is, without syntactic head raising. Under their view, focus particles do not
block overt head movement, and when an emphatic particle intervenes between V
and T, dummy verb support takes place because it disrupts linear adjacency—a
prerequisite to morphological merger.
116 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
5.3	Controversies Regarding
Analysis
The previous section shows some of the core data used to argue fbr or against overt
verb raising. In the Japanese linguistic literature, however, a number of counter-
arguments and alternatives to the proposals have been put forth. In this section, I
review some of the controversies.
Hoji (1998) presents arguments against Otani and Whitman's (1991)analysis.
He argues that the "sloppy identity" reading available in the Japanese null-object
construction is not the same as what obtains in English VP-ellipsis, so that Otani
and Whitman's analysis of the null-object construction in terms of VP-ellipsis plus
overt verb raising is not warranted. He suggests that the relevant null-object
construction can be better analyzed as involving "a null object argument" rather
than "VP-ellipsis."
Hoji presents a number of different arguments for his claim that the Japanese
null-object construction should not involve VP-ellipsis. First, he argues that the
null-object construction does not necessarily yield a sloppy identity reading in
the same manner as English VP-ellipsis.
(29)	a. John,-wa zibun(zisin)i-o nagusame-ta.
John-Top self-ACC console-PAST
'John consoled himself.'
b.	Bill-mo e nagusame-ta.
Bill-also console-PAST
'Bill also consoled e too.'
c.	Billj-mo zibun(zisin)j-o nagusame-ta.
Bill-also self^ACC console-PAST
'Bill also consoled himself.'
When (29a) counts as a preceding sentence, (29b) is not construed as having a
sloppy identity reading, so (29b) cannot mean what (29c) can mean. This is ap-
parently due to the fact that the act of consoling is more likely to be directed
toward someone other than the subject in an ordinary pragmatic context (see Hoji
1995). The English VP-ellipsis construction in (30b), by contrast, readily allows fbr
a sloppy identity reading.
(30)	a. John consoled himself
b. Bill did too. (— Bill consoled himself.)
This suggests that in English VP-ellipsis, sloppy identity readings are made possible
syntactically. In the Japanese null-object construction, by contrast, the possibility of
sloppy identity readings is affected by the choice of predicate. Hoji argues that this
difference would not be expected under Otani and Whitman's analysis, which equates
the Japanese null-object construction with the English VP-ellipsis construction.
ON VERB RAISING
117
Second, Hoji questions the validity of the generalization on the locality effect
for sloppy identity in the Japanese null-object construction, in the light of the
availability of a sloppy identity reading in (31b).
(31)	a. Johnj-wa zibun「no gakusei-o suisen-si-ta.
John-Top self^GEN student-ACC recommend-PAST
"John recommended selfs student?
b. (Demo) Maryj-wa [Bill-ga e suisen-si-ta to] omot-te i-ta.
but Mary-Top Bill-NOM recommend-PAST comp think be-PAST
(Dakara 勾 zibun-de-wa nani-mo si-nakat-ta.)
so	self^with-TOP anything do-NEG-PAST
"(But) Maryi thought that Bill recommended heq student. (So she did
not do anything herself.)'
According to Hoji, the sloppy identity reading on which Mary counts as the possessor
of the missing object in (31b) is possible in the following context. John and Mary have
been competing with each other in placing their students in good teaching positions.
Whenever John recommends his students, Mary does it as well. Bill, who used to be
her student, even recommends Mary's students on behalf of Mary. In (32), however,
the sloppy reading is not possible even if the same pragmatic context is available.
(32)	John recommended his student, but (since) Mary thought that Bill did, (she
did not do anything about recommending her own student).
The two crucial properties of sloppy identity observed in English VP-ellipsis
therefore do not obtain in the Japanese null-object construction. Hoji concludes
then that the latter should not be analyzed on a par with the former.
Hoji further observes that the following two facts cannot be accommodated
under Otani and Whitman's analysis. First, in (33b), a sloppy reading is available
despite the fact that the object in the antecedent clause (33a) is a proper noun.
(33)	a. John-ga John-o suisen-si-ta.
John-NOM John-Acc recommend-past
'John recommended John.'
b. Billj-mo 6j suisen-si-ta.
Bill-also recommend-PAST
'Bill also recommended e.'
Second, there are cases in which a sloppy reading is available even if a pronoun in
the preceding clause is not c-commanded by its antecedent. In (34b), for example,
the gap in the object position of the verb homeru 'praise' can refer to Bill.
(34)	a. [Mukasi John^o osie-ta]	sensei-ga	karej-no koto)-o
years.ago John-Acc teach-PAST teacher-NOM he-GEN fact-ACC
home-te i-ru.
praise be-PRES
'[The teacher who taught John years ago] is praising him.'
118 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
b. [Mukasi Billj-o osie-ta]	sensei-mo	6j home-te i-ru.
years.ago Bill-Acc teach-PAST teacher-also praise be-PRES
'[The teacher who taught John years ago] too is praising e.'
In English, sloppy identity does not obtain when a pronoun is not c-commanded
by its antecedent (see Reinhart 1983). Thus, the English sentence ]ohns sister
scratched his arm, and BilVs sister did, too has only the strict reading where the
second clause means "Bill's sister scratched John's arm" (see Sag 1976). It is obvious
then that the examples in (33) and (34) cannot be accounted for under the VP-
ellipsis analysis, given that the preceding clause does not provide a necessary
condition for the following clause to have sloppy identity under VP-deletion.
Hoji (1998) holds that in the Japanese null-object construction, a phonologi-
cally null argument appears in the direct object position一with no VP-ellipsis
involved. In his analysis, the null argument is an invisible NP-like element, such as
[np Bill] or [NP car], whose reference can be supplied contextually. He suggests that
what Otani and Whitman call "sloppy identity reading" is not a sloppy identity
reading but a "sloppy-like reading," and that sloppy-like readings are derived from
the nature of the null argument occupying the object position.
Hoji's main point is that the facts of the null-object construction are better
analyzed by positing a null argument in the gap (see Takahashi, this volume, for
discussion on some controversies regarding the interpretations of the null argument
as well as other possible alternative analyses).7 Hoji does not commit himself to the
question of whether Japanese has overt verb raising, but he does suggest that there is
no compelling reason why the null-object construction should be analyzed as in-
volving VP-ellipsis plus overt verb raising, as claimed by Otani and Whitman (1991).
Let us now turn to the discussion of controversies concerning the peculiar cleft
and coordinate constructions that Koizumi (1995, 2000) claims to show the exis-
tence of overt verb raising. Takano (2002) and Fukui and Sakai (2003) argue
against Koizumi's analysis, and also question some of the theoretical consequences
derived from his analysis.
Koizumi (2000) discusses some implications and consequences of his analysis.
One such implication concerns the Proper Binding Condition (the PBC), which
has often been assumed to apply at S-structure (see Saito 1989). To begin, note that
the coordinate structure in (35) can be scrambled to the front, leaving the dative
phrase Mary-ni 'to Mary' behind.
(35)	[[Tom-ga t；	ringo-o	2-tu] to	[Bob-ga	banana-o	3-bon]]j
Tom-NOM	apple-ACC	2-cl and	Bob-NOM	banana-ACC	3-CL
Mary-nii tj age-ta.
Mary-DAT give-PAST
'Tom gave two apples to Mary and Bob gave three bananas to Mary?
In Koizumi's analysis, the surface configuration in (35) is derived as follows. First,
the dative phrase is moved out of the two conjuncts in an across-the-board manner,
as in (36a), and then the conjoined structure is scrambled to the front, as in (36b).
ON VERB RAISING
119
(36)	a.[邙 DP-DA!； [[DP-nom t. DP-acc] and [DP-nom t. DP-acc]] V]
个’ l'	i
b.	[TP H DP-nom t. DP-acc 1 and「DP-nom t. DP-acc 山 DP-da^ t. V]
I
Example (35) is acceptable despite the fact that the conjuncts contain unbound
traces. By contrast, (37) is unacceptable.
(37)	*[Bill-ga tj sunde i-ru	to* sono-mura-nij John-ga ら omotte
Bill-NOM reside be-PRES comp that-village-in John-NOM think
i-ru (koto).
be-PRES (fact)
'John thinks that Bill lives in that village?
Example (37) involves a derivation similar to (35), in that the embedded clause is
moved to the front of the sentence after the dative clause is scrambled out of the
embedded clause. Saito (1989) attributes the unacceptability of (37) to be a vio-
lation of the PBC, because the fronted embedded clause contains an unbound trace
at S-structure. In Koizumi's analysis, (35) contains unbound traces just in the
same way that (37) does, but still, (35) is acceptable. Thus, Koizumi claims that
the PBC一which is often claimed to apply at S-structure一does not exist (but he
assumes that it applies at LF, as discussed below), and proposes to account for the
contrast in acceptability between (35) and (37) by way of Muller's generalization on
remnant movement given in (38) (see Muller 1996).
(38)	If a dominates a trace of P which has been created by a certain type of
movement, a cannot undergo the same type of movement yielding the
structure in which the trace of P in a is unbound.
In his proposal, the distinction between A- and A7-movement plays a crucial role in
determining the contrast in acceptability, and his explanation does not make
reference to S-structure configurations, as described below (see Saito 1992).
In (37), the long-distance movement of the dative phrase is construed as A‘-
movement, and the fronting of the embedded clause is middle-distance scram-
bling, which can be either A- or Az-movement. If the latter counts as Az-movement,
the derivation violates Muller's generalization. If it is A-movement, it cannot be
reconstructed into its trace position, which means that the derivation vio-
lates the PBC at LF. (Koizumi assumes that radical reconstruction is allowed only
for ^-movement.) In either case, the derivation crashes, hence the unacceptability
of(37).
In (35), however, the two instances of movement are middle-distance scram-
bling, which can be either A- or Az-movement. In this case, there is at least one
legitimate derivation. To be concrete, if the coordinate structure is fronted via A‘-
movement and the dative phrase via A-movement, then Muller's generalization is
120
THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
not violated. Additionally, because the coordinate structure moved by Az-move-
ment can be reconstructed into its premovement site at LF, no PBC violation is
incurred. This derivation turns out to be legitimate, so (35) is acceptable.
Takano (2002), however, observes one empirical problem with his analysis,
which concerns the well-formedness of (39).
(39)	[[John-ga tj ringo-o 3-tu] to [Bill-ga な banana-o 2-hon]]j
John-NOM	apple-ACC 3-CL and Bill-NOM banana-ACC 2-cl
zibun-zisin-nii § kat-ta.
self-DAT	buy-PAST
"John bought three apples for himself and Bill bought two bananas
for himself?
Example (39) differs from (35), in that the anaphor zibun-zisin 'self', which can take
John and Bill as its antecedents, occurs immediately before the verb. Takano argues
that if the traces in the coordinate structure are to be properly bound by their
antecedents, the coordinate structure must be reconstructed. Then, its fronting
operation must be A'-movement. Note, however, that the anaphor comes to be
bound by its antecedents once the coordinate structure is reconstructed into tj. If
the anaphor is located in A-position, its binding violates condition C of the
binding theory. Then, the anaphor must be located in an Apposition. This means
that the dative phrase should be subject to A'-movement when it is extracted from
the coordinate structure. However, this derivation results in a violation of Muller's
generalization, because the coordinate clause also involves A'-movement. Under
Koizumi's account then, there is no convergent derivation for (39).
Takano (2002) claims that the peculiar coordination and clefting constructions
should be explained in terms of "oblique" movement, which invokes adjunction of
one nominal to another (see Saito 1994 and Sohn 1994).
(40)	John-ga age-ta	no-wa hon-o	Mary-ni da.
John-NOM give-PAST nl-top book-ACC Mary-DAT cop
Lit. It is a book to Mary that John gave.'
On Takano's proposal, the surface configuration in (40) is derived as follows. First,
the accusative phrase is adjoined to the dative phrase by way of oblique movement,
yielding a nominal-stacking structure like (41b).
The adjunction operation creates a nominal constituent comprising both the dative
and accusative phrases.8 Then, the cluster of the two phrases is moved to the focus
ON VERB RAISING
121
position via pseudo-cleft movement. As a result of these syntactic operations, the
"'surprising constituent" in the focus position of the cleft sentence in (40) is derived.
Note here that some nonstandard syntactic operations are required in deriving
a coordinate structure like (39) in Takano's "oblique movement" analysis. Takano
proposes that the coordinate structure is formed in the following way. For the
formation of the second conjunct, the object banana-o 2-hon is first scrambled to
TP, and then the subject Bill-ga is moved and adjoined to the object in TP. These
operations yield the structure (42).
(42)	[TP [Bill-gai [banana-o 2-hon* ] [TP ・ り V]]
The first conjunct is constructed independently of the second conjunct. To form
the first conjunct, John-ga is left-adjoined to ringo-o 3-tu, then the coordinator to
'and' is further adjoined to the resultant constituent, as in (43).
(43)	[& [John-ga [ringo-o 3-tu]]-to]
If the conjunct (43) is left-adjoined to the conjunct (42), the formation of coor-
dinate structure is complete, as shown in (44).
(44)	[TP [& [John-ga [ringo-o 3-tu]]-to] [Bill-gai [banana-o 2-hon]j ] [TP なら V]]
In (44), the two conjuncts form a constituent that may undergo a syntactic op-
eration like scrambling. Here, the subject and the object in the first conjunct do not
leave their traces in TP, as represented in (44), but it is assumed that they are
associated with the existing subject and object traces in a loose way. Although
Fakano does not make any specific proposal to this effect, he claims that this
assumption is justified by an English example like (45), in which the trace located
in the fronted VP is somehow associated with the two subjects.
(45)	It's given 前 a raise that Betsyj should be and Juliej was.
If Universal Grammar (UG) provides a way of assigning a proper interpretation to
(45)	, there is no reason why the same interpretive mechanism should not apply to
(39). Crucially, in Takano's oblique movement analysis, neither Muller's gener-
alization nor the PBC is violated in the derivation of (39). Moreover, in (44), the
nominative phrases in the two conjuncts are associated with the trace in TP,
which would c-command the anaphor zibun-zisin. Thus, it comes as no surprise
that (39) should be acceptable on the interpretation in which the two subjects in
the coordinate structure serve as the antecedents of the anaphor.
Takano's oblique movement analysis is motivated by Sohn's (1994) observa-
tion on "saving effects" observed in w/i-questions such as (46).
(46)	a. ??Nazq sono-hito-Oj	John-wa [Mary-ga なら uttae-ta
why that-person-ACC John-Top Mary-NOM suc-past
toyuu uwasa]-o kii-ta no?
comp rumor-ACC hear-PAST Q
Why did John hear the rumor that Mary sued that person?'
122
THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
b. ??Sono-hito-Oj	naz% John-wa [Mary-ga tj 弓 uttae-ta
that-person-ACC why John-Top Maiy-NOM suc-past
toyuu uwasa] -o kii-ta no?
comp rumor-ACC hear-PAST Q
"Why did John hear the rumor that Mary sued that person?'
Both examples in (46) have the status of a Subjacency violation but not of an ECP
violation, despite the extraction of the adjunct naze 'why' from a complex DP
island. Sohn (1994) attributes the mild ungrammaticality of (46) to the extraction
of the object to which naze 'why' is adjoined. (Because this extraction does
not involve adjunct extraction per se, there is no reason why it should yield an
ECP violation.9) Takano claims that Sohn's analysis implementing oblique
movement should be extended to the analysis of unusual cleft and coordination
structures.
This does not mean, however, that Koizumi (2000) has not taken into con-
sideration the possibility of forming an unusual constituent via oblique movement;
in fact, he rejects this type of analysis, on the basis of examples such as (47).
(47)	a. Nani-o naze John-wa katta no?
what-ACC why John-Top bought Q
'Why did John buy what?'
b. *Naze nani-o	John-wa katta no?
why what-ACC John-Top bought Q
'What did John buy why?'
As shown in (47b), when naze 'why' is located higher than nani 'what', an ECP
effect is not voided. In Sohn's version of adjunction analysis, left- and right-
adjunction to a nominal is possible. If naze can be left-adjoined to a w"-phrase,
(47b) should not show an ECP effect, as the argument wh-phrase that comprises
naze could be moved in the same way as (47a). The presence of an ECP effect in
(47b) leads Koizumi to reject Sohn's adjunction-to-argument analysis.
Koizumi's (2000) argument against Sohn's analysis draws on Watanabe's
(1992) proposal that naze yields an ECP violation when it c-commands another
w/i-phrase (i.e., the so-called anti-superiority effect).10 Takano (2002), however,
notes that if only leftward adjunction is permitted in an adjunction-to-argument
operation, and if it is assumed, following Kayne (1994), that an adjoined element
asymmetrically c-commands the category to which it is adjoined, the desired
results can be derived even in the oblique movement analysis.
Takano presents another argument against Koizumi's overt verb-raising
analysis, building on Carlson's (1987) observation on the sentence-internal read-
ing of the English words same and different, which concerns a comparison be-
tween the events denoted by the clause containing them. Note that the Japanese
words onazi 'same' and tigau 'different', just like same and different, can have a
sentence-internal reading when the sentence has a conjoined NP, as can be con-
firmed by (48).
ON VERB RAISING
123
(48)	John-to	Bill-ga	onazi/tigau	eiga-o	mi-ta.
John-and Bill-NOM	same/different movie-ACC see-PAST
"John and Bill saw the same movie/different movies.'
In (49) by contrast, onazi and tigau cannot have a sentence-internal reading,
because the sentence does not have a conjoined NP indicating plurality.
(49)	John-ga onazi/tigau eiga-o mi-ta.
John-NOM same/different movie-ACC see-PAST
"John saw the same movie/different movies.'
Notice here that onazi and tigau in (50) can also invoke a sentence-internal
reading.
(50)	[[John-ga	ringo-o i-tu]	to [Bill-ga	banana-o	i-pon]]
John-NOM	apple-ACC i-cl	and Bill-NOM	banana-ACC	i-cl
onazi/tigau hito-ni	age-ta.
same/different person-DAT	give-PAST
'John gave an apple, and Bill gave a banana, to the same person/different
persons.'
Takano claims that the availability of a sentence-internal reading for onazi and
tigau in (50) cannot be captured by the overt verb-raising approach taking the
dative phrase as originating from within the TP-conjuncts.
(51)	[[TP John-ga t[ ringo-o i-tu] to [TP Mary-ga 有 banana-o i-pon]]
[onazi/tigau hito-ni]j age-ta.
In this analysis, the dative phrase should be interpreted within each conjunct. To
derive the desired sentence-internal reading for onazi and tigau in (50) then, it
is necessary for each TP conjunct to denote a plural eventuality. However, given that
onazi and tigau in (52) cannot have a sentence-internal reading, this cannot be the
case.
(52)	John-ga onazi/tigau	hito-ni	ringo-o	i-tu	age-ta.
John-NOM same/different person-DAT apple-ACC i-cl	give-PAST
"John gave an apple to the same person/different persons.'
Under the oblique movement approach by contrast, (50) is expected to have a
sentence-internal reading for onazi and tigauy because the conjoined structure does
not coordinate two TPs but has only stacked nominals, as shown in (53).
(53)	[tp [[dp John-ga [DP ringo-o i-tu]] to [DP Mary-ga [DP banana-o i-pon]]]
onazi/tigau hito-ni age-ta]
The derivation by way of oblique movement does not involve remnant movement,
and both the conjoined structure and the dative phrase are located within a single
TP. The sentence in (50) therefore has a configuration that allows onazi and tigau
to have a sentence-internal reading.
124 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Takano (2002) further suggests that the clausemate condition that Koizumi
(2000) has observed for the peculiar cleft construction should not be derived from
a constraint on verb raising, given the contrast in acceptability between (54a)
and (54b).
(54)	a. *[[Bill-ga ae-ru	to]	omot-te i-ru]	no-wa John-ga
Bill-NOM can.meet-PRES comp think	be-PRES nl-top John-NOM
Mary-ni da.
Mary-DAT cop
Lit. Tt is John Mary that thinks Bill can meet?
b. [[pro[ ae-ru	to] omot-te i-ru]	no-wa John「ga
can.meet-PRES comp think	be-PRES nl-top John-NOM
Mary-ni	da.
Mary-DAT	cop
Lit. 'It is John Mary that thinks (he) can meet?
The acceptability of (54b), which has a phonologically unrealized embedded
subject coreferential with the matrix subject, is not expected if the clausemate
condition comes from a constraint preventing the verb from crossing a clause
boundary. Takano suggests that the cleft construction with two clausal constituents
in (54a) is ruled out by two conflicting requirements imposed on clefting and
oblique movement; that is, radical reconstruction is required of oblique movement
(scrambling), which moves the embedded object Mary-ni long distance to form a
two-clause constituent, but cleft movement forbids it. According to Takano, it is
these two conflicting requirements that make the cleft sentence in (54a) illegiti-
mate. Note that in Takano's analysis, it is necessary to assume that radical re-
construction is not required of the scrambled object in (54b) to account for its
acceptability. In (54b), the embedded object Mary-ni is exempt from the recon-
struction requirement because its oblique movement out of the embedded clause
behaves like clause-internal scrambling.11
Fukui and Sakai (2003) also raise a number of criticisms against Koizumi's
analysis. One such criticism is derived from the acceptability of (55).
(55)	Taroo-ga [Hanako-ni ringo-o	3-tu] to [Kumiko-ni
Taroo-NOM Hanako-DAT apple-ACC 3-CL and Kumiko-DAT
banana-o 2-hon] katte-kuru-yooni (teinei-ni) tanon-da.
banana-ACC 2-cl buy-bring-to	politely ask-past
Lit. 'Taroo (politely) asked Hanako to buy and bring three apples and
Kumiko to buy and bring two bananas?
In (55), each conjunct contains a dative phrase selected by the matrix verb and an
accusative phrase selected by the embedded verb. To derive the unusual constit-
uent in (55) under Koizumi's approach, the embedded verb in the infinitival
complement must be raised to the matrix verb, as the verbal complex should be
located outside the coordinate structure.12 However, given that an adverbial like
teinei-ni 'politely' can intervene between the matrix and embedded verbs, the overt
ON VERB RAISING
125
verb raising at issue cannot take place. An additional problem noted by Fukui and
Sakai concerns an example such as (56), in which the second conjunct is case-
marked.
(56)	Taroo-ga	[[Hanako-ni	ringo	3-tu]	to	[Kumiko-ni	banana	2-hon]
Taroo-NOM	Hanako-DAT	apple	3-CL	and	Kumiko-DAT	banana	2-cl
(to)]・〇	age-ta.
and-ACC	give-PAST
Lit. 'Taroo gave three apples to Hanako and two bananas to Kumiko?
In the overt verb-raising analysis, the coordinate structure in (56) should fall into a
VP category. However, given that the coordinate structure can bear the accusative
case -0, which can be assigned to a nominal but not to a VP, it should belong to a
nominal category that cannot be created by verb raising (see also Fukushima 2003).
Fukui and Sakai claim that the facts of (55) and (56) are difficult to explain if the
conjoined structure is formed by way of overt verb raising.
Fukui and Sakai observe yet another problem for Koizumi s proposal analyzing
unusual constituents as involving overt verb raising. This has to do with the im-
possibility of forming a conjoined structure with the particle mo shown in (57a).
(57)	a. *Taroo-ga	[[Hanako-ni	ringo-o	3-tu]	mo	[Kumiko-ni
Taroo-NOM	Hanako-DAT	apple-ACC	3-CL	also	Kumiko-DAT
banana-o	2-hon] mo	age-ta.
banana-ACC	2-cl also	give-PAST
Lit. 'Taroo gave three apples to Hanako and two bananas to Kumiko?
b. Taroo-ga [[Hanako-ni ringo-o	3-tu age] mo [Kumiko-ni
Taroo-NOM Hanako-DAT apple-ACC 3-CL give also Kumiko-DAT
banana-〇	2-hon age] mo si-ta.
banana-ACC 2-cl give also do-PAST
Lit. 'Taroo gave three apples to Hanako and two bananas to Kumiko/
Example (57a) illustrates that the two constituents containing the dative and ac-
cusative phrases cannot be conjoined if the verb occurs outside the particle mo. As
shown in (57b), however, when the verb is located inside mo, coordination is
possible. (57b) shows that mo can be adjoined to VP, because it involves VP
coordination where the verb stays in its original position. Fukui and Sakai argue
that Koizumi's analysis confronts difficulty in accounting for the unacceptability
of (57a), because (57a) should involve the addition of mo to VP, in the same way
as(57b).
As an alternative to Koizumi's overt verb-raising analysis, Fukui and Sakai
(2003) propose a PF reduction analysis, according to which an "unusual” con-
stituent is formed by way of deleting the predicate in the first conjunct under
identity with the one in the second at the PF level, as shown in (58).
(58)	Taroo-ga [Hanako-ni ringo-o 3-tu age] to [Kumiko-ni banana-o 2-hon
age]-ta.
126 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
They claim that the PF reduction analysis has an advantage over Koizumi's anal-
ysis, given that (55) can be easily accommodated as an instance of PF predicate
deletion in their analysis. Koizumi (2000) rejects this type of PF predicate re-
duction analysis because conjoined constituents can be scrambled altogether, as
shown in (59).
(59)	[ [Mary-ga ringo-o	2-tu] to [Nancy-ga banana-o	3-bon]]j
Mary-NOM apple-ACC 2-cl and Nancy-NOM banana-ACC 3-CL
Becky-ga な	tabe-ta to	it-ta	(koto).
Becky-NOM	eat-PAST comp say-PAST (fact)
Lit. '[[Mary two apples] and [Nancy three bananas]] Becky said that ate.'
Fukui and Sakai (2003) argue, however, that the PF reduction analysis is plausible
in view of the recent development of the theory of scrambling. If scrambling can be
a PF operation, as claimed by some researchers (e.g., Ueyama 2003), the elements
fronted by scrambling need not form a constituent in narrow syntax. Fukui and
Sakai propose that the discontinuous constituents in (59) are reanalyzed into a
single constituent under string adjacency (without head raising) via 'Phrase-Level
Merger" in PF and that the reanalyzed constituent is fronted by way of PF
scrambling. In their analysis, the resultant constituent created by way of PF merger
belongs to a nominal category, so case marking is allowed to appear on the co-
ordinate constituent in (56).
Furthermore, it is argued by Fukui and Sakai (2003) that the PF reduction
analysis can explain the clausemate condition noted by Koizumi (2000), given that
predication deletion can take place across a nonfinite, but not a finite, clause
boundary, as illustrated by the pair of the English examples in (60).
(60)	a. Mary forced Tom to go to Cambridge, and forced John to go to Oxford,
b. *John thinks that Bill will see Susan, and Harry thinks that Bill will see
Mary.
The PF reduction analysis is also claimed to provide a ready answer to the
question of why mo cannot occur in the unusual constituent in (57a). The particle
mo—unlike to—carries quantificational force, which means that mo must be
present in LF as well as in narrow syntax.13 Thus, Fukui and Sakai claim that an
unusual constituent like one in (57a) must be formed in narrow syntax. Given
that Phrase-Level Merger is a PF operation, they conclude that (57a) is unac-
ceptable because there is no way of forming an unusual constituent in the
syntax.14
Alternatively, one might argue that an unusual coordinate structure is formed
by way of right-node raising, which extracts the verb from each conjunct. This
analysis is denied by Koizumi, however. Drawing on McCawley's (1982,1987)
proposal that right-node-raised elements are located within the coordinate
structure, Koizumi argues that the right-node-raising analysis is not plausible
ON VERB RAISING
127
because it predicts that whenever an unusual constituent is scrambled, the verb
should be moved as well. As we have already seen (e.g., (35)), the scrambling of an
unusual constituent leaves the verb behind (and in fact, the verb cannot be moved
along with it). Koizumi claims then that right-node raising cannot be involved in
the formation of an unusual coordinate structure.
Although Koizumi's argument against the right-node-raising analysis
hinges on McCawley's specific proposal, it is worth noting that we can still observe
some difference between the right-node raising and unusual coordinate con-
structions. In the unusual coordinate construction, adverbial modifiers (ad-
jectives) such as sintyoo-ni 'cautiously' appear to be excluded from the unusual
conjuncts, whereas DPs and PPs (such as locative PPs) are permitted. Thus,
(61), where adverbial modifiers are included in the peculiar conjuncts, is
degraded.15
(61)	??[[Mary-ni sintyoo-ni hon-o	2-satu] to [Bob-ni subayaku
Mary-DAT cautiously book-ACC 2-cl	and Bob-DAT quickly
zassi-o	i-satu]]j John-ga	watasi-ta (koto).
magazine-ACC i-cl	John-NOM hand-PAST (fact)
Lit. '[[Two books to Mary cautiously] and [a magazine to Bob quickly]]
John handed.'
By contrast, in the right-node-raising construction一typically formed with sosite
'and'—no restriction is imposed on the types of expressions that occur inside the
conjoined structure, as shown in (62) (see Kuno 1978).16
(62)	[[John-ga sintyoo-ni hon-o]	sosite [Mary-ga subayaku
John-NOM cautiously book-ACC and Mary-NOM quickly
zassi-o]] yon-da.
magazine-ACC read-PAST
'John read the book cautiously, and Mary, the magazine quicldy.'
The difference in acceptability between (61) and (62) shows that the unusual
coordinate construction possesses properties that differ from those of the right-
node-raising construction.
In regard to the coordinate and cleft structures of unusual constituents, three
different analyses have been proposed. In Koizumi's analysis, unusual constitu-
ents are created by way of overt verb raising. In Takano's oblique movement
analysis, these constituents involve stacked nominals. In Fukui and Sakai's
analysis, unusual constituents are formed via PF predicate deletion plus PF
Phrase-Level Merger.】’ The unusual coordinate and cleft constructions display
some intriguing properties that cannot be treated in a simple, straightforward
manner, however.
Finally, let us turn to the discussion of the pair of the verbal complexes found
in (63) (— (23)), which is used by Sakai (1998) and Aoyagi (1998) to argue for the
absence of overt verb raising.
128 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(63) a. John-ga ringo-o
John-NOM apple-ACC
'John ate the apple.'
b. John-ga ringo-o
tabe-ta.
eat-PAST
tabe-mo/-sae/-dake sz-ta.
John-NOM apple-ACC eat-also/-even/-only do-PAST
'John also/even/only ate the apple.'
Both Sakai and Aoyagi maintain that adverbial particles behave like adjuncts
and do not block head raising. Under their view, the predicate+tense
sequence一exemplified in (63a)一is formed by morphological merger (without
verb raising). In (63b), the emphatic particles that disrupt linear adjacency oc-
cur to the right of the verb and, thus, the dummy verb suru is inserted to support
tense.
The proposed analysis rests on the assumption that adverbial particles do not
block head raising. However, Miyagawa (2001)makes a suggestion to the contrary.
Although his main concern is the nature of the EPP in Japanese, his data are also
pertinent to the issue of verb raising. He observes that if zenin 'all' occurs in object
position in a negative sentence, zenin falls under the scope of negation.
(64) Taroo-ga zen'in-o home-nakat-ta.
Taroo-NOM all-ACC praise-NEG-PAST
'Taroo did not praise all.'
not>all, (*)all > not
If zenin 'all' occurs in subject position, as in (65), it is interpreted outside the scope
of negation.
(65) Zen'in-ga sono-testuto-o uke-nakat-ta.
all-NOM that-test-ACC take-NEG-PAST
'All did not take that test.'
牛not > all, all > not
Furthermore, the narrow scope interpretation of zenin becomes possible if the
object is scrambled to the front.
(66) Sono-tesuto-Oi zen'in-ga な uke-nakat-ta.
that-test-ACC all-NOM take-NEG-PAST
'That test, all did not take.'
not > all (all> not)
Miyagawa argues that in (64) and (65), the subject is attracted to Spec,TP
due to an EPP feature on T. By contrast in (66), the object is moved to Spec,TP
via -^-scrambling (i.e., A-movement), whereas the subject remains in situ.
This suggests that the EPP requirement of T may be satisfied by the subject or
object.
ON VERB RAISING
129
Miyagawa's argument here is that either the subject or object can be moved to
Spec,TP in (67), because these two phrases become equidistant from T, as a con-
sequence of overt V-to-T raising.18 In his analysis, overt verb raising to T should
take place in an unmarked case where no adverbial particle intervenes between the
verb and tense― ontrary to the proposal made by Sakai (1998) and Aoyagi (1998).19
Miyagawa also observes that zenin takes scope over negation even when an
object is scrambled to the clause-initial position in an emphatic construction in
which the verb is separated from tense by an emphatic particle such as mo.
(68)	Sensei-Oj	zen'in-ga な seme-mo si-nakat-ta.
teacher-ACC	all-NOM blame-even do-NEG-PAST
"The teacher, all did not even blame?
*not > all, all > not
He argues that in (68), the subject falls outside the scope of negation, because it
undergoes A-movement to Spec,TP, whereas the object undergoes A'-scrambling
rather than A-scrambling~just like a case in which an object is moved long distance.
(69)	Syukudai-Oj	zen'in-ga [sensei-ga な das-u	to]
homework-ACC	all-NOM teacher-NOM assign-PRES comp
omowa-nakat-ta.
think-NEG-PAST
'Homework, all did not think that the teacher would assign.'
*not > all, all > not
In Miyagawa's analysis, overt verb raising does not take place in (68), so the subject
and the object are not equidistant from T. In this case, the subject located higher
than the object must be raised to Spec,TP by A-movement. The scope fact in (68)
suggests that head raising should be blocked by emphatic particles.
Kishimoto (2005, 2007) provides a different type of argument to the effect that
overt raising of a predicate with an adverbial particle is not possible. His argument
is based on the fact that whereas the main verb allows the suffixation of an ad-
verbial particle, the sentential negator nai4not' does not.20
1Z0 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(70)	a. John-ga hon-o yoma-nakat-ta.
John-NOM book-ACC read-NEG-PAST
"John did not read books.'
b.	John-ga hon-o yomi-mo si-ta/si-nakat-ta.
John-NOM book-ACC read-also do-PAST/do-NEG-PAST
"John also read/did not read books.'
c.	*John-ga hon-o yoma-naku-mo at-ta.
John-NOM book-ACC read-NEG-also be-PAST
"John also did not read books.'
Assuming that an adverbial particle is head-adjoined to a lexical head on its
right, he suggests that a particle cannot be embedded inside a complex lexical
head, because it has the property of marking the right-boundary of a head. (71b)
illustrates that a complex head containing an adverbial particle inside is unac-
ceptable.
(71)	a. kaigai-mo b. *kaigai-mo-ryokoo
overseas-also	overseas-also-travel
'overseas also'	'overseas also travel'
Kishimoto (2005, 2007) maintains, just like Miyagawa (2001),that an adverbial
particle cannot occur to the right of a moving head. The reasoning here is different,
however, because it is viewed that the overt head raising of a head with an adverbial
particle to a higher head ends up with an illegitimate complex head inside which the
particle is embedded. The contrast in acceptability between (70a,b) and (70c) fol-
lows if the negative head nai undergoes overt head raising but a verbal head does
not. Kishimoto claims then that whereas the "negative-tense" sequence in (70a) is
created via overt head raising, the "verb-tense" sequence in (63a) is not, as illus-
trated in (72).
(72)	a.
Subj
Obj
Obj V
In Kishimoto's analysis, the dummy verb support found in (63b) above is moti-
vated for morphological reasons: The dummy verb suru is inserted to the front of
ON VERB RAISING
131
tense in (63b) for supporting morphologically dependent tense separated from the
main verb by an adverbial particle.
Kishimoto (2005, 2007) argues that the presence of negative head raising can
be assessed by the extent of the scope of negation. In Japanese, negative scope
extends over TP in an ordinary clause, so no subject-object asymmetry is observed
in regard to NPI licensing, as exemplified in (73).
(73)	a. Dare-mo hon-o yoma-nakat-ta.
anyone book-ACC read-NEG-PAST
'No one read the book.'
b. John-ga nani-mo yoma-nakat-ta.
John-NOM anything read-NEG-PAST
'John did not read anything.'
The English negative element not does not undergo overt verb raising, and we
observe a subject-object asymmetry in the licensing of NPI elements, as shown in
(74)	.
(74)	a. * Anyone did not read the book.
b. John did not read anything.
Kishimoto suggests that the expansion of negative scope correlates with the pos-
sibility of overt head raising, in the light of the following examples, where the
object NPI, but not the subject NPI, can be licensed by nai.
(75)	a.	John-ga	dare-mo	kyoositu-ni	haire-naku	si-ta.
John-NOM	anyone	classroom-in	enter-NEG	do-PAST
'John made anyone unable to enter the room.'
b.	*Dare-mo	Mary-o	kyoositu-ni	haire-naku	si-ta.
anyone	Mary-Acc	classroom-in	enter-NEG	do-PAST
'Anyone made Mary unable to enter the room.'
In the causative construction in (75), the scope of negation does not extend over
the entire clause. In this type of construction, it is possible to add an adverbial
particle to the right of nai.
(76)	John-ga Mary-o	kyoositu-ni	haire-naku-mo si-ta.
John-NOM Mary-Acc classroom-into enter-NEG-also do-PAST
'John also made no one able to enter the room.'
The subject-object asymmetry in (75) can then be attributed to the absence of
Neg-raising, which is derived from T's inability to attract the negative head nai
(by virtue of the intervening verb suru 'make'). Kishimoto further suggests that
the negative head nai undergoes overt raising in a sentence such as (70a), given that
it counts as a light functional predicate (i.e., a sentential negator), in an analogous
way to an English light verb have, which serves as an aspectual verb.
1)2 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(77)	a. John {has not been/*does not have been} to Paris.
b. John {did not have/*had not} his students examined by the doctor.
In English, a light verb, but not a main verb, is amenable to head raising. If this
difference extends to Japanese, it is expected that in Japanese, just as in English,
overt head raising should not apply to main verbs. In effect, the fact that main
verbs tolerate the addition of an adverbial particle to their right suggests that they
do not undergo overt verb raising.
Sakai (1998) and Aoyagi (1998) maintain that an adverbial particle does not
block head raising and that the unmarked verbal sequence of "verb-tense” is
formed via morphological merger without head raising. However, some different
proposals on the formation of a "verb-tense” sequence are also available. Miyagawa
(2001),assuming that an adverbial particle blocks head raising, claims that the
"verb-tense" sequence is created via overt head raising to T. However, Kishimoto
(2005, 2007) holds that the overt raising of a head plus adverbial particle results in
unacceptability and suggests that because the verb allows an adverbial particle to be
placed on its right, the ordinary "verb-tense” sequence should be formed without
recourse to syntactic head raising.
Although much more work needs to be done to resolve the problem on how
verbal complexes are formed, there is one piece of empirical evidence suggesting
that the "verb-tense" sequence can be formed irrespective of whether syntactic verb
raising takes place. To see this, consider (78), which comprises the idiomatic
adjectival expression warikire-nai "not satisfied', which takes either a dative-
nominative or a nominative-nominative case pattern.21
(78)	a.	John(-ni)-wa	sono-kettei-ga	warikire-na-i.
John-DAT-TOP	that-decision-NOM	satisfied-NEG-PRES
'John is not satisfied with that decision.5
b.	John(-ni)-wa	sono-kettei-ga	warikire-naku-mo	ar-u.
John-DAT-TOP	that-decision-NOM	satisfied-NEG-also	be-PRES
'John is also not satisfied with that decision?
Example (78b) shows that the negative expression nai in warikire-nai behaves just
like an ordinary adjectival predicate, in that it allows an emphatic particle to be
inserted to its right. Notably, in this case, negative nai does not extend its scope
over the entire clause, as shown in (79).
(79)	a. John(-ni)-wa sono-kettei-ga sukosimo/tittomo warikire-na-i.
John-DAT-TOP that-decision-NOM at.all/in.the.least satisfied-NEG-PRES
"John is not satisfied with that decision at all/in the least/
b. ?*Dare-mo sono-kettei-ga warikire-na-i.
anyone that-decision-NOM satisfied-NEG-PRES
"Anyone is not satisfied with that decision?
The NPI in subject position is not licensed, as shown in (79b), whereas the oc-
currence of NPI adverbs like sukosimo/tittomo is legitimate in (79a), which indi-
ON VERB RAISING
133
cates that nai does not take scope over TP even though it bears syntactic scope. The
scope fact here suggests then that the "negative-tense" sequence in (78a)一unlike
the same "negative-tense" sequence in (70a)一is formed with no overt head
raising.
The data in (79) imply that syntactic head raising is not a prerequisite for
agglutinative morphology of verbal complexes and that the ordinary "verb-tense"
sequence could be created with no syntactic verb raising. Note that in (63b), the
verb tolerates the addition of an emphatic particle to its right. This fact suggests
that overt verb raising should not be induced for the formation of the ordinary
"verb-tense" sequence in (63a).
5.4	Implications for
the General Theory
The central issue on verb raising in Japanese is the question of how verbal clusters
are formed. Japanese is an agglutinative language, where discrete verbal heads are
coalesced into a single complex predicate morphologically. This is one of the
notable typological properties that distinguish Japanese from English. In the early
days of Japanese generative grammar, it has commonly been assumed that syn-
tactic verb raising is instantiated to produce agglutinative morphology of verbal
complexes. More recently, however, this assumption is called into question一
especially with the advent of Distributive Morphology, which does not posit a strict
syntax-morphology correspondence by allowing late insertion of lexical items (see
Halle and Marantz 1993). Some of the recent works on verb raising in Japanese
reflect this trend and address the question of whether verbal clusters are formed via
syntactic head raising. The empirical data that are taken to diagnose verb position
do not necessarily point to the same conclusion. If, however, the suggestion made
at the end of the previous section is correct一that is, the suggestion that mor-
phological verbal complexes can be created without regard to syntactic verb
raising一then we can say that the morphophonological organization of verbal
complexes does not have to reflect their syntactic structure strictly. Furthermore, if
verb raising has syntactic consequences, as discussed in a number of works men-
tioned in this chapter, it must constitute part of the grammar of syntax (despite
some recent theoretical skepticisms raised on syntactic head raising). Although
further research is necessary to find out the exact status of verb raising in Japanese,
the verb raising dispute, once it is resolved, would provide us with a clue to the
proper understanding of the mechanisms of verb raising implemented in Universal
Grammar.
134 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
NOTES FOR CHAPTER 5
Part of the material in this chapter was presented at the Workshop on Linguistic
Theory and the Japanese Language, held at Harvard University on July 29-30, 2005. I am
grateful to Shigeru Miyagawa, Mamoru Saito, Heejeong Ko, Koichi Takezawa, Yusuke
Kubota, Elizabeth Smith, Mark Campana, and anonymous reviewers for helpful comments
and suggestions. Needless to say, I am solely responsible for any remaining inadequacies
and errors.
1.On the split vP hypothesis, the existence of V-to-v raising is plausible, and there
might be verb raising below vP. Nevertheless, the discussion in this chapter is limited to the
issue pertaining to V-to-T raising (and further conceivable T-to-C raising). There is some
issue concerning V-to-v raising, since Chomsky (1995, 2000, 2001)assumes that V-to-v
raising is universally implemented, but Fukui and Takano (1998) argue that Japanese does
not have V-to-v raising. In Japanese, there is also an issue concerning verbal noun con-
structions. Saito and Hoshi (2000) and Kishimoto (2001)suggest the possibility of covert
raising of verbal nouns to the light verb suru (see also Kageyama 1999). Fukui and Sakai
(2003) put forth an alternative view that dispenses with this covert raising.
2.	For discussion on verb raising in European languages, see Pollock 1989, Chomsky
1991,Holmberg 1986,1999, and others.
3.	Otani and Whitman (1991)do not represent the embedded clause, but I follow
WH1 iams's representation more closely on this point.
4.	Koizumi (1995,2000) adds a numeral quantifier at the end of each conjunct to avoid
attaching the coordinator to to a case marker directly, which is illicit for an independent
reason.
5.	Sakai (1998) and Aoyagi (1998) reach virtually the same conclusion independently.
6.	Here, Aoyagi (1998) is more specific than Sakai (1998), in claiming that adverbial
particles are nonprojected heads (clitics) in the sense of Chomsky (1995).
7.	Hoji (1998) suggests that a comparative ellipsis such as (i) exhibits properties
analogous to VP-ellipsis.
(i)	lintyoo-wa	[subete-no nihonzin huuhu-ni	yori]-mo sakini
chairperson-TOP all-GEN	Japanese couple-dat than-also early
subete-no amerikazin huuhu-ni onazi gakusei-o
all-GEN American couple-DAT same student-ACC
suisen-s-ase-ta.
recommend-CAUSE-PAST
"The chairperson made every American couple recommend the same student
earlier than every Japanese couple?
He argues that the comparative construction in (i) can have the same sloppy reading as
does the English VP-ellipsis construction in (ii).
(ii)	Every Japanese couple recommended the same student; and every American
couple did too.
He does not suggest that (i) involves VP-gapping, but (ii) shows that Japanese has a con-
struction that behaves more like VP-ellipsis than the null object construction. For the
details of the analysis, see Hoji 1998.
ON VERB RAISING
135
8.	If the order of the two phrases is reversed, the dative phrase must be adjoined to the
accusative phrase after the latter is scrambled to the front, because Takano (2002) allows
only the left-adj unction to a nominal via oblique movement.
9.	In (46), naze can be placed before or after the object sono-hito-o without incurring
an ECP effect. According to Takano (2002), both orders can be derived in the following
way. First, the object to which naze is adjoined is moved out of the island, which incurs
only a Subjacency violation. If naze is scrambled out and adjoined to TP after this
movement, the "mze-object” order is produced. Note that this scrambling operation is
necessary because an adverbial can intervene between the two phrases. If the object is
further scrambled across naze, the "object-〃〇ze” order is created.
10.	For the present purposes, it is sufficient to say that if naze is not the closest
potential binder to c-command its trace, an ECP violation ensues. It should be noted,
however, that more articulated theoretical assumptions need to be introduced in order to
fully explain why an ECP effect emerges when naze occurs to the left of the object in (47b).
See Saito 1994.
11.	Takano's analysis provides an account for the facts regarding (54) but leaves the
unacceptability of the coordinate construction in (21) unaccounted for. If the judgment is
as reported by Koizumi (2000), it is necessary to stipulate some conditions that make (21)
unacceptable. Although Takano does not provide an account, he reports that (21) sounds
better than (22), though degraded, and it becomes fully acceptable when the embedded
subject is replaced with pro.
12.	In effect, Koizumi (2000) claims that complex verb formation, which is highly
productive in Japanese, takes place in overt syntax.
13.	Obviously, one inherent problem with this analysis is that an unusual constituent
can be formed with the particle ka 'or'.
(iii)	Taroo-ga [[Hanako-ni ringo-o	3-tu] ka [Kumiko-ni banana-o
Taroo-NOM Hanako-DAT apple-ACC 3-CL or Kumiko-dat banana-ACC
2-hon] (ka)] age-ta (koto).
2-cl or give-PAST (fact)
Lit. "Taroo gave three apples to Hanako or two bananas to Kumiko.'
The particle ka carries quantificational force like mo. In Fukui and Sakai's analysis then, the
coordinate structure in (iii) can never be formed in the syntax, and hence should be
excluded in the same way as (57a). However, the fact of the matter is that (iii) is acceptable.
14.	Notice that the pseudo-cleft construction involving an unusual constituent poses a
problem on the PF reduction analysis, because PF merger should not apply to the for-
mation of a cleft sentence such as (iv).
(iv)	Taroo-ga	yomu-yooni nessin-ni susume-ta-no-wa	Hanako-ni
Taroo-NOM	read-coMP earnestly recommend-PAST-NL-TOP Hanako-DAT
Russell-no	hon-o (san-satu) da.
Russell-GEN	book-ACC three-CL cop
Lit. 'It is Russell's (three) books to Hanako that Taroo earnestly
recommended to read.'
Pseudo-clefting undoubtedly has an interpretive effect, because focus is separated from
presupposition. This means that unusual cleft formation cannot be accounted for by
1Z6 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
appealing to the PF merger that takes place after PF predicate deletion. Fukui and Sakai
(2003) argue, however, that the elements in the focus position of the pseudo-cleft con-
struction need not be reanalyzed into a constituent, because the "apparent" unusual
constituent in focus position is created by virtue of topicalization of a nominalized
predicate, as illustrated in (v).
(v)	[Ringo-o tabe-ta-no]j-wa Taroo-mo 命 da.
apple-ACC eat-PAST-NL-TOP Taroo-also cop
'It was also Taroo that ate apples?
In their analysis, the elements in the focus position do not undergo movement, so there is
no reason why they should form a syntactic constituent. If they do not form a constituent,
it is not surprising that the sentence is well formed even if PF merger cannot apply to the
elements in the focus position. Fukui and ゝakai's claim here is that two different analyses
apply to the same type of phenomenon, but this seems undesirable. Their analysis predicts
that the coordinate structure of unusual constituents will never be created in the focus
position of a cleft sentence. However, this prediction is not borne out, as the following
sentence is acceptable.
(vi)	Taroo-ga	age-ta	no-wa	[ [Mary-ni banana-o	2-hon] to
Taroo-NOM give-past nm-top Mary-DAT banana-ACC 2-cl and
[Jane-ni ringo-o 3-ko]] da.
Jane-dat apple-ACC 3-CL cop
Lit. 'It was [[to Mary, two bananas] and [to Jane, three apples]] that Taroo gave?
According to Fukui and Sakai, clefting involves predicate nominalization, but as can be
clearly seen in (vi), the moved material contains tense, which means that clefting should
involve TP-nominalization (or sentential nominalization). If so, the unusual constituent in
(vi) must somehow be moved out of the clause for the nominalized constituent to be
fronted, contrary to their claim.
15.	Heejeong Ko (pers. comm.) calls this fact to my attention. In Fukushima 2003,
some examples in which an adverb like kinoo 'yesterday' occurs in an unusual constituent
are judged to be acceptable. As Fukushima himself acknowledges, native speakers do not
necessarily agree with his judgments, however.
16.	In the right-node-raising construction, a slight pause is placed at the right
boundary of each constituent out of which the verb is extracted. No such pause is necessary
in the case of the unusual coordinate structure. Koizumi (2000) observes that the
clausemate condition does not apply to the right-node-raising construction.
17.	Fukui and Sakai (2003) suggest that Japanese does not have overt verb raising
(in narrow syntax). Takano (2002) holds that verb raising does not take place in
Japanese.
18.	This analysis assumes that the object is moved without going through vP.
Note, however, that if vP constitutes a phase that an argument needs to move through, the
object can be moved across the subject even if the verb does not raise to T (see Chomsky 2000,
2001).
19.	Ishihara (2001)argues that Miyagawa's analysis can capture the facts of nuclear stress
in Japanese~~the central prosodic stress assigned to sentences in neutral contexts一given
Cinque's (1993) theory of nuclear stress, which says that nuclear stress falls on the mostly
ON VERB RAISING
137
embedded XP ina clause. To be more specific, Ishihara claims that the fact that nuclear stress
falls on preverbal elements—but not the verb一follows from Miyagawa's analysis.
(vii)	a. Taroo-ga hon-o kat-ta.
Taroo-NOM book-ACC buy-pa st
'Taroo bought a book.'
b. Hon-Oj Taroo-ga t, katta.
book-ACC Taroo-NOM buy-past
'A book, Taroo bought?
In (viia), the object is the lowest XP (regardless of whether the verb moves up to a higher
position), so the object is assigned nuclear stress. When the object is scrambled to the
clause front, the subject receives nuclear stress. Ishihara suggests that this stress assignment
can be accounted for on the assumption that the subject stays in Spec,vP, while the verb
raises to T.
2〇. This does not mean that the addition of an adverbial particle to the negative head
nai is always impossible. There are in fact cases in which nai can be followed by an
adverbial particle, as illustrated in (viii).
(viii)	Ano-ryoori-wa mibae-ga waru-i-dake-de-naku oisiku-naku-mo ar-u.
that-dish-TOP looking-NOM bad-PRES-only-NEG delicious-NEG-also be-PRES
'That dish not only looks bad, but also not delicious.'
In a case like (viii), however, the negative expression nai does not function as a sentential
negator, as can be confirmed by the fact that it does not license any type of NPI.
(ix)	*Ano-ryoori-wa mibae-ga waru-i-dake-de-naku sukosimo/tittomo
that-dish-TOP looking-NOM bad-PRES-only-NEG at.all/in.the.least
oisiku-naku-mo ar-u.
delicious-NEG-also be-PRES
'That dish not only looks bad, but also not delicious at all/in the least.'
The negative head's inability to license NPIs suggests that it counts as a negative affix akin
to un- in uninteresting in English. This use of the negative element nai is not relevant to the
present discussion.
21.The verbal predicate warikira-nai'not decide', which takes a '"nominative-accu-
sative" case pattern, behaves like an ordinary negative expression. In the first place, nai in
warikira-nai does not allow the addition of an adverbial particle on its right.
(x)	*John-wa sono-koto-o	konna-huu-ni warikira-naku-mo ar-u.
John-Top that-matter-ACC this-way-in	decide-NEG-also be-PRES
"John does not also decide on that matter in this way.'
In the second, the scope of negation spreads over the entire clause, as indicated in (xi).
(xi)	Dare-mo sono-koto-o konna-huu-ni warikira-na-i.
anyone that-matter-ACC this-way-in decide-NEG-PRES
'No one decides on that matter in this way.'
1)8 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
These data show that the conditions restricting the idiomatic "adjectival" predicate war-
ikire-nai do not apply to the "verbal" predicate warikira-nai (and its variants) taking an
ordinary nominative-accusative case pattern.
REFERENCES
Aoyagi, Hiroshi.1998. On the nature of particles in Japanese and its theoretical implica-
tions. Doctoral dissertation, University of Southern California, Los Angeles.
Carlson, Greg.1987. Same and different: Some consequences of syntax and semantics.
Linguistics and Philosophy 10:531-565.
Chomsky, Noam.1991.Some notes on economy of derivation and representation. In
Principles and parameters in comparative grammar, ed. Robert Freidin, 417-454-
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Chomsky, Noam.1995. The Minimalist Program. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Chomsky, Noam. 200〇• Minimalist inquiries: The framework. In Step by step: Essays on
minimalist syntax in honor of Howard Lasnik, ed. Roger Martin, David Michaels, and
Juan Uriagereka, 89-155. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Chomsky, Noam. 2001.Derivation by phase. In Ken Hale: A life in language, ed. Michael
Kenstowicz, 1-52. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Cinque, Guglielmo.1993. A null theory of phrase and compound stress. Linguistic Inquiry
24:239-298.
Fukui, Naoki, and Hiromu Sakai. 2003. The visibility guideline for functional categories:
Verb raising in Japanese and related issues. Lingua 113:321-375.
Fukui, Naoki, and YujirFakano.1998. Symmetry in syntax: Merge and Demerge. Journal of
East Asian Linguistics 7:27-86.
Fukushima, Kazuhiko. 2003. Verb-raising and numeral classifiers in Japanese:
Incompatible bedfellows. Journal of East Asian Linguistics 12:313-347.
Halle, Morris, and Alec Marantz.1993. Distributed morphology and the pieces of in-
flection. In The view from Building 20: Essays in linguistics in honor of Sylvain Brom-
berger, ed. Kenneth Hale and Samuel Jay Keyser, 111-176. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
Hoji, Hajime.1995. Demonstrative binding and principle B. In Proceedings of NELS 25, ed.
Jill N. Beckman, 255-271. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA Publications.
Hoji, Hajime.1998. Null objects and sloppy identity in Japanese. Linguistic Inquiry 29:127-
152.
Holmberg, Anders.1986. Word order and syntactic features in the Scandinavian languages
and English. Doctoral dissertation, University of Stockholm.
Holmberg, Anders.1999. Remarks on Holmberg's generalization. Studia Linguistica 53:1-
39.
Ishihara, Shinichiro. 2001.Stress, focus, and scrambling in Japanese. In MITWPL 39: A few
from Building E39: Papers in syntax, semantics, and their interfaces, ed. Elena Guerzoni
and Ora Matushansky, 151-185. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working Papers in Linguis-
tics.
Kageyama, Taro.1999. Word formation. In The handbook of Japanese linguistics, ed.
Natsuko Tsujimura, 297-325. Oxford: Blackwell.
Kayne, Richard.1994. The antisymmetry of syntax. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
ON VERB RAISING
139
Kishimoto, Hideki. 2001.Binding of indeterminate pronouns and clause structure in
Japanese. Linguistic Inquiry 32:597-633.
Kishimoto, Hideki. 2005. Toogokoozoo-to bunpookankei [Syntactic structure and gram-
matical relations]. Tokyo: Kurosio.
Kishimoto, Hideki. 2007. Negative scope and head raising in Japanese. Lingua 117:
247-288.
Koizumi, Masatoshi 1995. Phrase structure in minimalist syntax. Doctoral dissertation,
MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Koizumi, Masatoshi. 200〇. String vacuous overt verb raising. Journal of East Asian Lin-
guistics 9:227-285.
Kuno, Susumu.1978. Japanese: A characteristic OV language. In Syntactic typology, ed.
Winfred P. Lehmann, 57-138. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Marantz, Alec.1989. Clitics and phrase structure. In Alternative conceptions of phrase
structure, ed. Mark Baltin and Anthony Kroch, 99-116. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
McCawley, James.1982. Parentheticals and discontinuous constituent structures. Linguistic
Inquiry 13:91-106.
McCawley, James.1987. Some additional evidence for discontinuity. In Discontinuous
constituency (Syntax and Semantics 20), ed. Geoffrey J. Huck and Almerindo E. Ojeda,
185-20〇. San Diego, Calif.: Academic Press.
Miyagawa, Shigeru. 2001.The EPP, scrambling, and w/z-in-situ. In Ken Hale: A life in
language, ed. Michael Kenstowicz, 293-338. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Muller, Gereon.1996. A constraint on remnant movement. Natural Language & Linguistic
Theory 14:355-407.
Otani, Kazuyo, and John Whitman.1991.V-raising and VP-ellipsis. Linguistic Inquiry
22:345 -358.
Pollock, Jean-Yves.1989. Verb movement, Universal Grammar, and the structure of IP.
Linguistic Inquiry 20:365-424.
Reinhart, Tanya.1983. Anaphora and semantic interpretation. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Sag, Ivan.1976. Deletion and logical form. Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge,
Mass.
Saito, Mamoru.1989. Scrambling as semantically vacuous A'-movement. In Alternative
conceptions of phrase structure, ed. Mark Baltin and Anthony Kroch, 182-20〇. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Saito, Mamoru.1992. Long distance scrambling in Japanese. Journal of East Asian Lin-
guistics 1:69-118.
Saito, Mamoru.1994. Additional-^/? effects and the adjunction site theory. Journal of East
Asian Linguistics 3:195-24〇.
Saito, Mamoru, and Hiroto Hoshi. 200〇• The Japanese light verb constructions and the
Minimalist Program. In Step by step: Essays on minimalist syntax in honor of Howard
Lasnik, ed. Roger Martin, David Michaels, and Juan Uriagereka, 261-295. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.
Sakai, Hiromu.1998. Feature checking and morphological merger. Japanese/Korean Lin-
guistics 8, ed. David J. Silva, 189-201. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI Publications.
Sohn, Keun-Won.1994. Adjunction to argument, free ride and a minimalist program.
MITWPL 24: Formal approaches to Japanese linguistics 1,ed. Masatoshi Koizumi and
Hiroyuki Ura, 315-334. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working Papers in Linguistics.
Takano, Yuji. 2002. Surprising constituents. Journal of East Asian Linguistics 11:243-301.
140 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Ueyama, Ayumi. 2003. Two types of scrambling constructions in Japanese. In Anaphora: A
reference.guide, ed. Andrew Barss, 23-104. Oxford: Blackwell.
Watanabe, Akira.1992. Subjacency and S-structure movement of w^z-in-situ. Journal of East
Asian Linguistics 1:255-291.
Williams, Edwin.1977. Discourse and Logical Form. Linguistic Inquiry 8:101-139.
CHAPTER 6
NOMINATIVE
OBJECT
MASATOSHI KOIZUMI
6.1	Introduction
Japanese is a nominative-accusative language. Subjects of both transitive and in-
transitive verbs are usually case-marked in nominative, in contrast to objects of
transitive verbs, which are typically marked with accusative. This is exemplified
in⑴.
(1)	a. Masami-ga ano kabin-o wat-ta.
Masami-NOM that vase-ACC break(transitive)-PAST
'Masami broke the flower vase?
b. Ano kabin-ga ware-ta.
that vase-NOM break(intransitive)-PAST
'The flower vase broke?
There are Japanese sentences, however, that implement what appears to be an
ergative case pattern (Kuno 1973, Kuroda 1978, among others). Consider the fol-
lowing examples:
(2)	a. Hiromi-ga syuwa-ga	deki-ru.
Hiromi-NOM sign language-NOM capable-PRES
'Hiromi can use a sign language?
b. Hiromi-ni syuwa-ga	deki-ru.
Hiromi-DAT sign language-NOM capable-PRES
'Hiroko can use a sign language?
142 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
The objects in (2) are marked by the nominative case-marker -ga rather than the
accusative case-marker -0. Sentences like (2) are referred to as the nominative object
construction. The subject of the nominative object construction may appear either
with the nominative case-marker -ga as in (2a) or with the dative postposition -ni as
in (2b). Similar constructions are found in many languages of the world such as
Hindi, Icelandic, Kannada, Korean, Russian, and Tibetan, among others, and have
raised a number of questions interesting both descriptively and theoretically. In
this chapter, I summarize major grammatical properties of the nominative object
construction in Japanese, present formal analyses to them, and consider their the-
oretical implications.
6.2	Core Data
Let us briefly overview, in this section, some of the fundamental properties of the
nominative object construction in Japanese.
6.2.1	The Nominative Object Is Not Subject
In the nominative object construction, the logical subject (experiencer or agent),
which is marked either dative or nominative, functions as the grammatical subject,
and the nominative object, which is a logical object (typically theme or patient), has
no subject properties other than the nominative case marking (Kuno 1973, Shibatani
1977, Takezawa 1987, among others). This can be shown by such standard opera-
tional tests as subject honorification, reflexive binding, arbitrary pro, and so forth.
One of the most frequently used operational tests for subjecthood in Japanese
is subject honorification. Subject honorification is a phenomenon in which a
certain marking on the predicate indicates the speaker's sense of respect toward the
referent of the grammatical subject of that predicate. In a subject honorification
sentence, the intended target of the speaker's respect must be the referent of the
grammatical subject, as in (3a), and when it is not, the sentence is judged deviant,
as in (3b).
(3)	a. Tigusa-sensei-ga gakuseitati-o o-yobi-ni natta.
Chigusa-pro£-NOM students-ACC called (sub-hon)
'Prof Chigusa called students.'
b. #Gakuseitati-ga Tigusa-sensei-o o-yobi-ni natta.
students-NOM Chigusa-prof.-ACC called (sub-hon)
'Students called Prof. Chigusa.'
If the predicate of a nominative object construction assumes the subject honorific
form, the target of honorification is the experiencer/agent argument rather than
the nominative object, as shown in (4) (Shibatani 1977).1
NOMINATIVE OBJECT 143
(4)	Subject honorification
a.	Tigusa-sensei-ga gakuseitati-ga o-suki-da.
Chigusa-prof.-NOM students-NOM like (sub-hon)
'Prof Chigusa likes students/
b.	#Gakuseitati-ga Tigusa-sensei-ga o-suki-da.
students-NOM Chigusa-prof-NOM like (sub-hon)
'Students like Prof. Chigusa?
(Infelicitous under the intended interpretation)
This suggests that in the nominative object construction, the logical subject
functions as grammatical subject but the logical object in the nominative case
does not.
Another diagnostic for identifying grammatical subjects in Japanese involves
the reflexive anaphor zibun 'self, which generally takes a subject as its antecedent,
as shown in (5) (cf. Kuno 1973, Harada 1976).
(5)	Masamii-ga Hiromi2-o zibun1Z*2-no heya-de hometa.
Masami-NOM Hiromi-Acc self-GEN	room-in praised
'Masami】 praised Hiromi in self'su*2 own room?
In the nominative object construction, it is the experiencer/agent argument rather
than the nominative object that functions as the antecedent of zibun (Shibatani
1977)：
(6)	Reflexive binding
Masami】-ga Hiromi2-ga zibun1Z*2-no kurasu-de itiban suki-da.
Masami-NOM Hiromi-NOM self^GEN	class-in best like-cop
'Masami】 likes Hiromi2 the best in self s1Z*2 class?
A third grammatical phenomenon sensitive to grammatical subjecthood is
the interpretation of unpronounced arguments. A phonologically null subject of
certain-type nonfinite clauses can have an "arbitrary interpretation,n but it is not
possible with a null object (Saito 1982, Kuroda 1983, Kageyama 1993). Thus the
subject in (7a) can be interpreted as "people in general"(—arbitrary interpreta-
tion), whereas the same is not possible with the null object in (7b): (7b) only has an
interpretation in which the null object refers to some specific entity.
(7)	a. (subject) kodomo-o sodateru no-wa muzukashii.
child-ACC raise that-TOP difficult
'To raise a child is difficult?
b. Oya-ga (object) sodateru no-wa muzukashii.
parent-NOM	raise that-TOP difficult
'For parents to raise (a child) is difficult?
The examples in (8) demonstrate that it is the logical subject rather than the
nominative object that counts as subject in the nominative object construction in
this regard.
144 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(8)	a. (logical subject) sampo-ga suki-na no-wa ii-koto-da.
walk-NOM like-cop that-TOP good-thing-cop
"To like taking a walk is a good thing.'
b. *Masami-ga (nominative object) suki-na no-wa ii-koto-da.
Masami-NOM	like-cop that-TOP good-thing-cop
Lit. "For Masami to like is a good thing.'
The three tests above all suggest that in the nominative object construction, the
logical subject functions as the grammatical subject, but the logical object in
the nominative case has none of the subject properties except for the case mark-
ing. It is thus safe to conclude that the nominative object is not a grammatical
subject.
6.2.2	The Nominative Object Is Grammatical Object
Let us now turn to some diagnostic tests of objecthood. One such test involves the
formal noun koto. The formal noun koto is devoid of its historically original
meaning 'fact' and can be inserted only in the surface direct-object position, as
shown in (9) (Tsunoda 1991,Kishimoto 2004).
(9)	a. John-ga Mary(-no-koto)-o damasi-ta.
John-NOM Mary-GEN-fact-ACC deceive-past
'John deceived Mary.'
b.	John(*-no-koto)-ga Mary-o damasi-ta.
John-gen-fact-NOM Mary-Acc deceive-PAST
'John deceived Mary.'
c.	Mary(七no-koto)・ga John-ni-yotte damas-are-ta.
Mary-GEN-fact-NOM John-by deceive-PASS-PAST
'Mary was deceived by John.'
In the nominative object construction, the nominative object may be accompanied
by the formal noun koto, but the logical subject cannot.
(10)	a. John-ga Mary(-no-koto)-ga suki-da.
John-NOM Mary-GEN-fact-NOM fond-PRES
'John is fond of Mary.'
b. John(*-no-koto)-ga Mary-ga suki-da.2
John-gen-fact-NOM Mary-NOM deceive-PRES
'John is fond of Mary.' (Kishimoto 2004)
This is a clear indication that the nominative object has an object property.
Another operational test for objecthood is concerned with so-called double -0
constraint (Harada 1973, Inoue 1976). In Japanese, multiple occurrences of di-
rect objects marked with accusative case are prohibited. As shown in (11), the verb
NOMINATIVE OBJECT 145
su(-rw) 'do' allows either Mootuaruto 'Mozart' or ensoo 'play' to be marked with
accusative case, but not both.
(11)	a. John-ga Mootuaruto-no ensoo-o si-ta.
John-NOM Mozart-GEN play-ACC Jo-past
'John played Mozart.'
b.	John-ga Mootuaruto-o ensoo-si-ta.
John-NOM Mozart-Acc play-do-PAST
'John played Mozart.'
c.	*John-ga Mootuaruto-o ensoo-o si-ta.
John-NOM Mozart-NOM play-Acc do-PAST
'John played Mozart.'
Although the constraint responsible for the ungrammaticality of (nc) is often
assumed to derive from a ban on the duplication of accusative case marking, it is in
fact a more general ban on the duplication of direct objects (Shibatani 1973, Ka-
geyama 1999, Kishimoto 2004). Thus, the same constraint applies to the predicate
deki(-ru) 'can-do', which is a suppletive form of su(-ru) 'do' and rare 'can', and
takes a nominative object, as illustrated in (12).
(12)	a. John-ga/-ni Mootuaruto-no ensoo-ga deki-ru.
John-NOM/-DAT Mozart-GEN play-NOM can.do-PRES
'John can play Mozart.'
b.	John-ga/-ni Mootuaruto-ga ensoo-deki-ru.
John-NOM/-DAT Mozart-NOM play-can.do-PRES
'John can play Mozart.'
c.	*John-ga/-ni	Mootuaruto-ga ensoo-ga	deki-ru.
John-NOM/-DAT Mozart-NOM	play-NOM can.do-PRES
'John can play Mozart.'	(Kishimoto 2004)
Given that the unacceptability of (12c) is on a par with (11c), and because there is no
general ban on double-gn or double nominative case marking in Japanese, the
deviance of (12c) must stem from a violation of a grammatical constraint that
restricts the number of direct objects to one per clause. If this reasoning is on the
right track, (12c) is taken to be evidence that the nominative object is a direct object
(Kishimoto 2004).
To sum up, the two tests for objecthood as well as the three diagnostics for
subjecthood all point to the conclusion that the nominative object is undoubtedly
a grammatical object.3
6.2.3	The Nominative Object Construction Is Neither the
Passive nor Major Subject Construction
The nominative object construction is superficially similar to the passive con-
struction in that they both exhibit the nominative-dative case pattern. The two
146 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
constructions are distinct, however. One difference has to do with thematic
relation. Unlike in the nominative object construction, where logical subject (ex-
periencer/agent) is the grammatical subject, in the passive construction, it is
the logical object (theme/patient) that functions as the grammatical subject.
Thus, compare the nominative object construction in (6), repeated here, with the
passive construction in (13), in which the theme argument (Hiromi) can be the
antecedent of zibun "self but the agent (Masami) cannot (Kuroda 1965, Kuno
1973).
(6) Reflexive binding
Masamij-ga Hiromi2-ga zibun1Z*2-no kurasu-de itiban suki-da.
Masami-NOM Hiromi-NOM sei仁gen	class-in best like-cop
'Masami】 likes Hiromi2 the best in self,s1/*2 class?
(13)	Passive construction
Hiromi]-ga Masami2-ni zibun1Z*2-no heya-de os-are-ta.
Hiromi-NOM Masami-DAT self-GEN	room-in push-PASS-PAST
'Hiromi was pushed by Masami in self>s1/*2 own room?
A second difference between the nominative-object and passive constructions
concerns case marking. As mentioned in relation to the examples in (2), the dative
marker in the nominative object construction may alternate with the nominative
case particle. The same is not possible, however, with the passive construction, as
shown in (14).
(14)	Hiromi-ga Masami-ni/*-ga os-are-ta.
Hiromi-NOM Masami-DAT/-NOM push-PASS-PAST
Intended: 'Hiromi was pushed by Masami?
Another type of sentence superficially similar to the nominative object con-
struction is the so-called major subject construction. The major subject con-
struction, like the nominative object construction, has two nominative nominals.
A crucial difference is that in the major subject construction, the second nomi-
native NP, rather than the first, is the logical as well as grammatical subject (Kuno
1973, Kuroda 1983). Thus, consider (15).
(15)	Major subject construction
Sendai-ga sakana-ga uma-i.
Sendai-NOM fish-NOM taste.good
'It is in Sendai that fish taste good?
Fish may or may not taste good, but it does not make sense to say that the city
of Sendai tastes good. The first nominative NP in the major subject construction
is neither the logical subject nor the logical object of the predicate; rather it has
some "aboutness relation" with the rest of the sentence. Neither of the two
nominative case particles in the major subject construction can be replaced with
the dative -ni.
NOMINATIVE OBJECT 147
6.2.4	The Nominative Object Occurs with a Stative Predicate
Sentences with a nominative object all involve a subset of stative predicates (Kuno
1973, Shibatani 1999). Predicates that occur in the nominative object construction
include (a) all transitive adjectives such as suki 'fond of, (b) a subset of stative
transitive verbs such as dekiru 'can do', and (c) complex predicates consisting of an
action verb and a stative auxiliary verb such as -rare 'can' or an auxiliary adjective -
tai 'want' (e.g., tabe-tai 'eat-want').
(16)	Predicates that take a nominative object4
a.	Transitive adjectives
kowa^-i) 'afraid of, hosi(-i) 'want', suki(-dd) 'like', kirai^-dd) 'hate',
hituyoo^-da) 'need', tokui(-da) 'good at', heta(-da) 'bad at', etc.
b.	Stative transitive verbs
deki(-ru) 'can do', waka(-ru) 'understand', ar(-u) 'have', etc.
c.	Complex stative predicates
i.	Potential verbs (V-rare/e(-r以)'can V)
tabe-rare(-ru) 'can eat',だom-e(-r以)'can drink',
hanas-e(-ru) 'can speak', t以m以r-e^-rti) 'can close', etc.
ii.	Desiderative adjectives (V-ta(-r) 'want to V)
tabe-ta(-i) 'want to eat', nomi-ta(-i) 'want to drink',
hanasi-ta^-i) 'want to speak', tsumuri-ta(-i) 'want to close', etc.
6.2.5	The Nominative Object Tends to Have Wide Scope
Among the three types of predicates given in (16), the first two (i.e., those in (a) and
(b)) only take nominative object (except for a few exceptions, such as waka{-r以)
'understand', which take either a nominative or accusative object). With a pred-
icate of the third type (i.e., those in (c)), the object may be case-marked either in
the accusative or in the nominative, as shown in (17).
(17)	a. Kiyomi-wa migime-dakc-o tumur-e-ru.
Kiyomi-rop right.eye-only-ACC close-can-PRES
Lit: 'Kiyomi can close only his right eye.'
[can>only] 'Kiyomi can wink his right eye.'
b. Kiyomi-wa migime-dake-ga tumur-e-ru.
Kiyomi-rop right.eye-only-NON close-can-PRES
[only > can] 'It is only the right eye that Kiyomi can close.'
The accusative object takes narrow scope with respect to the second element of the
complex predicate (the potential verb -rare 'can' in (17), V2 hereafter). Thus the
prominent reading of (17a) is 'Kiyomi can wink his right eye' (can > only).5
In contrast, the nominative object has wide scope over V2 (Sano 1985, Tada 1992),
so that (17b) is interpreted as It is only the right eye that Kiyomi can close'
(only > can).
148 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
In negative sentences, the accusative object falls within the scope of the sen-
tential negation and V2 (neg > can > only), whereas the nominative object takes
wider scope than the negation and V2 (only > neg > can) (Koizumi 1994,1995).
(18)	a. Kiyomi-wa migime-dake-o tumur-e-na-i.
Kiyomi-TOP right.eye-only-ACC close-can-NEG-PRES
Lit: "Kiyomi cannot close only his right eye.'
[not > can > only] 'It is not the case that Kiyomi can wink his right eye.'
b. Kiyomi-wa migime-dake-ga tumur-e-na-i.
Kiyomi-TOP right.eye-only-NOM close-can-NEG-PRES
[only > not > can] 'It is only the right eye that Kiyomi cannot close.'
The nominative object has wide scope not only in sentences with a complex
stative predicate but also in simplex stative sentences. Example (19) can be read as
'The only subject Hiromi is not capable of is math' (only > not), and it cannot be
interpreted as 'It is not the case that Hiromi is only capable of math' (not > only)
(Koizumi 1994,1995).
(19)	Hiromi-wa suugaku-dake-ga deki-na-i.
Hiromi-TOP math-only-NOM capable-NEG-PRES
*[not > only] 'It is not the case that Hiromi is only capable of math'
[only > not] 'It is only mathematics that Hiromi is not capable of.'
To summarize so far, we have seen in this section that the nominative object is
a grammatical object rather than some sort of subject, that it occurs with certain
types of stative predicates, and that it tends to have wide scope.
6.3	Analytical Issues
In this section, I consider how the case and scope properties of the nominative
object can be explained within the broad framework of current generative grammar.
6.3.1	Why Is the Object Case-Marked in Nominative?
There are three classes of hypotheses regarding why the object is marked with -ga in
the nominative object construction. They all agree in assuming that the stative
predicates that occur in this construction lack the ability to license accusative Case.
They differ as to the nature or origin of the particle -ga of the nominative object.
The three hypotheses are: (a) The particle -ga of the nominative object is a post-
position rather than an instantiation of abstract nominative Case; (b) -ga is the
nominative case marker and is licensed by a stative predicate (Kuno 1973, Tada
1992, Yatsushiro 1999, Takano 2003, among others); and (c) -ga is the nominative
NOMINATIVE OBJECT 149
case marker and is licensed by a functional category, Tense (T) (Koizumi 1994, Ura
1999, Kishimoto 2001;see also Takezawa 1987).
That the first hypothesis is inadequate can be shown by facts about numeral
quantifier float and ga-no (or nominative-genitive) conversion. Generally, floated
numeral quantifiers can be associated with an NP bearing nominative or accusative
Case, but they cannot be construed with an NP within PP, as shown in (20)
(Shibatani 1978, Miyagawa 1989, among others).
(20)	a. Gakusei-ga 3-nin ringo-o katta.
student-NOM 3-CL apple-ACC bought
"Three students bought apples/
b.	Gakusei-ga ringo-o 3-tu katta.
student-NOM apple-ACC 3-CL bought
'A student bought three apples?
c.	*Hiromi-ga gakusei-kara 3-nin ringo-o	katta.
Hiromi-NOM student-from 3-CL apple-NOM bought
Intended: "Hiromi bought apples from three students?
Examples(2ia,b) demonstrate that the logical subject and the nominative object,
respectively, can readily host a numeral quantifier, the latter of which should be
impossible if the particle -ga of the nominative object were a postposition such as -
kara 'from', as in (20c).
(21)	a. Kono kurasu-no gakusei-ga 3-nin tyuugokugo-ga hanas-e-ru.
this class-GEN student-NOM 3-CL Chinese-NOM speak-can-PRES
'Three students in this class can speak Chinese?
b. Masami-ga gaikokugo-ga	3-tu hanas-e-ru.
Masami-NOM foreign language-NOM 3-CL speak-can-PRES
'Masami can speak three foreign languages?
As for the ga-no (or nominative-genitive) conversion, in certain configura-
tions such as a relative clause, an NP may be optionally marked with the genitive
case-marker -no instead of the nominative -ga, as shown in (22a). (For details of
the ga-no conversion, see Maki and Uchibori, this volume, and the references cited
there.) Comparable alternation is not possible with any of the postpositions (see
(22b)).
(22)	a. ame-ga/-no huru hi
rain-NOM/-GEN fall day
'the day when it rains'
b. sora-kara/*-no huru hi
sky-from/-GEN fall day
Intended: 'the day when something falls from the sky'6
The nominative object may undergo ga-no conversion, as shown in (23), which
again supports the idea that the -ga marking of the nominative object is a reali-
zation of structural nominative Case rather than a postposition.
150 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(23)	a. tyuugokugo-ga hanas-e-ru	gakusei
Chinese-NOM speak-can-NONPAST student
b. tyuugokugo-no hanas-e-ru	gakusei
Chinese-GEN speak-can-NONPAST student
'a student who can speak Chinese'
The second analysis一that -ga is the nominative Case marker licensed by a
stative predicate一also faces several problems. For example, under this analysis,
nominative Case is licensed by two distinct categories. The nominative Case of the
subject is licensed by Tense, and the nominative Case of the nominative object is
licensed by stative predicates. Tense is a functional category, whereas stative
predicates are lexical categories (verbs and adjectives). These two categories have
nothing in common, except for the alleged nominative Case-licensing ability. It is
not clear at all why nominative Case should be licensed by two distinct sets of cat-
egories as different as Tense and stative predicates. This fact alone, of course, does
not render the analysis untenable, but it surely makes it dubious (Koizumi 1994).
There are empirical problems with the second analysis as well. Consider the
following examples (Koizumi 1994).
(24)	a. Mary-wa suugaku-dake-o wakari-tuzuke-ta.
Mary-Top mathematics-ACC understand-continue-past
Lit. "Mary kept understanding only math.'
b. Mary-wa suugaku-dake-ga wakari-tuzuke-ta.
Mary-TOP mathematics-NOM understand-continue-PAST
The lower verb (Vi) of these sentences (i.e., wakar 'understand') is a stative verb,
and the higher verb (V2) (i.e., tuzuke 'continue') is a nonstative verb/ The object
may be marked either with the nominative -ga or with the accusative -0. If the
nominative object is Case-licensed by a stative verb as postulated by the second
analysis, the nominative object in (24b) should be licensed within the embedded
VP (or some larger phrase sister to the higher verb), as schematically shown in (25).
(25)	... [Vp [yp [nominative object] understand] continue]
Here the nominative object is asymmetrically c-commanded by the higher verb.
We would therefore expect that (24b) may not have the reading in which the object
takes scope over the higher verb. The prediction fails, however. Example (24b) is
interpreted such that it is only math that Mary had understood all the time
throughout the relevant time span, which clearly shows that the object takes the
wide scope reading. This suggests that (unlike the accusative object in sentences
like (17a)) the nominative object in (24b) is licensed in a position higher than the
higher verb, contrary to what is expected from the hypothesis that the nominative
object is licensed by a stative predicate. Yet another problem with this analysis has
to do with the fact that it cannot account for the obligatory wide scope of the
nominative object over sentential negation (Neg) (see (18) and (19) above). If the
nominative object is licensed by the stative verb within the projection of that verb
NOMINATIVE OBJECT IZ1
as schematically shown in (26), much like the accusative object is licensed by a verb
within its VP, there is no reason for the nominative object to take scope over
negation obligatorily.8
(26)	[TP [NegP [Vp [nominative object] close-can] Neg] T] (cf.(18))
The third analysis一that the nominative Case of the nominative object is
licensed by Tense一faces none of the above problems. Under this hypothesis,
nominative Case is uniformly licensed by Tense regardless of which NP it appears
on. The nominative object undergoes movement to the domain of T for the
purpose of Case-licensing, and the domain of T is higher than (and hence outside
the scope of) Neg. The wide scope reading of the nominative object therefore is
readily explained (Koizumi 1994,1995).
(27)	|jp [Negp [yp [vp [nominative object] close] can] Neg] T]
6.3.2	Why Is the Narrow Scope Reading Absent?
Given that the nominative object is licensed by T within TP, the wide scope reading
of the nominative object over sentential negation and stative verbs is explained in
the way just sketched. A remaining question is why the nominative object cannot
have narrow scope with respect to Neg and V2 in the V1-V2 compound. There are
two main approaches for this. One approach postulates a VP-complementation
structure as in (27) and assumes that a trace left behind by (a subtype of) A-
movement is invisible for the purpose of scope interpretation (e.g., Koizumi 1998,
Nevins and Anand 2003, Bobaljik and Wurmbrand 2005). The other approach
assumes that complex predicates are formed prior to merger of the nominative
object either as in (28a) or as in (28b) (e.g., Saito 2000; Hoshi 2001,2005; see also
Takano 2003). In either structure, the object is never lower than the second verb,
and hence there is no possibility of scope reconstruction.
Bobaljik and Wurmbrand (2007) note several potential problems with
the analyses in (28). One of them is reproduced here, and the reader is referred to
their original work for other problems. It is known that different time-span
152 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
adverbials diagnose different aspectual classes of VPs. Bare time adverbials such as
iti-zikan 'for one hour' modify the duration of an activity. Expressions like iti-
zikan-de 'in one hour', however, serve to diagnose accomplishments (Vendler
1967). Aspectual distinctions hold at the VP-level rather than at the V-level, as
shown by the English sentences in (29), where the transitive accomplishment-
denoting VP read the book licenses in an hour, but the intransitive activity-denoting
VP read cannot.
(29)	a. John read the book in an hour.
b. John read *in an hour/fbr an hour.
Now consider the following example (Bobaljik and Wurmbrand 2007):
(30)	Taroo-ga hon-ga iti-zikan-de yom-e-ru.
Taro-NOM book-NOM i-hour-in read-can-PRES
'Taro can read the book in one hour.'
In (30), iti-zikan-de 'in one hour' is licensed, which shows that the nominative
object construction contains an accomplishment-denoting VP. The problem with
the structures in (28) is that there is no node corresponding to an accomplish-
ment. The VP in (28a) and the higher VP in (28b) are states, whereas the lower
VP (without an object) in (28b) would be an activity. Both states and activities
are incompatible with tie-marked adverbials. The structures in (28) therefore
wrongly predict that (30) is ungrammatical. In contrast, the correct predictions
are made by a VP-complementation structure in (27), because the lower VP
contains an object trace and thus denotes an accomplishment, licensing the -de
adverbial.
6.3.3	May the Narrow Scope Reading Be Marginally
Available after All?
So far we have assumed that the nominative object takes scope over both sentential
negation and stative verbs. Recently, however, Nomura (2005a,b) has challenged
this generalization by pointing out that, with an appropriate context, the narrow
scope reading of the nominative object is marginally possible for many speakers.
Thus, consider the following example.
(31)	Taroo-ga	koyubi-dake-ga	mage-rare-ru	no-wa	sit-te-ita-ga,
Taro-NOM	pinkie-only-NOM	crook-can-PRES	that-TOP	knew-but,
(kare-ga)	kusuriyubi-dake-mo	mage-rare-ru	no-ni-wa	odoro-ita.
(he-NOM)	ring-finger-only-also	crook-can-PRES	that-at-TOP	surprised
'I have known that Taro can crook only his pinkie, but I was surprised
that he can also crook only his ring finger.'
NOMINATIVE OBJECT 1ZZ
If the example in (31) is interpreted in such a way that the nominative object takes
scope over the potential verb, it would yield a contradictory reading一that is, ‘I
have known that Taro can bend none of his fingers except his pinkie, but I was
surprised that he can bend none of his fingers except his ring finger? Nomura
(2005a, b) observed, however, that (31) is judged as noncontradictory, and this is
only possible if the nominative object is interpreted within the scope of the po-
tential verb (can > only). The noncontradictory reading available to (31) is T have
known that Taro can bend only his pinkie, but I was surprised that he can also bend
only his ring finger?
As a further support for the claim that the nominative object can fall within
the scope of the potential verb, consider example (33) in the context provided in (32).
(32)	Context (Nomura's [2005a] context 4):
John has a white bookshelf and he does not want it to be orange colored.
He has two different color paints, red and yellow (mixing red and yellow
will yield orange).
(33)	John-wa subete-no iro-ga tuka-e-nai.
John-TOP all-GEN eolor-NOM USe-POT-NEG
"John cannot use every color?
There are three logically possible interpretations for the example in (33), with
regard to whether the universally quantified object takes scope over negation and/
or the potential verb, which are summarized in (34).
(34)	a. all > not > can: For every color x, John cannot use x.
b.	not > all> can: It is not the case that for every color x, John can use x.
c.	not > can > all: It is not possible for John to use all the colors.
Let us consider the three interpretations in turn. Under the interpretation in (34a),
there has to be no color that John can use. However, given that he can use a
nonorange color, this is a false statement in the context of (32). Example (34b)
denies that John can use any one of the colors. This denial is a false statement
because he can use any single color. Example (34c) denies that using all the paints is
a way of achieving the desired result. Given that mixture of red and yellow is
orange, this is a true assertion in the given context. The fact that sentence (33) can
be felicitously used (as a true statement) in the context given in (32) shows that
given appropriate context the nominative object can take narrow scope with re-
spect to both sentential negation and potential verb.
The correct generalization about the scope interpretation of the nomina-
tive object, therefore, seems to be that the wide scope reading is strongly pre-
ferred, but the narrow scope reading is marginally available given appropriate
context.
154 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
6.3.4	Why Is the Narrow Scope Reading So Difficult
to Obtain?
The new generalization calls for a new analysis. Why is the narrow scope reading so
difficult to obtain? Although this is currently an open question, one promising way
to pursue the issue has to do with pragmatics. According to this view, syntactically
both the wide and narrow scope readings are available for the nominative object,
and the extremely strong preference for the wide scope reading is due to pragmatic
reasons along the lines of Grice's conversational principles, such as "avoid ambi-
guity as much as possible (manner)," which suppress (or disfavor) the narrow
scope reading. As discussed in section 6.2, the nominative object construction with
a complex stative predicate has a counterpart with an accusative object. A relevant
set of examples are repeated here.
(35)	a. Kiyomi-wa migime-dake-o tumur-e-ru.
Kiyomi-TOP right.eye-only-ACC close-can-PRES
Lit: "Kiyomi cannot close only his right eye.'
[can > only] "Kiyomi can wink his right eye.'
*[only > can] Tt is only the right eye that Kiyomi cannot close.'
b. Kiyomi-wa migime-dake-ga tumur-e-ru.
Kiyomi-TOP right.eye-only-NON close-can-PRES
#[can > only] 'Kiyomi can wink his right eye.'
[only > can] Tt is only the right eye that Kiyomi cannot close.'
In the pair of examples in (35), the accusative object is within the scope of the
potential verb, giving rise to the interpretation [can > only] but not the inter-
pretation [only > can]. In contrast, if Nomura's observation is correct, the nom-
inative object is actually ambiguous in scope with respect to the potential verb. It
can take either wide [only > can] or narrow [can > only] scope. Of the two in-
terpretations available to the sentence with the nominative object, one is identical
to the reading of the sentence with the accusative object (i.e., the object narrow
scope reading [can > only]). Then, when a speaker intends to convey the mean-
ing associated with the narrow scope of the object, there are two alternative
expressions from which to choose: one with the accusative object, which is unam-
biguous; and the other with nominative object, which is ambiguous. In this
situation, the speaker would choose the unambiguous sentence with the accusa-
tive object, given Gricean requirements on rational use of the language for com-
munication ("avoid ambiguity," in particular): If a speaker has the means to
express a certain idea clearly, he or she would not choose a less clear way to
express it.
This is reminiscent of a case, discussed by Reinhart (1983) among others, of
interpretation of pronouns. A pronoun in the object position usually cannot be
coreferential with the subject, as shown in (36b), but there are various situations in
which such coreferential reading is possible (e.g., (37)). Reinhart proposes that the
NOMINATIVE OBJECT 1ZZ
coreferential reading of (36b) is usually unavailable not because it is ruled out by
principles of sentence grammar (i.e., condition B) but because it is pragmatically
unfavored given the Gricean principle "avoid ambiguity" (Reinhart's Rule I) (see
also Dowty 1980). There is a clearer alternative to (36b) (i.e., (36a)))which is
unambiguous, unlike (36b) in which her can be potentially coreferential with
someone other than Zelda.
(36)	a. Zelda saw herself
b. Zelda saw her.
(37)	I know what Bill and Mary have in common. Mary adores Bill, and Bill
adores him too. (Reinhart 1983:169)
Since Reinhart 1983, several alternative analyses have been proposed to account for
the (un)availability of the coreference reading in examples like (36b) (e.g.,
Grimshaw and Rosen 1990, Grodzinsky and Reinhart 1993, Wexler and Thornton
1999). Although it is beyond the scope of this chapter to compare and choose
among them, whatever analysis turns out to be correct for (36b) may be readily
extended to (35b), given the apparent parallelism between (35) and (36).
6.4	Accusative Object
We have considered how nominative objects are licensed. For the sake of com-
pleteness, let us now briefly turn to the question of how accusative objects are
licensed. I lay out what may be considered "core data” in section 6.4.1, and in
section 6.4.2,1 discuss possible analyses.
6.4.1	Empirical Generalization
As discussed in the previous sections, the stative compounds shown in (16c)一that
is, the complex potential verbs (V-rare/e^-ru) 'can V') and complex desiderative
adjectives (V-ta(-r) 'want to V')—can take either a nominative or an accusative
object. When the object is case-marked in nominative, it usually takes scope over
the second element (i.e., rare 'can' or tai 'want') of the compound. When the object
bears the accusative case, it has narrow scope with respect to 'can' or 'want'. In this
section, I discuss nonstative compounds such as V-hazime(-ru) 'begin to V, in
which the second element is a nonstative verb unlike the stative compounds, in
which the second element is a stative predicate.
Nonstative compounds cannot take a nominative object. They take an accu-
sative object if the first element (Vi) is a transitive verb. Accusative objects of
nonstative compounds exhibit different scope properties depending on the type of
1Z6 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
the second component verb (V2). When V2 is a control verb with an accusative
Case feature (e.g., wasure cforgef), the object obligatorily takes scope over V2. This
is exemplified in (z8)?
(38)	V2 — Control verb with accusative feature
John-wa ringo-dake-o tabe-wasure-ta.
John-Top apple-only-ACC eat-fbrget-PAST
'John forgot to eat only apples?
a.	only > forget (Among many things John was supposed to eat, it was
only apples that he forgot to eat.)
b.	*forget > only (It was eat only apples that John forgot to do.)
When V2 is a control verb without an accusative Case feature (39), a raising
verb (40), or a verb ambiguous between raising and control (41), the accusative
object may take either narrow or wide scope with respect to V2.
(39)	V2 — Control verb without accusative feature
Yooko-wa furansu-ryuugaku-tyuu-ni pan-dake-o
Yoko-Top France-study.abroad-during-at bread-only-ACC
tabe-nare-ta.
eat-get.used.to-PAST
'Yoko got used to eating only bread, while studying in France?
a.	only > get.used.to (It is only bread that Yoko got used to eating while
studying in France.)
b.	get.used.to > only (While studying in France, Yoko got used to eating
bread without having anything else together.)
(40)	V2 — Raising verb
John-wa niku-dake-o tabe-sugi-ta.
John-Top meat-only-ACC eat-overdo-PAST
'John overdid eating only meat?
a.	only > overdo (Among many things John ate, it was only meat that he
overate.)
b.	overdo > only (For too long a time, John ate nothing but meat.)
(41)	V2 — Ambiguous between raising and control
John-ga ringo-dake-o tabe-hazime-ta
John-NOM apple-only-ACC eat-start-PAST
'John started to eat only apples?
a.	only > start (It was only apples that John started to eat.)
b.	start > only (It was eat only apples that John started to do.)
Representative verbs that can be used as V2 in stative and nonstative com-
pounds are shown in (42), and the relationship between the type of V2 and the
scope of the accusative object is summarized in (43).
NOMINATIVE OBJECT IS/
(42)	V2 in stative and nonstative compounds
a.	Control verb with accusative feature
-wasure 'forget\ -oe 'finish', -age 'complete', -naos 're-do'
-sokonaw 'fail', etc.
b.	Control verb without accusative feature
-nare 'get used to', -tuke 'be accustomed to', -aki 'get tired of',
-aw 'do to each other', etc.
c.	Raising verb
-sugi 'overdo', -kake 'be about to', -owar 'come to an end', etc.
d.	Ambiguous between raising and control
-hazime 'begin', -tuzuke 'continue', -das 'start', etc.
e.	Stative (— stative control verb or adjective without accusative feature)
-rare 'can', -tai'want'
(43)	Relationship between the type of V2 and the scope of the accusative object
Scope
V2	Object > V2	V2 > Object
Fype 1 verbs	J	*
(—Control w/ acc)
Fype 2 verbs	J	J
(—Control w/o acc,
raising, and raising/control)
Type 3 verbs (— Stative)	*	J
Given the data above, the empirical generalization seems to be as follows (Koizumi
1995,1998): When V2 has an accusative Case feature, it obligatorily takes narrow
scope with respect to the accusative object. When V2 does not have an accusative
Case feature, it may take either wide or narrow scope with respect to the accusative
object if it is a nonstative verb, and it takes wider scope than the accusative object if
it is a stative verb.
6.4.2	Analyses
Two families of analyses have been proposed to account for the generalization
mentioned above: movement approaches (Kageyama 1993; Nishigauchi 1993; Koi-
zumi 1995,1998) and direct merge approaches (Kato 2003; Saito 2000; Hoshi 2001)
2005). Abstracting away from details, according to the movement approaches, the
accusative object is first combined with Vi to form a verb phrase (Vi?). When Vi? is
selected by v as in (44a), the object raises to the specifier of v and has its accusative
Case licensed by v. Given that the object in this configuration is c-commanded by V2,
it is within the scope of V2 (the subject positions are not represented in (44)).
IZ8 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(44)
In contrast, when ViP is selected by V2 rather than v as in (44b), the object moves to
the vP above V2P to have its accusative Case licensed. In this case, the object
asymmetrically c-commands V2 and hence takes scope over V2. Both (44a,b) are
available fbr type 2 verbs in (43) (such as raising verbs), whereas only (44b) is
possible with type 1 verbs (control verbs such as wasure 'fbrget'). Within the
movement camp, there are several competing ideas as to why there is such a se-
lectional difference between the two types of verbs. See Kageyama 1993, Koizumi
1995,1998)and Bobaljik and Wurmbrand 2005, among many others.
The direct merge approaches account for the scope ambiguity observed with
type 2 verbs by positing that the object may be merged either before (as in (45)) or
after (as in (46)) V2 (Kato 2003, Hoshi 2005).
(46)
NOMINATIVE OBJECT 1Z9
Under these approaches, type i verbs may occur in the structures in (46) but not in
(45) for some reason. Because there is no movement of the object in (46), there is
no possibility of reconstructing it below V2, and hence wide scope is guaranteed for
the object of complex verbs with a type 1 V2.
The most crucial difference between the movement approaches and direct
merger approaches is that the former posits an object trace in the embedded VP but
the latter does not. An active debate is going on between the two camps. See Bo-
baljik and Wurmbrand 2005, 2007 for the most recent discussion.
6.5	Theoretical Implications
In this section, I consider two theoretical implications of the discussion in the
previous sections.
6.5.1	Multiple Agree and EPP
It was discussed in section 6.3 that nominative object moves to TP. Koizumi (1994),
adapting the insight of Tada (1992), suggests a Case-theoretic reason for this
obligatory movement. However, given recent minimalist assumptions, in which a
probe can enter into long-distance Agree (including case licensing) with a target in
its c-commanding domain without ever invoking movement of the target, the
nominative Case of the object should be able to be licensed by T through (long
distance) Agree if the object does not move to TP. In fact, nominative objects in
some languages clearly occur in a low position, as exemplified by the Icelandic
sentence in (47).
(47) Barninu viriSst [t hafa	batnad	veikin].
child-DAT seems to-have recovered-from disease-NOM
"The child seems to have recovered from the disease/ (Andrews 1982)
If the nominative Case of the object can be licensed by long-distance Agree, why
is it the case that the object must move to TP? One conceivable reason has to
do with EPP一that is, that the object movement is driven by the EPP feature of
T. It has been argued that Japanese T has an EPP feature, and something must
occupy Spec,TP (see, e.g., Miyagawa 2001).It is therefore tempting to say that
the nominative object moves because of the EPP of T. There is, however, a po-
tential problem with this idea. The EPP is satisfied by movement of the subject
to Spec,TP. If so, there is no reason for the nominative object to move there as
well.
This apparent paradox can be resolved if we adopt Hiraiwa's (2001)idea of
Multiple Agree/Multiple Move, given in (48).
160 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(48) Hiraiwa's (2001)Multiple Agree/Multiple Move
MULTIPLE AGREE (multiple feature checking) with a single probe is a
single simultaneous syntactic operation; AGREE applies to all the matched
goals at the same derivational point derivationally simultaneously. MUL-
TIPLE MOVE (movement of multiple goals into multiple specifiers of the
same probe H) is also a single simultaneous syntactic operation that applies
to all the AGREEd goals.10
It has often been suggested that Japanese T can participate in Case-checking op-
erations more than once (e.g., Ura 2000). According to Hiraiwa, however, it is
not the case. What appears to be a series of Case-checking operations in fact is a
single operation involving multiple NPs. T in Japanese enters into Agree/Move
relation with more than one nominative NP simultaneously when there are such
NPs in its c-command domain. Thus, in the nominative object construction, both
the nominative subject and nominative object simultaneously enter into Multiple
Agree/Multiple Move relation with T and move to the multiple specifiers of T to
satisfy the EPP feature. This is schematically shown in (49).
(49)
Multiple Agree
i	r	1
[tp [Subj-NOM Obj-NOM ] T ]
Ml	丨
Multiple Move
If T enters into Agree/Move relation with the nominative subject alone first, its(|)-
and EPP features are all deleted, and hence it cannot participate in any further
operation as a probe. Then the object remains with its Case feature unlicensed,
leading to ungrammaticality.
What happens when the subject bears the dative postposition -ni (rather than a
structural nominative Case), as shown in (50)?
(50)	______Agree
厂	～I
[tp [[Pp Subj-DAT] Obj-NOM ] T
t________I
Move
In this case, T's EPP feature is satisfied by the movement of the subject, but its
uninterpretative (^-features remain yet to be deleted because they cannot be deleted
by a PP. Thus, T can still enter into Agree relation with the nominative object.
Because the EPP feature of T is already satisfied by the subject, the nominative
object in this case need not move to TP. Then, we would expect the nominative
object to take narrow scope with respect to the matrix verb when the subject is in
dative.11 This expectation seems to be borne out. Consider (51).12
NOMINATIVE OBJECT 161
(51)	Kiyomi-ni(-wa) migime-dake-ga tumur-e-na-i (koto).
Kiyomi- d at (-top) right.eye-only-NOM close-can-NEG-PRES (fact)
Lit. 'Kiyomi cannot close only the right eye.'
Primary reading: [not > can > only]: 4Kiyomi cannot wink his right eye.'
This is in sharp contrast to the nominative object constructions with a nominative
subject, in which, as we have observed, the nominative object takes widest scope.13
6.5.2	Nominative Object in Child Languages
As discussed in section 6.3.4, the object pronoun in (36b), repeated here as (52),
usually cannot be coreferential with the subject in adult English. It has been ob-
served, however, that children more readily accept such coreferential reading.
More precisely, children's performance on sentences such as (52) is at chance level
(Chien and Wexler 1990).
(52)	Zelda saw her.
To decide if coreference is permitted in sentences such as (52), according to Reinhart
(1983), one must evaluate two representations, (52) and a similar structure with a
bound variable, and determine if the two are not equivalent in the given context.
Grodzinsky and Reinhart (1993) argue that the computation required here exceeds the
processing ability of children, so that children give up and make a guess, yielding the
observed 50 percent error rate (i.e., chance-level performance). If this line of analysis is
on the right track, and if the suggestion that the object narrow scope reading in the
nominative object construction in Japanese is difficult to obtain for the same reason
that the coreferential reading is difficult to obtain in sentences such as (52), we would
then expect that Japanese learning children may go through stages in which they will
accept the narrow scope reading for the nominative object more readily than adults.
Future research should clarify whether this expectation is borne out.
6.6	Conclusion
In this chapter, we have first observed in section 6.2 that the nominative object is a
grammatical object rather than some kind of subject; that the nominative object
occurs with stative predicates, which lack the ability to license nominative Case;
and that the nominative object tends to have wide scope with respect to sentential
negation and V2. In section 6.3, I have reviewed several attempts to account for
these facts and reached the conclusion that the nominative Case of the nominative
object is uniformly licensed by T rather than by a set of heterogeneous categories.
Then in section 6.4, I have briefly considered how accusative Case is licensed.
Finally, in section 6.5,1 have suggested that the nominative object, along with the
nominative subject, moves to TP to satisfy the EPP requirement of T.
162 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
NOTES FOR CHAPTER 6
1.	Matrix stative sentences, including the nominative object construction, sound most
natural when the subject is topicalized and marked with the topic marker wa. The ma-
trix subject of a stative sentence tends to be interpreted as focused if it is in the nominative
case.
2.	Example (10b) with the formal noun koto is grammatical under the interpretation
that Mary is fond of John, in which case the nominative object is scrambled across the
subject.
z. Additional evidence for this conclusion can be found in Takezawa 1987. For dif-
fering views, see Tonoike 1975/1976, Saito 1982, and Shibatani 1999, among others.
4.	Adjectives here include keiyoshi (z-adjectives) and keiyodoshi (rza-adjectives) in
the terms of the traditional Japanese grammar. Some of the predicates that occur in the
nominative object construction cannot take a dative subject, (e.g., hosi(-i) 'want', suki(-da)
'like').
5.	The accusative object can take wide scope if it is stressed, which presumably is due
to movement induced by the stress.
6.	Example (22b) with the genitive case marker is acceptable if it is interpreted as "the
day when the sky falls,' which is irrelevant in the context of our discussion.
7.	Predicates of this type are rare and hence not listed in (16).
8.	See Koizumi 1994 for further problems with the second analysis.
9.	All examples in section 6.4.1 are taken from Koizumi 1995 unless otherwise noted.
10.	This is similar to what is proposed in Miyagawa 2001 for nominative objects as well
but for an opposite reason. Miyagawa argues that it is possible to have multiple instances of
"agreement" in languages such as Japanese that do not have formal(H-feature agreement
(of Indo-European language type). This correctly differentiates Japanese, in which nom-
inative object moves to TP, from Icelandic, in which nominative object stays in a lower
position (see note 13).
11.See a similar point in Miyagawa 2001.
12.	The object can take scope over the negation if it is stressed (Ura 1999).
13.	As we have seen in (47), the subject of the nominative object construction in lan-
guages such as Icelandic is marked with a nonstructural case, such as an inherent case or a
postposition, much like the Japanese example in (51). It cannot bear structural nominative
Case unlike in Japanese. The nominative object remains in a low position. These languages
differ from Japanese in that their T cannot enter into Multiple Agree/Multiple Move.
REFERENCES
Andrews, Avery.1982. The representation of Case in Modern Icelandic. In The mental
representation of grammatical relations, ed. Joan Bresnan, 427-503. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Bobaljik, Jonathan David, and Susi Wurmbrand. 2005. The domain of agreement. Natural
Language & Linguistic Theory 23:809-865.
Bobaljik, Jonathan David, and Susi Wurmbrand. 2007. Complex predicates, aspect, and
anti-reconstruction. Journal of East Asian Linguistics 16:27-42.
NOMINATIVE OBJECT l6Z
Chien, Y.-C., and Ken Wexler.199〇. Children's knowledge of locality conditions in binding
as evidence for the modularity of syntax and pragmatics. Language Acquisition 1:225-
295.
Dowty, David.198〇. Comments on the paper by Bach and Partee. In Papers from the
Parasession on Pronouns and Anaphora, ed. Jody Kreinman and Almerindo Ojeda, 29-
4〇. Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society.
Grimshaw, Jane, and Sara Thomas Rosen.199〇. Knowledge and obedience: The devel-
opmental status of the binding theory. Linguistic Inquiry 21:187-222.
Grodzinsky, Yosef, and Tanya Reinhart.1993. The innateness of binding and the devel-
opment of coreference: A reply to Grimshaw and Rosen. Linguistic Inquiry 24:69-103.
Harada, S.-1.1973. Counter equi NP deletion. Annual Bulletin 7:113-147. Research Institute
of Logopedics and Phoniatrics, Tokyo University.
Harada, S.-I.1976. Honorifics. In Japanese generative grammar (Syntax and Semantics 5),
ed. Masayoshi Shibatani, 499-561. San Diego, Calif: Academic Press.
Hiraiwa, Ken. 2001.Multiple Agree and the Defective Intervention Constraint in Japanese.
In MITWPL 40, ed. Ora Matushansky, Albert Costa, Javier Martin-Gonzalez, Lance
Nathan, and Adam Szczgielniak, 67-8〇. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working Papers in
Linguistics.
Hoshi, Hiroto. 2001 Relations between thematic structure and syntax: A study on the
nature of predicates in Japanese. In SOASWPL 11,ed. Hyun-Joo Lee and Sam Hell-
muth, 203-247. London: SOAS, University of London.
Hoshi, Hiroto. 2005. Functional categories and configurationality. Ms., Akita University,
Akita, Japan.
Inoue, Kazuko.1976. Henkei-bunpoo-to nihongo [Transformational grammar and Japa-
nese] .Tokyo: Taishukan.
Kageyama, Taro.1993. Bunpoo to gokeisei [Grammar and word formation]. Tokyo: Hituzi
Syobo.
Kageyama, Taro.1999. Word formation. In The handbook of Japanese linguistics, ed.
Natsuko Tsujimura, 297-325. Oxford: Blackwell.
Kato, Sachiko. 2003. Derivational theta-marking: A minimalist approach to the complex
predicate constructions in Japanese. Gengo Kenkyu 124:37-96.
Kishimoto, Hideki. 2001.Binding of indefinite pronouns and clause structure in Japanese.
Linguistic Inquiry 32:597-633.
Kishimoto, Hideki. 2004. Transitivity of ergative-marking predicates in Japanese. Studies in
Language 28(1):105-136.
Koizumi, Masatoshi.1994. Nominative objects: The role of TP in Japanese. In MITWPL 24,
ed. Masatoshi Koizumi and Hiroyuki Ura, 211-23〇. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working
Papers in Linguistics.
Koizumi, Masatoshi.1995. Phrase structure in minimalist syntax. Doctoral dissertation,
MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Koizumi, Masatoshi.1998. Invisible Agr in Japanese. The Linguistic Review 15:1-39.
Kuno, Susumu.1973. The structure of the Japanese language. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Kuroda, S.-Y.1965. Generative grammatical studies in the Japanese language. Doctoral
dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Kuroda, S.-Y.1978. Case marking, canonical sentence patterns, and counter Equi in Jap-
anese. In Problems in Japanese syntax and semantics, ed. John Hinds and Irwin Ho-
ward, 30-51. Tokyo: Kaitakusha.
Kuroda, S.-Y.1983. What can Japanese say about government and binding? In Proceedings
of the Western Conference on Formal Linguistics 2, ed. Michael Barlow, Daniel P.
164 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Flickinger, and Michael T. Wescoat, 153-164. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Linguistics
Association.
Miyagawa, Shigeru.1989. Structure and Case-marking in Japanese. San Diego, Calif.:
Academic Press.
Miyagawa, Shigeru. 2001.EPP, scrambling, and w/i-in-situ. In Ken Hale: A life in language^
ed. Michael Kenstowicz, 293-338. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Nevins, Andrew, and Pranav Anand. 2003. Some AGREEment matters. In Proceedings of
WCCFL 22, ed. Gina Garding and Mimu Tsujimura, 370-381. Somerville, Mass.:
Cascadilla Press.
Nishigauchi, Taisuke.1993. Long distance passives. In Japanese syntax in Comparative
Grammar, ed. Nobuko Hasegawa, 74-114. Tokyo: Kurosio.
Nomura, Masashi. 2005a. Nominative Case and AGREE(ment). Doctoral dissertation,
University of Connecticut, Storrs.
Nomura, Masashi. 2005b. Remarks on the scope of nominative objects in Japanese. Paper
presented at TCP 2005, Tokyo.
Reinhart, Tanya.1983. Anaphora and semantic interpretation. London: Croom Helm.
Saito, Mamoru.1982. Case marking in Japanese: A preliminary study. Ms., MIT, Cam-
bridge, Mass.
Saito, Mamoru. 200〇• Predicate raising and theta relations. Ms., Nanzan University, Na-
goya, Japan.
Sano, Masaki.1985. LF movement in Japanese. Descriptive and Applied Linguistics 18:245-
259.
Shibatani, Masayoshi.1973. Semantics of Japanese causativization. Foundations of Language
9327-373.
Shibatani, Masayoshi.1977. Grammatical relations and surface case. Language 53:789-809.
Shibatani, Masayoshi.1978. Mikami Akira and the notion of "subject" in Japanese
grammar. In Problems in Japanese syntax and semantics, ed. John Hinds and Irwin
Howard, 52-67. Tokyo: Kaitakusha.
Shibatani, Masayoshi.1999. Dative subject constructions 22 years later. Studies in the
Linguistic Sciences 29(2):45-76.
Tada, Hiroaki.1992. Nominative objects in Japanese. Journal of Japanese Linguistics 14:91-
108.
Takano, Yuji. 2003. Nominative objects in Japanese complex predicate constructions: A
prolepsis analysis. Natural Language & Linguistic Theory 21:779-834.
Takezawa, Koichi.1987. A configurational approach to Case-marking in Japanese. Doctoral
dissertation, University of Washington, Seattle.
Tonoike, Shigeo. 1975/1976. The case ordering hypothesis. Papers in Japanese Linguistics
4:191-208.
Tsunoda, Tasaku.1991.Sekai-no gengo-to nihongo [Languages of the world and Japanese
language]. Tokyo: Kurosio.
Ura, Hiroyuki.1999. Checking theory and dative subject constructions in Japanese and
Korean. Journal of East Asian Linguistics 8:223-254.
Ura, Hiroyuki. 200〇. Checking theory and grammatical functions in Universal Grammar.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Vendler, Zeno.1967. Linguistics in philosophy. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
Wexler, Ken, and Rosalind Thornton.1999. Principle B, VP ellipsis, and interpretation in
child grammar. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Yatsushiro, Kazuko.1999. Case licensing and VP structure. Doctoral dissertation, Uni-
versity of Connecticut, Storrs.
CHAPTER 7
JAPANESE ACCENT
HARUO KUBOZONO
7.1	Introduction
Anyone who studies the word accent of Tokyo Japanese will be amazed at the
complexity of its system. It appears complex in two ways. First, the system contains
a large number of accent rules, including the loanword accent rule, a set of com-
pound accent rules, and the accent rule for verbs and adjectives (Akinaga 1985,
2001).Second, the system is believed to involve a depth of accent specification in the
lexicon. This latter point can be exemplified by the data in (1)(McCawley 1968). In
(1)and throughout this chapter, words without an accent mark are unaccented, or
words pronounced with a rather flat pitch even when they are followed by a particle
like the nominative particle ga. This representation should not be taken as sug-
gesting, however, that lack of an accent represents the unmarked or default accent
pattern of the language.
(1)Lexical specification
a.	Initial accent, initial-accenting: neko 'cat', basu "bus'
e.g., perusya-neko 'Persian cat', koosoku-basu 'highway bus'
b.	Final accent, preaccenting: yuki 'snow', uma 'horse'
e.g., niwaka-yuki 'sudden snow', abare-uma 'unruly horse'
c.	No accent (unaccented), preaccenting: musi 'bug', tora 'tiger'
e.g., kabuto-musi 'beetle', hitokiii-dora 'man-eating tiger'1
d.	Final accent, deaccenting: yama 'mountain', sima 'island'
e.g., asama-yama 'Mount Asama', takara-zima 'Treasure Island'
166 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Two types of accent specification are given in (i). First, it is supposed that
every lexical item is specified in the lexicon with respect to its own accent pattern.
The words in (la), for example, are listed as initially accented, whereas those in (ib)
are represented as finally accented in the lexicon. Moreover, each monomoraic or
bimoraic lexical item is believed to be specified in the lexicon as to its accent
behavior in compound nouns of which they form the second member. The items
in (la), for example, are specified as initial-accenting morphemes because they
attract a compound accent on their initial syllable in compound nouns. The items
in (ib), on the other hand, are specified as preaccenting morphemes; they attract a
compound accent on the syllable immediately before them. The morphemes in
(id) are registered as finally accented just like those in (ib), but they are also
registered as deaccenting morphemes because they yield unaccented compound
nouns (McCawley 1968).
Seen from the viewpoint of language acquisition, the analysis in (1)implies
that children acquiring Tokyo Japanese must learn all of this lexical information to
correctly produce the lexical and compound accent patterns for each morpheme.
This would be a tough job to achieve because there are ten thousand or more
morphemes in the language, including more than one thousand monomoraic or
bimoraic ones. However, psycholinguistic work on phonological development
reports very few accent errors, if any, although a number of segmental errors are
reported (see, e.g., Ito 1990). This raises a fundamental question about the accent
system of Tokyo Japanese: is the accent system really so complex as is generally
believed in the literature?
This chapter answers this question negatively through a review of the recent
studies of Japanese accent. Regarding lexical specification, I argue that word accent
is only sparsely specified in the lexicon一that is, only certain classes of words in the
whole vocabulary are lexically specified with their accent patterns, whereas the
majority of words are literally unmarked in the lexicon. As for the number of
accent rules, I claim that what have been characterized as major accent rules in
Tokyo Japanese一such as the loanword accent rule, compound accent rules, and
the accent rule for verbs and adjectives—an be generalized.
This new line of work on Japanese accent has significant implications for
general phonological theories. In loanword phonology, for example, a heated
debate has been going on regarding the very nature of the phonological patterns
exhibited by loanwords: where do loanword patterns come from? For previous
analyses, see Silverman 1992, Paradis and LaCharite 1997, Dupoux et al.1999,
Kenstowicz and Sohn 2001,and Kenstowicz and Uffrnann 2006.
Japanese accent provides a very interesting case for this central question of
loanword phonology because loanwords in this language appear to show radi-
cally different accent patterns from native words. This can be seen from the
data in table 7.1, which shows the frequency of each of the two major accent
patterns一accented and unaccented一for the three word types: native, Sino-
Japanese (SJ), and foreign (loanwords) in trimoraic nouns (Kubozono 2006).2
JAPANESE ACCENT 16/
Table 7.1 Word type and accent pattern in three-mora nouns			
	Accent pattern		
	Accented	Unaccented	
Word type	[pitch fall]	[-pitch fall]	Examples
Native(2,220 words)	29%	71%	inoti 'life', sakana 'fish'
Sino-Japanese	49%	51%	tenki 'weather', kiten "tact, wit'
(4,939 words)			
Loan(7/8 words)	93%	7%	purasu "plus', piano 'piano'
As mentioned earlier, accented words involve a sudden pitch drop at the
phonetic output, whereas unaccented words are pronounced without such a
pitch fall.
Table 7.1 reveals that a vast majority of native words are unaccented, whereas
most loanwords are accented. In other words, the accent type that native words
prefer is not favored by loanwords and vice versa. Sino-Japanese words, or old
loanwords from Chinese, exhibit an intermediate pattern whereby they favor the
accented and unaccented patterns equally well.
Where the prosodic pattern of loanword comes from has been a mystery in the
study of Japanese phonology (e.g., Sibata 1994). This chapter shows that the
prosodic pattern in question comes from native phonology—in particular, loan-
words follow the accent rule for accented native nouns.
This chapter consists of six sections. Section 7.2 considers the accent rule of
morphologically simplex nouns to argue for the following three points: (a) what has
been proposed as the loanword accent rule is nothing but the native accent rule for
accented nouns in this language (Haraguchi 1991,Kubozono 2006); (b) this rule
crucially resembles the famous Latin-type accent rule (Kubozono 1996,1999); and
(c) native nouns do not constitute a multiple-pattern system, as is generally be-
lieved, but rather a two-pattern accent system with a certain number of lexical items
that exhibit idiosyncratic accent patterns (Haraguchi 1991).In terms of accent
specification, this last point implies that word accent is only sparsely specified in the
lexicon. Section 7.3 proposes a further generalization of Japanese accent by showing
that what appears to be complicated accent behavior of compound nouns can be
attributed to a general rule that permits a certain class of lexical exceptions. Here,
too, the idea of exhaustive lexical specification of accent is argued against, in favor
of a sparse accent specification in the lexicon. Section 7.4 demonstrates that the
generalized rule of compound accent can be further generalized with the accent rule
of morphologically simplex nouns discussed in section 7.2 as well as with the accent
rule of verbs and adjectives. I then discuss Japanese accent in view of loanword
phonology in section 7.5, where I also consider implications of Japanese accent for
the central issue of loanword phonology. Section 7.6 presents a summary of main
points.
168 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
7.2	Antepenultimate Rule
7.2.1	Native Nouns and Loanwords
A standard view of noun accent in Tokyo Japanese characterizes its system as a
multiple-pattern system一that is, a system that permits multiple accent patterns
(Uwano 1999, 2007). More specifically, Tokyo Japanese permits n+i accent pat-
terns for nouns of n syllables, where n represents an integer starting from one
(McCawley 1968, Poser 1984, Shibatani 1990). Thus, three-syllable nouns exhibit
the four accent patterns shown in (2): initial accent, medial accent, final accent,
and no accent (unaccented). Longer nouns are thought to permit a larger number
of accent patterns.
(2)	Four accent patterns for three-mora nouns in Tokyo Japanese
a.	Initial accent: i.no.ti "life
b.	Medial accent: ko.ko.ro 'heart'
c.	Final accent: o.to.ko 'man'
d.	No accent (unaccented): sa.ka.na 'fish'
This multiple-pattern system contrasts with the two-pattern system of verbs
and adjectives. In Tokyo Japanese, verbs and adjectives exhibit only two accent
patterns一accented versus unaccented一with the accented pattern almost always
bearing an accent on the penultimate mora.
(3)	Verbs and adjectives in Tokyo Japanese
a.	Penultimate accent: hasiru 'to run', siraberu 'to examine', atui'hot', umai
'tasty', utukusii 'beautiful'
b.	No accent (unaccented): ageru 'to raise', atui 'thick', amai'sweet'
The accent system in (3) is quite similar to the accent system of Kagoshima
Japanese, a regional dialect spoken in the south of Japan. This dialect permits only
two accent patterns一accented versus unaccented一for every type of word re-
gardless of its length. As shown in (4), the accented pattern always involves an
accent on the penultimate syllable. In phonetic terms, the accented pattern has a
high tone on the penultimate syllable, whereas the unaccented pattern shows a
default high tone on the final syllable (Shibatani 1990; Kubozono 2007).3
(4)	Kagoshima Japanese
a.	Penultimate accent: sakana 'fish', akaka 'red', ageru 'to raise'
b.	No accent (unaccented): inoti 'life', aoka 'blue', hasiru 'to run'
Although slightly different in phonetic details, the two-pattern accent system of
verbs and adjectives in Tokyo Japanese illustrated in (3) is strikingly similar to this
accent system of Kagoshima Japanese, yet it differs from the multiple-pattern system
of nouns in the same dialect, given in (2). Still, the three accent systems are thought
to have one thing in common: the relationship between lexical items and their accent
JAPANESE ACCENT 169
patterns is arbitrary, so it is not possible to tell which accent pattern is taken by a
given word. In (2), for example, it is not possible to explain, at least in the synchronic
grammar ofTokyo Japanese, why /i.no.ti/ <life> is initially accented, /ko.ko.ro/ 'heart'
is medially accented, and /sa.ka.na/ 'fish' is unaccented. The assignment of a par-
ticular accent pattern to a particular lexical item thus seems arbitrary.
It must be noted, however, that this does not entail that the accent patterns
must be learned word by word or specified for each and every item in the lexicon.
Consider, for example, a hypothetical situation where the accent pattern in (zb) is
quite uncommon一in other words, relatively few words take this accent pattern. It
would then follow that this accent pattern is lexically marked, whereas the other
pattern, in (za), is unmarked or rule governed. In terms of language acquisition,
children would only have to memorize the words that take the exceptional accent
pattern, while mastering an accent rule that assigns the penultimate accent to the
majority of words. In the case of noun accent in Tokyo Japanese, there are at least a
few pieces of evidence to support this idea of accent underspecification in pref1
erence to the standard view that an accent pattern is specified for every item in the
lexicon.
The first fact to consider is that the n+ilaw does not hold in nouns with five or
more morae/syllables. According to the standard view mentioned earlier, five-
syllable nouns should exhibit six accent patterns, and six-syllable nouns seven
patterns. This prediction cannot be empirically borne out. On the contrary, it is
generally the case that fewer accent patterns emerge in longer words. Particularly,
initial accent and final accent become very rare in long nouns: thus, very few six-
mora nouns, if any at all, are accented on their initial or final syllable. It may be
argued that relatively long nouns tend to show more or less uniform accent patterns
because many of them are compound nouns whose accentuation is determined by
the compound accent rule. This observation is partially correct, but it does not
apply to loanwords in general, which are morphologically simplex and can be long
but nevertheless display a strong bias as to their accentual preference. Loanwords
are generally known to follow the famous antepenultimate rule in (5) regardless of
their phonological length (McCawley 1968).
(5)	Loanword accent rule
Put an accent on the syllable containing the antepenultimate mora.
This rule, as exemplified in (6), is responsible for the accent of loanwords in
general. In particular, loanwords generally disfavor final accent regardless of their
length, and, moreover, relatively long loanwords disfavor initial accent as well.
(6)	ba.su 'bus'	a.zi.a 'Asia'
yoo.rop.pa 'Europe' san.do.it.ti 'sandwich'
ku.ri.su.ma.su 'Christmas' ma.sa.tyuu.set.tu 'Massachusetts'
wa.sin.ton 'Washington' ba.do.mm.ton 'badminton'
Thus, it remains unclear why loanwords fail to obey the n+i law and become
subject to a certain accent rule. This has a close bearing on the long-standing
I/O THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
question in the loanword phonology of Japanese一namely, where does the ante-
penultimate accent rule of loanwords come from?
This question can be answered at least in part by considering a second fact that
the standard view of Tokyo Japanese accent has overlooked. Statistically, the an-
tepenultimate accent pattern is the most productive pattern among accented native
nouns. Recall from table 7.1 that native nouns favor the unaccented pattern,
whereas loanwords show a marked bias toward the accented pattern. However, this
difference disappears if we restrict the analysis to accented nouns. A comparison
between trimoraic accented loanwords and their native counterparts is summa-
rized in table 7.2 (Kubozono 2006).
Table 7.2 shows that most trimoraic loanword and SJ nouns take an accent on
their antepenultimate mora, if they are accented. This is in full agreement with
what the accent rule in (5) predicts. Interestingly enough, the same accent pattern
is chosen by a majority of (accented) native nouns as well. This similarity between
native and loanword nouns is suggestive of two things. First, the antepenultimate
accent pattern in loanwords does not arise out of the blue, nor does it simply
correspond to accent patterns "in marginal sectors of the native Japanese vocab-
ulary, such as proper names and prosodically derived words" (Shinohara 2000:91).
Rather, it is the most productive accent pattern of accented native words. In other
words, the accent rule in (5) is nothing but a native accent rule that comes from the
native phonology of the language. This shows how heavily loanword phonology is
constrained by the native phonology of the recipient language.
Second, and seen conversely, the similarity between native and loanword nouns
implies that the antepenultimate accent pattern in native nouns is also rule gov-
erned. It is certainly true that the native vocabulary permits the other accented
patterns一penultimate or final accent一to a considerable extent, but these sub-
dominant accent patterns can be regarded as lexical exceptions to the antepenul-
timate rule in (5)： In other words, native nouns and loanwords primarily differ in
the extent to which they admit lexical exceptions.
Table 7.2 considers the accentuation of three-mora nouns for two reasons:
there are not many bimoraic loanwords in the language, and, moreover, most
four-mora or longer native nouns are morphologically complex, at least etymolog-
ically. However, native nouns display basically the same accent patterns and pref-
erence as loanwords regardless of their phonological length. Five-mora or longer
Table 7.2 Word type and accent pattern in accented three-mora nouns
	Initial accent	Medial accent	
Accent pattern	(=antepenultimate)	(=penultimate)	Final accent
Native (634 words)	59%	33%	9%
SJ (2,427 words)	95%	2%	3%
Loan (722 words)	96%	2%	2%
Total (3,783 words)	89%	7%	4%
JAPANESE ACCENT 1/1
native nouns, virtually all of which are compound nouns, exhibit basically the same
accentual tendencies as their loanword counterparts. For one thing, unlike native
nouns with up to four morae, they disfavor the unaccented pattern. Moreover, their
accent location is strikingly similar to the location of accent in loanwords in that
accent tends to go as close as possible to the end of the word while avoiding the final
syllable. This second point is discussed in detail in section 7.4, where it is dem-
onstrated that the loanword accent rule in (5) and the accent rule of compound
nouns are, in fact, one and the same.
In sum, statistical data, including those in table 7.2, indicate that, as far as
accented nouns are concerned, accent location is.largely predictable and rule
governed in Tokyo Japanese一accented nouns, whether native or foreign, follow
the antepenultimate rule in (5). This has two significant implications. Regard-
ing lexical specification of accent, it clearly speaks against the traditional view
that accent pattern is specified for each and every word in the lexicon. Instead,
it supports the idea that the antepenultimate pattern should be attributed to a
rule, whereas the other accented patterns represent lexical exceptions to this rule.
Thus, the three accented patterns in table 7.2 do not have the same status in the
lexicon. Seen from the perspective of language acquisition, children acquiring the
language need to distinguish between accented and unaccented words as a whole,
but they do not have to memorize the accent pattern of every accented noun. All
they have to do is memorize the words showing accented patterns other than the
antepenultimate pattern and apply the rule in (5) to all other words marked as
accented.
This sparse representation of accent in the lexicon is shown in (7), where *
denotes a kind of floating accent that is to be assigned to a certain syllable by rule.
This analysis, which was originally hinted at by Haraguchi (1991)for nouns with
four or more morae, has been shown by Kubozono (2006) to apply to shorter
nouns as well.
(7)	Lexical specification: two-pattern system with lexically marked words
a.	Major distinction
Accented: i.no.ti* (* = floating accent, assigned by rule)
Unaccented: sa.ka.na
b.	Lexically marked patterns: ko.ko.ro, o.to.ko
It may be argued that this accent analysis does not differ radically from the
traditional analysis illustrated in (2). Under the new analysis, people acquiring the
language acquire the antepenultimate accent rule, the distinction as to whether a
given word belongs to the accented or unaccented class, and the small group of
idiosyncratic words that are accented on an idiosyncratic location of the word. This
may look like a sufficiently complex analysis, maybe as complex as the standard
analysis of exhaustive accent specification. However, this criticism is not appro-
priate. The two analyses differ crucially from each other in terms of lexical spec-
ification and language acquisition. This difference shows up very clearly if a new
word enters the vocabulary of the language. The traditional analysis in (2) does not
172 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
make any concrete prediction as to how this new word is to be pronounced. The
underspecification analysis in (7), in contrast, predicts that the new word will be
pronounced with the antepenultimate accent pattern or, otherwise, as an unac-
cented word. This prediction squares perfectly with the well-known fact that most
words borrowed from other languages一Sino-Japanese words and loanwords一as
well as nonsense words follow the antepenultimate accent rule in (5) if they are not
processed as unaccented words (see section 7.5 for an analysis of unaccented
nouns).
A second implication that comes from the new analysis in (7) concerns the
accent system of the language per se. As mentioned before, Tokyo Japanese is
believed to have a multiple-pattern system for nouns and a two-pattern system for
verbs and adjectives. The data presented in this section require us to reconsider this
interpretation. Specifically, they suggest that Tokyo Japanese has a two-pattern
system for nouns just as it does for verbs and adjectives and that nouns differ from
verbs and adjectives only in the extent to which they admit lexical exceptions.
Tokyo Japanese also differs from Kagoshima Japanese in the same way: Tokyo
admits more lexical exceptions than Kagoshima. All of these systems crucially
involve a contrast between two major accent patterns, accented and unaccented,
but permit lexical exceptions to differing degrees. This analysis is further reinforced
by the discussion in section 7.4.2, where it is shown that the antepenultimate accent
rule for nouns一the rule in (5)一can be generalized with the penultimate accent
rule for verbs and adjectives.
7.2.2	Antepenultimate Rule versus Latin Rule
Having seen that the antepenultimate accent rule in (5) is a general accent rule for
accented nouns in Tokyo Japanese, it is worth considering here the argument that
this accent rule has strikingly similar effects as the Latin/English stress rule (Ku-
bozono 1996,1999, 2006; Shinohara 2000). Because the antepenultimate rule in (5)
has been formulated with the mora as the basic unit of description, it has the effect
of accenting either the second or third syllable from the end of the word if re-
interpreted in terms of the syllable. Assuming that syllables fall into two kinds一
heavy (or bimoraic) and light (or monomoraic) (Kubozono 1999)一the ante-
penultimate rule assigns an accent as in the following, where H and L stand for
heavy and light syllables, respectively, and syllables in boldface represent those to
which an accent has been assigned.
(8)	a. ...HHH# b.... HHL# c.... LHH# d.... LHL#
e.	...HLH# f.... HLL# g.... LLH# h.... LLL#
On the other hand, the famous Latin accent rule is formulated as in (9) and
assigns an accent as shown in (10) (Hayes 1995).
(9)	Latin Accent Rule
JAPANESE ACCENT 1/)
Accent the penultimate syllable if it is heavy (bimoraic); otherwise, accent the
antepenultimate syllable.
(10)	a. ... HHH# b.... HHL# c.... LHH# d.... LHL#
e. ... HLH# f.... HLL# g.... LLH# h.... LLL#
A comparison between (8) and (10) reveals a striking similarity between the
antepenultimate rule of Japanese and the Latin accent rule, the latter being a very
general accent rule observed in a variety of languages (Hayes 1995). Indeed, these
two rules make one and the same prediction in six out of the eight phonological
contexts. What is fundamentally shared by the two rules is the assignment of accent
as close to the end of the word as possible, while avoiding the very final syllable. On
the other hand, they assign an accent onto different syllables in (8/ioe) and (8/iog).
In these two environments, the Japanese rule assigns an accent onto the penulti-
mate light syllable, whereas the Latin rule obviously avoids this light syllable to
choose the antepenult instead as the docking site of the accent.
Interestingly enough, an accent change is taking place in exactly these two
environments in Tokyo Japanese (Kubozono 1999). Thus, older generations tend
to prefer the accent patterns in (8e,g), and younger generations favor the Latin-
type accent patterns in (ioe,g). This is exemplified in (11), where the accent pattern
of the first member of each pair is the one preferred by the older generations.
(11)	... LLH# do.ra.gon vs. dd.ra.gon 'dragon', re.ba.non vs. re.ba.non
'Lebanon', a.ma.zon vs. a.ma.zon 'Amazon', e.ne.rii.gii vs.
e.ne.ru.gii'energy'
... HLH# myuu.zi.syan vs. myuu.zi.syan 'musician', han.ga.rii vs. han.ga.rii
'Hungary', en.de.baa vs. en.de.baa 'endeavor'
According to statistical studies that looked at the accentuation of loanwords in
accent dictionaries as well as that of nonsense words (Kubozono 1996, 2002; Ta-
naka 1996), the preantepenultimate patterns as in /do.ra.gon/ and /myuu.zi.syan/
outnumber the antepenultimate patterns of /do.ra.gon/ and /myuu.zi.syan/.5
7.3	Compound Accent Rules
In the preceding section I showed that morphologically simplex nouns follow the
antepenultimate rule whether they are native nouns or loanwords. In this section, I
move on to analyze the accentuation of compound nouns. The accent patterns
shown by compound nouns in Tokyo Japanese have been formulated quite dif-
ferently from those shown by morphologically simplex nouns. A standard view
classifies compound nouns into two major groups, those with a short second
member (N2) and those with a long N2 (McCawley 1968, Akinaga 1985, Poser
1990). "Short" here means monomoraic or bimoraic, whereas "long" means
174 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
trimoraic or longer words. These two groups of compound nouns are supposed to
follow different accent rules, although they both obey the basic principle whereby
their accentuation is determined by the phonological structure of their second (or
final) member.
In this section, I show that these two types of compound nouns need not be
distinguished from each other in accentual terms—that is, the accent patterns
exhibited by the two groups of compound nouns can be generalized into one
accent rule if a certain number of lexically marked items are removed from the
scope of accent computation. In showing this point, I also demonstrate that only a
certain type of monomoraic or bimoraic morpheme is specified in the lexicon with
respect to its accentual behavior in compound nouns. This speaks against the
traditional view that all monomoraic or bimoraic morphemes are lexically marked
as to their compound accent behavior (see section 7.1).
7.3.1	Compound Nouns with a Short Second Member
Compound nouns with a short N2 may be classified into three categories, de-
pending on the accent patterns they take: those with a compound noun accent (CA)
on the initial syllable of their N2, those with a CA on the final syllable of their first
member (N1),and those that are unaccented. Traditionally, these three CA patterns
have been attributed to the morphological property of N2, as briefly mentioned
in section 7.1. Thus, morphemes that yield the first two types of CA patterns
are called initial-accenting and preaccenting morphemes, respectively, whereas
those that produce unaccented compounds are referred to as deaccenting mor-
phemes (McCawley 1968). These three types of morphemes and their CA behavior
are illustrated in (12).
(12)	Compound nouns with a short N2
a.	Initial-accenting morphemes
neko 'cat': perusya-neko 'Persian cat', maneki-neko 'cat with a beck-
oning paw'
basu 'bus': maikuro-basu 'mini-bus', koosoku-basu 'highway bus'
b.	Pre-accenting morphemes
si 'city': hirosima-si 'Hiroshima City', nagasaki-si'Nagasaki City'
ko 'child': tinomi-go 'baby at the breast; infant', minasi-go 'orphaned
child'
inu 'dog': akita-inu 'Akita dog', mayoi-inu 'lost dog'
hime 'princess': kaguya-hime 'Princess Kaguya', sirayuki-hime Snow
White'
musi 'bug': kabuto-musi 'beetle', tentoo-musi 'ladybug'
c.	Deaccenting morphemes
iro 'color': orenzi-iro 'orange color', nezumi-iro 'gray'
too 'party': minsyu-too 'Democratic Party', kyoowa-too 'Republican
Party'
go 'word, language': nihon-go 'the Japanese language', ei-go 'English'
JAPANESE ACCENT 1/Z
This traditional analysis fails to explain the following three facts. First, a sta-
tistical study shows that the three types of morphemes are not equally popular;
rather, the preaccenting morpheme is by far the most common (Kubozono 1997).
Second, there is a certain correlation between the accent pattern of the N2 mor-
phemes and the CA pattern they exhibit. Specifically, deaccenting and initial-
accenting patterns arise only from N2S that are accented on their final and initial
syllables, respectively, although not vice versa (Kubozono 1997). This is shown in
table 7.3, where / / and / mean that the correlation in question is very strong and
relatively strong, respectively.
Finally, there is psycholinguistic evidence that children learning to speak
Tokyo Japanese tend to acquire the deaccenting pattern later than the other two
patterns (Shirose, Kubozono, and Kiritani 1997). All these facts suggest that the
three types of morphemes in (12) do not have an equal status in the phonology of
Japanese or in the mental lexicon of its speakers.
These three facts have led to a new CA analysis that distinguishes lexically
marked patterns from lexically unmarked ones. This analysis assumes that only
deaccenting morphemes are lexically marked一that is, that they are specified in the
lexicon with respect to their accent behavior in compounds (Kubozono 1997). In
terms of language acquisition, children have only to memorize this set of mor-
phemes and their compound accent behavior. However, the other two types of
morphemes一initial-accenting and preaccenting morphemes一are not lexically
marked, but their accent behavior in compounds is accounted for largely by rule on
the basis of their own lexical accent patterns.
More specifically, the compound accent patterns in (12a,b) can be attributed to
the two basic principles in (13a, b), one specifying the condition on the parsability
of the input N2 accent in the output, and the other defining the location of a
default CA (Kubozono 1997).
(13)	Generalization of the preaccenting and initial-accenting patterns
a.	Keep the accent of N2 as compound accent (CA) except when it is on the
very final syllable.
neko 'cat': perusya-neko 'Persian cat'
inu ' dog': akita-inu 'Akita dog'
b.	Otherwise, put a CA on the final syllable of N1.
inu dog': akita-inu 'Akita dog'
musi'bug': kabuto-musi 'beetle'
Table '7.3 Relationship between lexical and compound accent patterns
Accent of compound nouns
N2 accent	(12a)	(12b)	(12C)
Initial(—nonfinal) accent	//	/	一
Final accent	一	//	Z
No accent	——	ノノ	—
1/6 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
The generalization in (13a) is based on two facts: (i) that the CA pattern in (12a)
comes only from N2S that are originally accented on their initia!一or nonfinal一
syllable; and (ii) that if N2 is accented on its final syllable in the lexicon, this lexical
accent is almost never preserved in compound nouns. There are a certain number
of bimoraic morphemes, such as /hime/ in (12b), that are originally accented on
their nonfinal syllable but do not nevertheless preserve their accent in compound
nouns. But this type of morpheme is outnumbered by the /neko/-type morpheme,
which readily retains its nonfinal accent in compounds.
The generalization in (13b), on the other hand, is based on the fact that a CA is
placed on the Ni-final syllable if N2 is lexically accented on its final syllable or is
unaccented. This location of accent can be identified as the default location of CA
in compound nouns with a short N2. It must be noted in this connection that the
deaccenting morphemes in (12c) do not follow this generalization. They do follow
the generalization in (13a) in that their final accent is never preserved in compound
nouns. However, they do not attract a default CA in compound nouns of which
they form the second member. This is where their idiosyncratic nature is mani-
fested. This idiosyncratic pattern contrasts with the one shown by a large number
of morphemes, including /inii/ and /si/ in (12b), which are accented on their final
syllable when pronounced in isolation but attract a default CA in compound
nouns.
In sum, it is reasonable to assume that not all short morphemes are specified in
the lexicon with respect to their accent behavior in compound nouns. Rather, only
two types of morphemes are subject to such lexical specification: the so-called
deaccenting morphemes that follow the generalization in (13a) but not the one
in (13b), and the /hime/-type morpheme that does not keep its nonfinal accent in
compound nouns. All other types of morphemes need not be specified in the lexicon
with respect to their compound accent behavior. In terms of language acquisition,
children have to memorize the idiosyncratic accent behavior of the first two types of
morphemes while acquiring the two generalizations in (13) to produce the com-
pound patterns in (12a,b) correctly.
7.3.2	Compound Nouns with a Long Second Member
As mentioned before, in previous studies of Japanese accent, compound nouns
with a three-mora or longer N2 have been treated separately from those with a
shorter N2. The most traditional analysis of this type of compound nouns was that
of McCawley (1968), who proposed the following generalization.
(14)	a. If N2 is unaccented or accented on the final syllable, then a CA emerges
on the initial syllable of N2.
b. Otherwise, the accent of N2 survives as the CA.
The two subparts of this CA rule are exemplified in (15a,b), respectively.
JAPANESE ACCENT 177
(15)	a. otoko 'man': yuki-otoko 'snow, man; yeti'
amerika 'America': minami-amerika 'South America'
b. nadesiko 'lady': yamato-nadesiko 'Japanese lady'
baree 'volleyball': biiti-baree 'beach volleyball'
Poser (1990) revised this generalization by introducing the notion "bimoraic
foot" in the analysis of Japanese accent:
(16)	a. Mark the final foot of N2 as invisible.
b.	If the visible portion of N2 is unaccented, assign an accent to its initial
syllable.
c.	Otherwise, leave the existing accent in place.
According to Poser's analysis, the final two morae of N2 become invisible to
the CA rule with the result that the accent existent in this invisible portion is never
preserved in compound nouns. In contrast, any accent in the remaining portion is
visible to the CA rule and is retained in compounds, as formulated in (16c).
Compound nouns cannot be unaccented and, hence, attract a CA onto the N2-
initial syllable if the visible portion of N2 contains no accent.
Poser's analysis is superior to his predecessors' in incorporating the notion of
bimoraic foot in the analysis of Japanese accent. However, his analysis is oversim-
plified in that it fails to account for the fact that compound nouns can and often do
preserve an accent on the penultimate mora of N2. Some examples are given in (17).
(17)	derawea 'Delaware': kita-derawea 'north Delaware'
ototoi 'the day before yesterday': saki-ototoi 'three days ago'
Moreover, many words show a fluctuation between two accent patterns, one in
which N2 preserves its accent on its penultimate mora and the other in which this
accent is not respected.
(18)	tamago 'egg': nama-tamago, nama-tamago 'raw egg'
itoko 'cousin': mata-itoko, mata-itoko 'second cousin'
omiitu 'diaper': kami-omutu, kami-omutu '(disposable) paper diaper'
All these examples suggest that an accent on the nonfinal syllable of N2 can be
faithfully preserved in compound nouns. This leads to a new generalization,
summarized in (19).
(19)	Compound nouns with a long N2
a.	Keep the accent of N2 as CA except when it is on the very final syllable.
b.	Otherwise, put a CA on the initial syllable of N2.
Notice that this generalization is very similar to the one proposed for com-
pound nouns with a short N2. In fact, the parsability conditions in (13a) and (19a)
are identical. In both types of compound nouns, the input accent of N2 is pre-
served quite faithfully in the output compounds except when it is on the very final
1/8 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
syllable. How then are the other subparts of the generalizations一(izb) and (19b)—
related to each other?
In (13b), a default CA appears on the final syllable of N1,whereas it emerges on
the initial syllable of N2 in (19b). These are compared in (20) and illustrated in (21)
with unaccented N2S.
(20)	a. If N2 is either monomoraic or bimoraic, a CA falls on the final syllable of
N1.
b. If N2 is three morae long or longer, a CA falls on the initial syllable of N2.
(21)	a. ti.no.mi + ko	— ti.no.mi-go "milk drinking, baby;
breastfeeding baby'
ku.wa.ga.ta + mu.si	—> ku.wa.ga.ta-mu.si 'stag beetle'
tu.ki + ki.zu	-> tu.ki-ki.zu 'to push, bruise; prick or stab'
b. no + ne.zu.mi -> no-ne.zu.mi 1 field, mouse; field mouse'
sin + yo.ko.ha.ma -» sin-yo.ko.ha.ma 'New Yokohama (Station)'
mi.na.mi + a.me.ri.ka — mi.na.mi-a.me.ri.ka 'South America'
At a glance, these appear to be entirely different effects of CA. If one looks at the
location of the default accent from the end of the compound, however, one can see
their identity. The two rules in (20) both avoid placing an accent on the final
syllable (Nonfinality-syllable) and on the final two morae (Nonfinality-fbot) unless
the final mora itself constitutes an independent word in compounds. Moreover,
both rules avoid placing an accent on a syllable too far from the right edge of the
word (Edgemostness). The Nonfinality effect can be seen clearly from the fact that
/no-ne.zu.mi/, /sin-yo.ko.ha.ma/, and /mi.na.mi-a.me.ri.ka/ in (21b) cannot be
accented on the penultimate syllable (i.e., ^/no-ne.zu.mi/, */sin-yo.ko.ha.ma/,
^/mi.na.mi-a.me.ri.ka/), whereas /sin-yo.ko.ha.ma/ and /mi.na.mi-a.me.ri.ka/ can
be accepted as variant accent patterns of /sin-yo.ko.ha.ma/ and /mi.na.mi-
a.me.ri.ka/, respectively.
Similarly, the tendency to put an accent toward the end of the word can be
confirmed by the fact that the rule in (20b) does not apply to compound nouns
with a five-mora or longer unaccented N2, a fact that has been overlooked by most
previous studies. Compounds with this type of N2 generally become unaccented or
otherwise bear a CA on the third or fourth mora from the end of the word
(Kubozono and Mester 1995; Kubozono, Ito, and Mester 1997). This is illustrated in
(22)	, where loanword N2 is used in the absence of an appropriate noncompound
native noun. These exceptional compound patterns, which contrast with the one in
(21b), suggest that assigning an accent on the fifth or six mora from the right edge
of the word is banned or disfavored in Japanese compounds.
(22) minami + kariforunia — mi.na.mi-ka.ri.fo.ru.ni.a, mi.na.mi-ka.ri.fo.ru.ni.a
*mi.na.mi-ka.ri.fo.ru.ni.a 'Southern California'
nyiiu + karedonia -> nyuu-ka.re.do.ni.a, nyuu-ka.re.d6.ni.a
*nyuu-ka.re.do.ni.a 'New Caledonia'
JAPANESE ACCENT 1/9
In any case, the two CA rules in (20) have basic features in common. This
observation prompted Kubozono and Mester (1995) to propose that the two rules
represent the two sides of a single coin and can be unified. By using "bimoraic
foot” as a key notion and assuming that foot formation is bound by morpheme
boundaries, Kubozono (1995) proposed the following descriptive generalization for
the two rules in (20).
(23)	a. Accent the rightmost, nonfinal foot (Nonfinality-foot, Edgemostness).
b. Within the rightmost, nonfinal foot, accent the syllable that is closer to
the word-internal morpheme boundary (Align-CA).6
When combined with the parsability condition in (13a) and (19a), repeated in (24),
(23)	allows us to account for the accent pattern of compound nouns in general,
irrespective of the accentuation and phonological length of N2. Some examples
with an accented N2 are given in (25), where foot structure [ ] is shown only in
relevant places (see Kubozono 1995,1997 for a detailed analysis).
(24)	Keep the accent of N2 as CA except when it is on the very final syllable (Max-
accent).
(25)	ten.zyoo + [ka.wa] -> ten.[zyoo]-ga.wa "ceiling, river; raised bed
river,
a.ka+ [kai]	— [a.ka]-gai "red, shellfish; arch shell,
ma.ne.ki + [ne.ko] — ma.ne.ki-[ne.ko] "inviting, cat; a cat with
a beckoning paw,
ya.ma.to + na.[de.si].ko -> ya.ma.to-na. [de.si].ko "Japan, lady; Japanese
lady,
na.tii + ya.su.mi -> na.tu-[ya.su].mi "summer, holiday; summer
holiday,
In sum, the compound accent patterns exhibited by compounds with a short
N2 and those with a long N2 can be generalized. There are several keys to this
generalization. One of them is to make a distinction between lexically marked and
rule-governed patterns in compound nouns with a short N2. This allows us to
exclude the unaccented pattern in (12c) from the scope of phonological compu-
tation, which is an accent pattern that is never produced by compound nouns with
a three- or four-mora N2. Another key to the new generalization in question is to
define precisely the extent to which the lexical accent of N2 can be preserved in
compound nouns. The two types of compound nouns exhibit a crucial similarity in
that they both tend to preserve an input accent of N2 unless it is on the very final
syllable. Third, the default accent location in the two types of compound nouns can
be identified by computing the CA from the end of the word and by using the
notion of bimoraic foot. The two types of compound nouns both display a strong
tendency to put a CA as close to the end of the word while avoiding the final two
morae.
180 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
7.4	Further Generalization
7.4.1	Compound Accent and Antepenultimate Accent
We have seen in the preceding section that compound nouns一whether with a short
or long N2一tend to maximally preserve the input accent of N2 on the one hand, and
on the other hand, put a default CA toward the end of the word while avoiding the
last two morae. This second part of the CA rule, it must be noticed, looks very similar
to the effect of the antepenultimate rule in (5), which, as pointed out in section 7.2,
accounts for the accent location of accented nouns that are morphologically sim-
plex. Indeed, both rules can be attributed to two factors, one that forces an accent
away from the final syllable and another that prohibits the accent from docking
too far from the right edge of the word. In theoretical terms, these two factors are
equivalent to Nonfinality and Edgemostness, the two constraints that govern the
accentuation of compound nouns in general (see (23a)).
The basic identity between the antepenultimate rule in (5) and the CA rule
leads to the generalization that these two rules essentially represent one and the
same process, which is a conclusion independently reached by Kubozono (2002)
and Shinohara (2002). The only difference between the two rules is that the an-
tepenultimate rule only consists of the default rule in (23a), whereas the CA rule
involves the Align-CA principle in (23b) and the faithfulness principle in (24) in
addition to the default rule in (23a). Note that the two principles in (23b) and (24)
vacuously apply to morphologically simplex nouns. What this means is that all
nouns, both morphologically simplex and complex, are subject to one and the
same set of principles. On the one hand, morphologically complex words are
subject to Align-CA and Max-accent, the two principles that apply to morpho-
logically complex inputs, in addition to the default accent rule. On the other hand,
morphologically simplex nouns are free from compound-related constraints be-
cause they lack internal structure and are hence subject only to the default rule in
(23a). Obviously, this difference arises from the differences in input structure
between simplex and compound nouns and not from any difference in the system
in which their accentuation is computed.
That morphologically simplex accented nouns follow the default rule in (23a)
can be shown in (26), where loanwords are used for illustration.
(26)	su.[to.re].su	stress'
	[sai].daa	'cider'
	yoo.[rop].pa	'Europe'
	ku.ri.[su.ma].su	'Christmas'
	wa. [sin], [ton]	Washington
	an.[daa].[son]	'Anderson'
	pai. [nap], [pu.ru]	pineapple'
	ba.do.[mm].[ton]	'badminton'
JAPANESE ACCENT 181
This leads me to conclude that the antepenultimate accent rule is fundamen-
tally the same as the CA rule responsible for the accentuation of accented four-mora
and longer nouns. This reinforces the argument developed in section 7.2 that the
antepenultimate rule一or the principle behind it一accounts for the default accent
pattern of accented native nouns: it reflects the default accent pattern in the core
part of the accented native vocabulary. Moreover, the antepenultimacy effect is,
after all, an epiphenomenon that results from the interaction between the Non-
finality and Edgemostness effects.
7.4.2	Noun Accent and Verb/Adjective Accent
Finally, let us consider the accent rule for verbs and adjectives, which represents
another major accent rule in Japanese. As mentioned in section 7.2, verbs and
adjectives are either accented or unaccented and, if accented, they are accented on
their penultimate mora. Some examples from (3) are repeated here as (27).
(27)	a. Penultimate accent: hasiru 'to run', siraberu 'to examine', umai 'tasty',
utukusii 'beautiful'
b. No accent (unaccented): ageru 'to raise', amai 'sweet'
Previous studies of Japanese accent pointed out three crucial differences be-
tween noun and verb/adjective accentuation. First, nouns supposedly constitute a
multiple-pattern system, whereas verbs and adjectives form a two-pattern system.
Second, the default accent location of accented nouns is the third mora from the
end of the word, whereas that of accented verbs and adjectives is the second mora
from the end of the word. Third, the majority of native nouns are unaccented, as
illustrated in table 7.1, and the vast majority of (native) verbs and adjectives are
accented (Tanaka and Kubozono 1999). I have already argued against the first
characterization, by pointing out that nouns also have a two-pattern system一
accented versus unaccented一with a certain number of lexical exceptions taking an
idiosyncratic accent pattern. It is puzzling then why accent location differs between
accented nouns and accented verbs and adjectives.
A fact that has a crucial bearing on this question is that the two groups of words
differ in morphological complexity. Nouns can be either morphologically simplex
or complex. Morphologically complex nouns are called compound nouns whose
accentuation, as discussed in the preceding section, crucially resembles that of
morphologically simplex nouns. However, verbs and adjectives are all morpho-
logically complex, given that they consist of a stem (or root) and a suffix (or end-
ing). Verbs fall into consonant-final and vowel-final verbs, but, in either case, they
are morphologically complex with a monomoraic ending.7
(28)	hasir-u, sirabe-ru, uma-i, utukusi-i
Given the morphological complexity of verbs and adjectives, it is easy to ex-
plain why they are accented on their penultimate mora if they are accented at all.
182 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Verbs and adjectives are accented on the second mora from the end of the word
because of the same compound accent rule that assigns an accent on the same
position in compound nouns with a monomoraic second member, such as /minasi-
go/ "orphaned child' and /hirosima-si/ "Hiroshima City' in (12b). Penultimate ac-
cent in verbs and adjectives at a boundary presumably aids in parsing the words
into their two constituents. This analysis also has the advantage of accounting for
the fact, mentioned above, that unlike morphologically simplex nouns, verbs and
adjectives tend to be accented rather than unaccented. Morphologically complex
words, whether they are nouns or verbs and adjectives, are generally accented rather
than unaccented as an effect of the compound accent rule.
In sum, verbs and adjectives, too, are governed by the same accent rule as
accented nouns一namely, by the rule (23a) that assigns an accent to the rightmost,
nonfinal foot. This explains why most verbs and adjectives are accented, although a
majority of morphologically simplex (native) nouns are unaccented.
7.5	Native versus Loanword
Accentuation
Until now I have deferred the question regarding the crucial accentual difference
between native words and loanwords. At the beginning of the chapter, I illustrated
that most loanwords become accented, whereas their native counterparts tend to
be unaccented (see table 7.1). It is clear from the discussion in section 7.2 that the
accent pattern shown by accented loanwords is directly attributable to the accent
rule responsible for accented native nouns. However, it remains unclear why
loanwords do not tend to become unaccented. Kubozono (2006) proposes two
factors to account for this apparent difference between the two groups of words:
one concerns phonological structure, and the other has to do with input-output
relationship.
Table 7.4 Word type and syllable structure in trimoraic words
		Syllable structure		
Word type	LLL	HL	LH	Total
Native	2,084(94%)	112 (5%)	24 (1%)	2,220 (100%)
Sino-Japanese	1,110 (22%)	2,257 (46%)	1,572 (32%)	4,939 (100%)
Loan	296 (38%)	350(45%)	132 (17%)	778 (100%)
N — 7,937 words.
Source: NHK 1998.
JAPANESE ACCENT l8z
Table 7.5 Correlation between syllable structure and accent pattern in fbur-
mora loanwords
Syllable structure	#LLLL#	#HLL#	#LHL#	#LLH#	#HH#	Average
Unaccentedness ratio 54%	45%	24%	19%	7%	29%
N — 963 words.
Source: NHK 1998.
Loanwords are crucially different from native words in containing an abun-
dance of heavy syllables and epenthetic vowels. Compare the words for 'smoke', for
example. The native noun is /ke.mu.ri/, which is an unaccented word consisting of
three light syllables with no epenthetic vowel. In contrast, its loanword counterpart,
/su.moo.ku/, has an accented heavy syllable with the other two syllables containing
an epenthetic vowel. That loanwords differ from native words in syllable compo-
sition is illustrated in table 7.4, where three-mora native nouns are compared with
their loanword counterparts.
It is well known that heavy syllables tend to attract an accent as compared with
light syllables across languages (Prince and Smolensky 1993/2004). This is true in
Japanese, too, where words with a heavy syllable tend to attract an accent. Stated
conversely, words consisting solely of light syllables resist being accented in a
language like Japanese, where unaccented words are tolerated as an independent
accent category. This analysis can be supported by the fact that loanwords tend to
become unaccented if they consist of light syllables. This is particularly so in four-
mora loanwords, which, in fact, display a high degree of variability in the ratio of
the unaccented pattern depending on the syllable structure of the word. As shown
in table 7.5, although the unaccented pattern accounts for only about 30 percent of
all four-mora loanwords, it accounts for 54 percent of four-mora loanwords with
no heavy syllable. The same accent pattern accounts for only 7 percent of those with
only heavy syllables (Kubozono and Fukui, 2006).
Furthermore, the ratio of the unaccented pattern also varies depending on the
presence or absence of an epenthetic vowel, especially in word-final position. Thus,
four-mora loanwords that end in a sequence of light syllables are mostly unac-
cented (90 percent) if their final vowel is underlying, whereas the ratio goes down
to about 30 percent in words ending in an epenthetic vowel. This is shown in table
7.6 and exemplified in (29), where Omeans that the syllable contains an epen-
thetic vowel (Kubozono and Fukui, 2006).
Table 7.6 Epenthetic vowel and the percentage of the unaccented pattern in
LLLL and HLL loanwords
Epenthetic/nonepenthetic	..LL#	..L<L>#	Average
Unaccentedness ratio	90%	32%	50%
N=355 words.
184 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(29)	Examples of unaccented loanwords
s<u>.te.re.o 'stereo'
si.na.ri.o 'scenario'
in.h<u>.re 'inflation'
a.ri.zo.na 'Arizona'
i.ta.ri.a 'Italy'
ho.no.ru.ru 'Honolulu'
a.to.ri.e 'atelier'
ma.ka.ro.ni 'macaroni, a kind of pasta'
u.ku.re.re. 'ukulele'
he.r<u>.ni.a "hernia (Latin)'
According to Sibata (1994), 64 percent of four-mora nonloanwords一that is,
native and SJ nouns combined一take the unaccented pattern. The data in table 7.6
indicate that loanwords can show a higher percentage of the unaccented pattern if
they are given a nativelike phonological structure一that is, a sequence of light
syllables and no epenthetic vowel.rFhis reinforces the argument that loanwords do
not crucially differ from native words in accent structure and preference. What
appears to be an accentual difference between the two types of words一such as the
one in table 7.1一stems largely from their differences in syllable structure and in the
nature of vowels. If these factors are properly controlled, as shown in tables 7.5 and
7.6, then the two types of words display much the same accent structure and
preference.
A second reason for the high percentage of the accented pattern in loanwords is
that loanwords, but not native or SJ words, have correspondents in the source
language. According to Sibata (1994), 84 percent of loanwords used in modern
Japanese come from English, whose words are produced with a sudden pitch drop
when pronounced in isolation. As is well known, almost every Japanese person
receives English instruction at school and, moreover, pitch fall is a distinctive
phonetic feature in the accent system of Tokyo Japanese. Given these facts, it will
come as no surprise if native speakers of Japanese become sensitive to the pitch fall in
the pronunciation of English words. It can be easily understood that this pitch
feature is preserved in Japanese as a lexical accent although accent location is ad-
justed by the native accent rule (Kubozono 2006): for example, Washington -> wa.
[sin].ton, *wasinton, *wasinton (no accent). Unlike loanwords, native and SJ words
do not have such an input prosodic feature to preserve in the output. This explains
why many SJ words are unaccented although they involve many heavy syllables and
epenthetic vowels.
That loanwords inherit a certain prosodic property of their source words is
not a language-specific phenomenon. Kagoshima Japanese, a dialect described in
section 7.2, distinguishes between two accent patterns一one with a pitch fall and
the other without. In this dialect, the two accent patterns compete in nonloan-
words in frequency, but the pattern with a pitch fall is by far the more common in
JAPANESE ACCENT 185
loanwords, accounting for 95 percent of the loanword data (Kibe and Hashimoto
2003This is illustrated in (30), where high-toned syllables are capitalized: words
with a high tone on their final syllable are pronounced without a pitch fall, whereas
those with a high tone on their penultimate syllable involve a pitch fall at the
phonetic output.
(30)	ya.KYUU vs. bee.su.BOO.ru 'baseball'
dan.RO vs. su.TOO.bu 'heater'
koo.kuu.BIN vs. e.a.MEE.ru 'airmail'
hu.ku.SYUU vs. ri.BEN.zi 'revenge'
a.O vs. BU.ruu	'blue'
A.ka vs. RED.do	'red'
si.roo.TO vs. a.ma.TYU.a 'amateur'
Kagoshima Japanese differs from Tokyo Japanese in permitting closed (and hence
heavy) syllables quite freely in the native vocabulary as in the foreign vocabulary
(Kubozono 2006). However, loanwords and native words nevertheless display an
apparent difference in accentual preference in this dialect just as they do in Tokyo
Japanese. This apparent difference can be attributed to the perceptual role in
loanword adaptation, which is entirely absent in the accentuation of native and SJ
words.
7.6	Conclusion and Implications
for Phonological Theory
7.6.1	Conclusion
In this chapter I argue that the accent system of Tokyo Japanese is not as complex
as is generally assumed. It is not so complex for two reasons: one regards the degree
to which words are accentually specified in the lexicon, and the other concerns the
number of accent rules in the system. As for accent specification, I claim that
accent is only sparsely specified in the lexicon. This shows up in two independent
ways. First, the antepenultimate pattern that accounts for the majority of accented
words in Tokyo Japanese in all lexical strata一native, SJ, or foreign一is not lexically
specified but is rule governed. This explains why new words—words borrowed
from other languages as well as newly coined words一exhibit the antepenultimate
pattern among the multiple accent patterns. Therefore, words showing the ante-
penultimate pattern need not be specified in the lexicon with respect to their accent
location. Thus, /inoti/ 'life' and /azarasi/ 'harbor seal' are free from the specification
186 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
of accent location in the lexicon, whereas /kokoro/ 'heart' and /koohii/ 'coffee'
must be lexically specified as to the accent location.
Second, only a portion of monomoraic and bimoraic morphemes are lexically
specified with respect to their accent behavior in compound nouns. Among the
three types of short morphemes, only deaccenting morphemes such as /iro/ and
/too/ and the /hime/-type morphemes must be marked in the lexicon: the for-
mer does not attract a default compound accent, and the latter does not keep a
nonfinal accent when it forms the second member of compound nouns. In con-
trast, the other two general types of morphemes一so-called preaccenting and
initial-accenting morphemes一need not be marked in the lexicon as their accent
behavior in compound nouns can be readily computed by rule on the basis of their
own accent structure.
In sum, I argue for two types of accent underspecification in the lexicon一one
for lexical items themselves and the other for their accent behavior in compounds.
These two types of sparse accent representation share the following basic property
or tendency: the shorter the word becomes, the more likely it is to be lexically
marked.9 For example, a good portion of three- and four-mora nouns do not obey
the antepenultimate rule, whereas longer words show a stronger tendency to follow
the rule. Similarly, a portion of monomoraic and bimoraic morphemes must be
marked in the lexicon as to their accent behavior in compounds, whereas three-
mora and longer morphemes are not subject to such lexical markedness.
A second major claim of this chapter is that major accent rules in Tokyo
Japanese can be unified into a single basic rule. First of all, the accent pattern
shown by accented native nouns can be attributed to the famous antepenultimate
accent rule that has been proposed specifically for loanwords (McCawley 1968). It
is true that native nouns exhibit accent patterns other than the antepenultimate
one, but a reinterpretation of the data in terms of phonological markedness leads
to a different analysis whereby these other accented patterns are lexically marked.
After all, native nouns share with loanwords the same accent rule but differ in the
number of lexical exceptions they permit. This analysis also suggests that nouns in
Tokyo form a two-pattern accent system just as verbs and adjectives do in the same
dialect. Here again, nouns differ from verbs and adjectives in the degree to which
they permit lexical exceptions.
The general accent rule for morphologically simplex nouns can be further gen-
eralized with the set of compound accent rules responsible for the accentuation of
morphologically complex nouns. Although the accent patterns exhibited by com-
pound nouns with a short second member and those with a long second member are
formulated in entirely different ways in the literature, they can be generalized if a
lexically marked pattern一the one yielded by deaccenting morphemes一is excluded
from the scope of accent computation. Moreover, this generalized accent rule for
compound nouns can be unified with the antepenultimate accent rule mentioned
earlier. It follows from this that Tokyo Japanese has one general rule for nouns,
regardless of whether they are morphologically complex or simplex or whether they
JAPANESE ACCENT 18/
are loanwords or native words. Additionally, I propose a further generalization of
this accent rule by showing that it can also be unified with the accent pattern
displayed by accented verbs and adjectives.
What underlies the accentuation of all these various kinds of words in Tokyo
Japanese is the principle that puts an accent as close to the end of the word as
possible while avoiding the very final syllable. To put it another way, the basic rule
of accentuation in this language places an accent on the rightmost, nonfinal foot.
7.6.2	Implications
The new analysis of Japanese accent has certain implications beyond Japanese
phonology. One implication concerns the fact that Japanese pitch accent is strik-
ingly similar to the Latin accent rule, which is also employed in English. English
and Japanese have been characterized as different kinds of accent languages一stress
accent versus pitch accent (Beckman 1986). However, they share fundamental
properties with respect to accent computation, as discussed in section 7.2.2. Spe-
cifically, both languages display a clear tendency to put an accent toward the end of
the word while avoiding the very final syllable. This suggests that pitch accent
languages can be analyzed on the same grounds as stress accent languages as far as
the computation of accent location is concerned.
However, the pitch accent system of Tokyo Japanese exhibits one crucial
difference from the stress accent system of English. That is, Tokyo Japanese has a
number of unaccented words, or words that are pronounced with a rather flat pitch
and, hence, lack a tonal prominence. This difference is reminiscent of and quite
consistent with Hyman's (2005) claim that "a language with stress-accent is one in
which... every word has AT LEAST one syllable marked for the highest degree of
metrical prominence (primary stress)" [emphasis in original].
Another interesting implication of the Japanese data for general linguistic
theory has to do with the central issue in loanword phonology: where do loanword
patterns come from? Tokyo Japanese presents a challenging case for this question
because loanwords and native words favor different accent patterns: most loan-
words are accented as opposed to unaccented, which sharply contrasts with the
dominance of the unaccented pattern in the native vocabulary. We have seen, first
of all, that the loanword accent rule is the very rule that governs accented na-
tive words. This demonstrates that loanword prosody is heavily constrained by
native prosody. On the other hand, the fact that loanwords favor the accented
pattern over the unaccented one can be attributed to several general and inde-
pendent factors, such as (i) differences in phonological structures一syllable
structure and the nature of vowels一between the two types of words, and (ii) the
fact that loanwords but not native words are subject to the influence of source word
prosody. The latter factor speaks for the relevance of a perceptual effect of source
words on adapted forms.
188 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
7.6.3	Future Agenda
Before concluding this chapter, I would like to sum up some remaining problems
for future research. It is interesting, for example, to ask if the general accent rule
proposed here一or the descriptive generalization summarized in (23) and (24)一
can be extended to cover accent rules other than those discussed in this chapter,
particularly the seemingly complex accent patterns exhibited by conjugated verb
forms (Akinaga 2001)and the miscellaneous accent rules discussed in Kubozono
2001.This line of research may show that the general accent rule is indeed more
general than has been claimed in this chapter.
Another interesting question for future research is how to formalize the general
accent rule of Tokyo Japanese in the nonderivational framework of Optimality
Theory. Optimality-theoretic analyses have thus far analyzed different aspects of
Japanese accent: for example, Katayama (1998) and Shinohara (2000) examined
loanword accent, Kubozono (1995,1997) and Shinohara (2002)looked at compound
noun accent, and so forth. It is necessary to incorporate all these studies into one
picture and, by using only those constraints that are independently motivated, to
propose a general and comprehensive constraint-based grammar of Japanese accent.
This task may not be easy, given that Japanese accent appears quite complicated in
some respects: for example, loanwords and native words assign different accent
patterns for words with one and the same phonological (syllable) structure, epen-
thetic vowels often display somewhat ad hoc accent behavior (Kubozono 2001),and
so on. Theoretical research along this line will illuminate both the universal and
language-specific properties of Japanese accent, on the one hand, and the impor-
tance of Japanese accent for the general study of word accent on the other hand.
NOTES FOR CHAPTER 7
An earlier version of this article was presented at the Workshop on Linguistic Theory and
the Japanese Language held at Harvard University in July 2005. I would like to thank
the audience of that meeting, particularly Armin Mester, Junko Ito, Michael Kenstowicz,
and Alan Prince, for various valuable comments. I am also grateful to Donna Erickson
for checking and commenting on this manuscript. All errors that remain are, of course, my
own. This work has been supported by Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (A) and
(B) (Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, grant nos.17202010 and 14310222) and
Grant-in-Aid for Exploratory Research (Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science
and Technology, grant no.15652027).
1.	Voiceless obstruents such as /t/ and Is/ often undergo rendaku, or sequential
voicing, when they stand in the initial position of a noninitial member of compounds.
2.	The data in this table as well as those in table 7.2 come from The NHKPronunciation
and Accent Dictionary (1998).
3.	Unlike Tokyo Japanese and many other Japanese dialects, Kagoshima Japanese is a
syllable-based language in which the syllable is the relevant phonological unit: thus,
phonological distance is measured in terms of the syllable and high tones are assigned to a
JAPANESE ACCENT 189
particular syllable, not to a particular mora. The loanword /wa.sin.ton/ 'Washington', for
example, is pronounced with a high tone on /sin/, which is the second syllable from the end
of the word.
4.	The relatively high popularity of the penultimate accent pattern in native nouns in
table 7.2 is attributable largely to the fact that most of the words showing this accent type
are morphologically complex—that is, compound nouns, whose accentuation can be ex-
plained by the compound accent pattern discussed in section 7.3; for example, /ha.na-ya/
'flower, house; flower shop', /ha.ta-bi/ 'flag, day; holiday'.
5.	Native and SJ nouns do not exhibit the p reant epen ultimate patterns in question,
because those that have the syllable composition in (11) are compound nouns and, hence,
attract a compound noun accent near the compound-internal morpheme boundary; for
example, /gaku#mon/ 'learning'. See the next section for details.
6.	This indicates that compound noun accent in Japanese basically has a boundary-
marking effect. This is a feature that compound accent shares with other phonological
processes observed in compounds such as rendaku (or sequential voicing) and vowel
alternation (Ito and Mester 2003). Boundary marking presumably aids in parsing the
compound into its two constituents.
7.	Verbal and adjectival conjugations and their accent patterns are beyond the scope of
this chapter.
8.	Basque seems to display a similar situation with its loanwords, which show a
stronger tendency to be accented than native words (Jose Hualde, pers. comm.).
9.	Kenstowicz and Sohn (2001)also observe in Kyungsang Korean that accent is
contrastive in shorter nouns but predictable in longer ones.
REFERENCES
Akinaga, Kazue.1985. Kyootuugo no akusento [Accent of Standard Japanese]. In NHK
pronunciation and accent dictionary^ ed. NHK, 70-116. Tokyo: Nippon Hoso Shuppan
Kyokai.
Akinaga, Kazue. 2001.Tookyoo akusento no syuutoku hoosoku [Rules for learning Tokyo
accent]. In Sin meikai nihongo akusento ziteny ed. Haruhiko Kindaichi, 10-106. Tokyo:
Sanseido.
Beckman, Mary.1986. Stress and non-stress accent. Dordrecht: Foris.
Dupoux, E., K. Kakehi, Y. Hirose, C. Pallier, and J. Mehler.1999. Epenthetic vowels in
Japanese: A perceptual illusion? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance 25:1568-1578.
Haraguchi, Shosuke.1991.A theory of stress and accent. Dordrecht: Foris.
Hayes, Bruce.1995. Metrical stress theory: Principles and case studies. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Hyman, Larry M. 2005. Word-prosodic typology. Paper presented at the BeST (Between
Stress and Tone) Conference, Leiden University, the Netherlands, June.
Ito, Junko, and Armin Mester. 2003. Japanese morphophonemics: Markedness and word
structure. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Ito, Katsuhiko.199〇. Kodomo no kotoba [Child language]. Tokyo: Keisoo Shoboo.
Katayama, Motoko.1998. Optimality Theory and Japanese loanword phonology. Doctoral
dissertation, University of California, Santa Cruz.
19〇 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Kenstowicz, Michael, and Hyang-Sook Sohn. 2001. Accentual adaptation in North
Kyungsang Korean. In Ken Hale: A life in language, ed. Michael Kenstowicz, 239-27〇.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Kenstowicz, Michael, and Christian Uffrnann, eds. 2006. Lingua: A special issue on loanword
phonology.
Kibe, Nobuko, and Yumi Hashimoto. 2003. Kagoshimashi hoogen no gairaigono onchoo
[Tone of loanwords in Kagoshima Japanese]. The Journal of the Phonetic Society of
Japan 7(3): 92-10〇.
Kubozono, Haruo.1995. Constraint interaction in Japanese phonology: Evidence from
compound accent. Phonology at Santa Cruz (F*SC) 4:21-38.
Kubozono, Haruo.1996. Syllable and accent in Japanese: Evidence from loanword ac-
centuation. The Bulletin (Phonetic Society of Japan) 211:71-82.
Kubozono, Haruo.1997. Lexical markedness and variation: A non-derivational account.
WCCFL 15:273-287.
Kubozono, Haruo.1999. Mora and syllable. In The handbook of Japanese linguistics, ed.
Natsuko Tsujimura, 31-61. Oxford: Blackwell.
Kubozono, Haruo. 2001.Epenthetic vowels and accent in Japanese: Facts and paradoxes. In
Issues in Japanese phonology and morphology, ed. Jeroen van de Weijer and Tetsuo
Nishihara, 113-142. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Kubozono, Haruo. 2002. Syllable weight and Japanese accent. Paper presented at LP 2004,
Meikai University. (To appear in Proceedings of LP 2002. Prague: Charles University
Press.)
Kubozono, Haruo. 2006. Where does loanword prosody come from? A case study of
Japanese loanword accent. Lingua 116(7):1140-117〇.
Kubozono, Haruo. 2007. Tonal change in language contact: Evidence from Kagoshima
Japanese. In Tones and tunes: Vol.1:Typological studies in word and sentence prosody,
ed. Carlos Gussenhoven and Tomas Riad, 323-351. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Kubozono, Haruo, and Misa Fukui. 2006. Phonological structure and unaccented nouns in
Tokyo and Osaka Japanese. Japanese/Korean Linguistics 14, ed. Fimothy Vance and
Kimberly Jones, 39-5〇. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI Publications and SLI.
Kubozono, Haruo, Junko Ito, and Armin Mester.1997. On'in koozoo kara mita go to ku no
kyookai [The phonological boundary between the word and the phrase]. In Bunpoo to
onsei [Speech and grammar], ed. Spoken Language Research Group, 147-166. Tokyo:
Kurosio.
Kubozono, Haruo, and Armin Mester.1995. Foot and accent: New evidence from Japanese
compound accentuation. Paper presented at the annual LSA meeting, New Orleans,
January.
McCawley, James D.1968. The phonological component of a grammar of Japanese. The
Hague: Mouton.
NHK, ed. 1985/98. NHK pronunciation and accent dictionary. Tokyo: Nippon Hoso
Shuppan Kyokai.
Paradis, Carole, and Darlene LaCharite.1997. Preservation and minimality in loanword
adaptation. Journal of Linguistics 33:379-43〇.
Poser, William.1984. The phonetics and phonology of tone and intonation in Japanese.
Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Poser, William.199〇• Evidence for foot structure in Japanese. Language 66:78-105.
Prince, Alan, and Paul Smolensky.1993. Optimality Theory: Constraint interaction in gen-
erative grammar. Technical Report 2, Rutgers Center for Cognitive Science, Rutgers
University. (Published 2004. Oxford: Blackwell.)
JAPANESE ACCENT 191
Shibatani, Masayoshi.199〇• The languages of Japan. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Shinohara, Shigeko. 200〇• Default accentuation and foot structure in Japanese: Evidence
from Japanese adaptations of French words. Journal of East Asian Linguistics 9:55-96.
Shinohara, Shigeko. 2002. Metrical constraints and word identity in Japanese compound
nouns. MIT Working Papers in Linguistics 42:311-328.
Shirose, Ayako, Haruo Kubozono, and Shigeru Kiritani.1997. The acquisition of com-
pound accent in Japanese. Proceedings of the 16 th International Congress of Linguists
(CD-ROM). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Sibata, Takesi.1994. Gairaigo ni okeru akusento kaku no ichi [On the location of accent in
loanwords]. In Gendaigo hoogen no kenkyuu [Studies on modern dialects], ed. Kiyoji
Sato, 338-418. Tokyo: Meり1 Shoin.
Silverman, Daniel.1992. Multiple scansion in loanword phonology: Evidence from Can-
tonese. Phonology 9:289-328.
Tanaka, Shin'ichi.1996. Nihongo no onsetu koozoo to on'in gensyoo [Syllable structure
and phonological phenomena in Japanese]. Master's thesis, Osaka University of
Foreign Studies, Osaka, Japan.
Tanaka, Shin'ichi, and Haruo Kubozono.1999. Nihongo no hatuon kyoositu [Introduction to
Japanese pronunciation]. Tokyo: Kurosio.
Uwano, Zendo.1999. Classification of Japanese accent systems. In Proceedings of the
symposium uCross-Linguistic Studies on Tonal Phenomena, Tonogenesis, Typology, and
Related Topics," ed. Shigeki Kaji, 151-186. Tokyo: ILCAA.
Uwano, Zendo. 2007. Two-pattern accent systems in three Japanese dialects. In Tones and
tunes: Vol.1:typological studies in word and sentence prosody, ed. Carlos Gussenhoven
and Tomas Riad, 147-165. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
CHAPTER 8
GA/NO CONVERSION
HIDEKI MAKI AND ASAKO UCHIBORI
8.1	Introduction
Japanese has a Case alternation phenomenon called the ga/no (nominative/geni-
tive) conversion (hereafter, GNC). This conversion takes place in embedded
contexts, such as sentential modifiers to nouns, but not in independent clauses.
This phenomenon has led to a variety of approaches, all attempting to deal with the
emergence of genitive Case no on the subject of the sentential modifier. The GNC
was originally discussed by Harada (1971)and subsequently discussed by many
linguists, such as Bedell(1972), Shibatani (1975,1977,1978), Inoue (1976), Nakai
(1980), Saito (1983), Fukui (1986), Miyagawa (1993), Ura (1993), Sakai (1994),
Watanabe (1996), Hiraiwa (2001a), and Ochi (2001),among others. Here we review
two major approaches一Miyagawa (1993) and Ochi (2001)on the one hand, and
Hiraiwa (2001a) on the other一and clarify the potential problems of each ap-
proach. We then suggest a refined approach, which crucially relies on core ideas
from the two approaches. In the refined approach, D licenses genitive Case, as in
the Miyagawa/Ochi-type approach, and movement into Spec,DP is not involved in
genitive Case licensing, as in the Hiraiwa-type approach.
8.2	Description of the Core Data
The core data discussed in this chapter are shown in (1)and (2). Examples of type
(2)	are amply provided in Hiraiwa 2001a.
ga/no conversion 193
(1)	Watasi-wa [[John-ga/no kita] riyuu] -0	sitteiru.
I-1O? John-NOM/GEN came reason-ACC know
‘I know the reason why John came?
(2)	John-wa [ame-ga/no yamu made] ofisu-ni ita.
John-10? rain-NOM/GEN stop until office-at was
"John was at his office until the rain stopped.'
In (1)the DP marked genitive, John-no ‘John-GEN’,appears in the sentential
modifier of a noun. In (2) the genitive DP ame-no ‘rain-GEN’ appears in a clause
that does not directly modify a noun, unlike (1), because made 'until' is not a noun
but a postposition. The examples in (1)and (2) raise central questions for this
construction一namely, where is the genitive DP in the phrase structure, and what
licenses its Case?
8.z Controversies Regarding
Analysis
Two major approaches have been proposed in terms of what licenses genitive Case:
(a) the DP approach by Miyagawa (1993) and Ochi (2001),among others, and (b)
the non-DP approach by Hiraiwa (2001a), among others. Both approaches have
their own strengths and weaknesses. The first approach is consistent with the fact
that a DP is marked genitive whenever it is in a local relation to the outer N/D.1
However, this approach cannot account for (2), in which there appears to be no
nominal head to license genitive Case.
The second approach straightforwardly accounts for the GNC in examples
such as (2). When the GNC is allowed, the predicate always takes its rentai (at-
tributive) form. The rentai form of a predicate is, in most cases, identical to its
syuusi (conclusive) form.
However, in a certain class of adjectives, the morphological distinction be-
tween the rentai and syuusi forms is retained.2 Consider the examples in (3).
(3)	a. Ano hito-wa sizuka-da/*na.
that man-10? quiet-da(conclusive)/*na(attributive)
'That man is quiet.'
b. sizuka-na/*da	hito
quiet-NA(attributive)/*DA(conclusive) man
'a quiet man'
Example (za) is an independent matrix clause. The sentence is grammatical when it
ends with the conclusive form of the adjective, but it is ungrammatical when it
ends with the attributive form of the adjective. However, (3b) contains a relative
194 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
clause that has the same adjective. The sentence is grammatical when the adjective
takes the attributive form, but it is ungrammatical when it takes the conclusive
form? Based on this fact and examples such as (2), Hiraiwa (2001a) claims that in a
sentential modifier, it is the (^-feature of a special type of C that licenses the
genitive DP via Agree in the sense of Chomsky (2000), but not the nominal head,
thus arguing against the DP approach. Under this approach, the rental mor-
phology of the embedded predicate is a manifestation of the agreement relation
among the special C, T, (v), and V. However, a potential problem with this ap-
proach is that it is possible to insert a nominal head to be modified by the sentential
modifier, such as toki 'time', between yamw 'stop', and made 'until' in (2), as shown
in (4).
(4)	John-wa [ame-ga/no	yamu toki made] ofisu-ni ita.
John-Top rain-NOM/GEN stop time until office-at was
'John was at his office until the rain stopped.'
One may then argue that there is an invisible noun corresponding to toki'time',
which would lead us to conclude that examples such as (2) may not provide strong
support for the non-DP approach. Also, this approach does not explain the fact
that a genitive DP appears in simple possessive structures such as [DP's N], where
no predicate in the rentai (attributive) form appears.
After reviewing the two approaches, we present an approach that draws from
both of them. In particular, we suggest that D licenses genitive Case, as in the DP
approach, and that movement into Spec,DP is not involved in genitive Case li-
censing, as in the non-DP approach. We also discuss the transitivity restriction on
the GNC, which prohibits co-occurrence of an accusative DP with the genitive DP
(Harada 1971,Miyagawa 1993, and Watanabe 1996, among others), and show how it
is handled with Miyagawa's (2003) proposal that there are two types of Tense (T) in
Japanese.
8.3.1	The DP Approach
8.Z.1.1 Miyagawa (1993)
Miyagawa (1993) proposes the three hypotheses in (5).
(5)	a. The genitive subject in a prenominal gapless clause raises into Spec,DP.
b.	This movement takes place in LF.
c.	Spec,DP may be A- or A'-position.
The first hypothesis (5a) is motivated by scope interactions between the
nominative/genitive subject and the head noun. The example in (6a), which has a
nominative subject, only has the reading in which the head noun kanoosee
'probability' takes scope over the nominative subject rubii-ka sinzyu 'ruby or
pearl'. We call this reading the "in-situ" reading. The example in (6b), which has a
ga/no conversion 195
genitive subject, allows an additional reading in which the subject takes scope
over the head noun kanoosee 'probability'. We call this reading the "raising"
reading.
(6)	a. [[[Rubii-ka sinzyu]-ga yasuku-naru] kanoosee] -ga	50% izyoo da.
ruby-or pearl-NOM cheap-become probability-NOM 50% over is
i.	'The probability that rubies or pearls become cheap is over 50%.'
ii.	*'The probability that rubies become cheap or the probability that
pearls become cheap is over 50%.'
probability>[ruby or pearl]; *[ruby or pearl]> probability
b. [[[Rubii-ka sinzyu]-no yasuku-naru] kanoosee]-ga	50% izyoo da.
ruby-or pearl-GEN cheap-become probability-NOM 50% over is
i.	'The probability that rubies or pearls become cheap is over 50%.'
ii.	'The probability that rubies become cheap or the probability that
pearls become cheap is over 50%.'
probability > [ruby or pearl]; [ruby or pearl]> probability
Miyagawa (1993) points out that (6a) is unambiguous because the nominative
subject does not raise out of the prenominal sentential modifier and is c-com-
manded by the head noun, as schematically shown in (7).
(7)	[DP [NP [ip [ruby or pearl]-nom predicate] N] D]
However, (6b) allows scope ambiguity because the genitive subject raises into
Spec,DP at some point in the derivation and c-commands the head noun, as
schematically shown in (8).
(8)	LF movement
i I
[dp [ruby or pearl]-GENi [np [ip kj predicate] N] D]
t________________I
Case checking
The second hypothesis is motivated by Nakai's (1980) observation that the
genitive subject may be preceded by other elements in the prenominal sentential
modifier. Consider the example in (9).
(9)	[kotosi sinzyu-no yasuku-naru] kanoosee
this year pearl-GEN cheap-become probability
'the probability that pearls become cheap this year'
In (9), the adverb kotosi 'this year' is at the left edge of the sentential modifier,
preceding the genitive subject sinzyu 'pearl'. Therefore, the genitive subject cannot
be in Spec,DP in overt syntax. This led Miyagawa to conclude that the genitive
subject raises out of the sentential gapless clause into Spec,DP at LF.
196 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Finally, the third hypothesis is motivated by the left-edge effect on scope
exhibited by examples such as (10). According to Miyagawa (1993), whereas (10a),
in which the genitive subject is at the left edge of the sentential modifier, allows
scope ambiguity, (10b), in which it is preceded by an adverb in the sentential
modifier, only allows the in-situ reading.
(10)	a. [[[Rubii-ka sinzyu]-no kotosi-kara	yasuku-natta] riyuu]-o	osiete.
ruby-or pearl-GEN this year-from cheap-became reason-ACC tell-me
i.	'Tell me the reason that rubies or pearls became cheap starting this year?
ii.	'Tell me the reason that rubies became cheap starting this year or the
reason that pearls became cheap starting this year?
reason > [ruby or pearl]; [ruby or pearl]> reason
b.	[[Kotosi-kara	[rubii-ka sinzyu]-no yasuku-natta] riyuu]-o	osiete.
this year-from ruby-or pearl-GEN cheap-became reason-ACC tell-me
i.	'Tell me the reason that rubies or pearls became cheap starting this year?
ii.	*'Tell me the reason that rubies became cheap starting this year or the
reason that pearls became cheap starting this year.'
reason > [ruby or pearl];*[ruby or pearl]> reason
To explain this fact, Miyagawa proposes that Spec,DP may be either an A- or A'-
position. When the genitive subject raises to Spec,DP as an A-position, (10a) only
has a raising reading, under the assumption that there is no reconstruction with A-
movement (Miyagawa 1993, Chomsky 1995, and Lasnik 1999, among others).
However, when the genitive subject raises to Spec,DP as an A'-position, (10a) has
an in-situ reading, if A'-movement allows reconstruction. As for (10b), Miyagawa
argues that the PP kotosi-kara 'from this year' blocks A-movement of the genitive
subject, and thus, (10b) only allows A'-movement of the genitive subject. There-
fore, (10b) only has an in-situ reading on the assumption that A'-movement forces
reconstruction.
So far, we have seen examples with prenominal gapless sentential modifiers.
Before leaving this subsection, let us briefly summarize Miyagawa's analysis of
relative clauses containing a disjunctive quantifier. Consider the example in (11).
(11)	[[[John-ka Mary]-ga/no な katta] honj-o misete.
John-or Mary-NOM/GEN bought book-ACC show-me
a.	'Show me the book that John or Mary bought.'
b.	'Show me the book that John bought or the book that Mary bought?
book> [John or Mary]; [John or Mary] > book
Miyagawa observes that in (11), regardless of whether the subject is marked
nominative or genitive, both the in-situ and raising readings are allowed. The in-
situ reading is possible because the head noun hon 'book' c-commands the subject
in the relative clause. That the raising reading is allowed, according to Miyagawa, is
attributed to the fact that there is a relative gap within the relative clause coindexed
with the head noun hon 'book', and this gap is c-commanded by the subject within
the relative clause.
ga/no conversion 197
8.3.1.2 Ochi (2001)
Ochi (2001)inherits the core idea of Miyagawa's (1993) approach一namely, that
the Case feature of a genitive subject is licensed by D. What is new in Ochi's
approach is the claim that in certain cases, not the genitive subject as a whole but
only the relevant feature of the genitive subject moves to D in covert syntax, based
on Chomsky's (1995) Move-F hypothesis.4 Specifically, Ochi (2001)proposes the
three hypotheses in (12).
(12)	a. The genitive subject in a prenominal gapless clause is licensed by moving
into Spec,DP in overt syntax or by moving the Case feature of the genitive
subject to D in covert syntax.
b.	The genitive subject in a relative clause is licensed by moving the Case
feature of the genitive subject to D in covert syntax.
c.	Spec,DP is consistently an A-position.
Let us start by examining how the first hypothesis (12a) captures the left-edge
effect on scope illustrated by the examples in (10). Example (10b) only has an in-
situ reading. This is expected because the genitive subject has not moved out of the
sentential modifier in overt syntax due to the left-edge element. Ochi (2001)argues
that in this case, the Case feature of the genitive subject moves out of the sentential
modifier in covert syntax, and given the independent evidence that covert feature
movement does not affect scope relations (Lasnik 1995, among others), the genitive
subject cannot take scope over the head noun in (10b).
In contrast, in (10a), nothing prevents the genitive subject from moving to
Spec,DP out of the sentential modifier in overt syntax, because there is no left-edge
element in the clause. If the genitive subject moves to Spec,DP in overt syntax, it
takes scope over the head noun, and if it does not, only the Case feature raises, at
which point, the head noun takes scope over the genitive subject, just as in the case
of (10b). Therefore, the hypothesis (12a) straightforwardly explains the scope facts
in (10).
Next, let us turn to the second hypothesis in (12b). Consider (13), where the
subject of the relative clause is preceded by an adverb.
(13)	[kinoo John-ga/no unten-site-ita] kuruma
yesterday John-NOM/GEN drive-doing-was car
'the car John was driving yesterday'
In (13), the genitive subject is within the relative clause and, thus, is not in Spec,DP
in overt syntax. If the genitive subject is forced to overtly move into Spec,DP, the
example becomes ungrammatical, as shown in the contrast between (14a) and (14b).
(14)	a. [totemo atarasii] [kinoo John-no unten-site-ita] kuruma
very new yesterday John-GEN drive-doing-was car
cthe very new car that John was driving yesterday'
b. *John-no [totemo atarasii] [kinoo t unten-site-ita] kuruma
John-GEN very new yesterday drive-doing-was car
198 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
In (14a), the adjective phrase totemo atarasii very new', which modifies the head
noun kuruma 'car', is placed in the position preceding the relative clause. In (14b),
the genitive subject is moved to Spec,DP across the adjective phrase. Example (14b)
is totally ungrammatical, in contrast to (14a), when the intended reading of (14b) is
identical to that of (14a).5 Therefore, the genitive subject in a relative clause cannot
move into Spec,DP in overt syntax. Based on this fact, Ochi (2001)proposes that
the genitive subject in a relative clause is licensed by moving the Case feature of the
genitive subject to D in covert syntax.
Finally, let us turn to the third hypothesis in (12c). Consider the examples in
(15). In (15a), the genitive subject of the sentential modifier is preceded by a relative
clause, and in (15b), the genitive subject of the sentential modifier is moved to the
sentence-initial position and precedes the relative clause.
(15)	a. [kono	kompyuutaa-ga	keesan-sita]	[[rubii-ka	sinzyu]-no
this	conputer-NOM	calculated	ruby-or	pearl-GEN
kotosi	yasuku-naru]	kanoosee
this year	cheap-become	probability
i. 'the probability [that rubies or pearls become cheap this year]
[which this computer calculated]'
ii. (?)'[[the probability that rubies become cheap this year] or [the
probability that pearls become cheap this year] ] [which this
computer calculated]'
probability > [ruby or pearl]; (?)[ruby or pearl]> probability
b.	[[rubii-ka sinzyu]-no, [kono kompyuutaa-ga keesan-sita],
ruby-or pearl-GEN this computer-NOM calculated
kotosi yasuku-naru kanoosee]
this year cheap-become probability
i.	*'the probability [that rubies or pearls become cheap this year] [which
this computer calculated]'
ii.	'[[the probability that rubies become cheap this year] or [the proba-
bility that pearls become cheap this year] ] [which this computer
calculated]'
キprobability>[ruby or pearl];[ruby or pearl]> probability
Ochi (2001)reports that, although (15a) has two readings一namely, the in-situ and
raising readings一(15b) only has the raising reading. The fact that (15a) is am-
biguous is readily explained under Ochi's approach, because in (15a), the genitive
subject rubii-ka sinzyu 'ruby or pearl' is either in Spec,DP or within the sentential
modifier in overt syntax, and the former case yields the raising reading, and the
latter case the in-situ reading. The relevant structures for the in-situ and raising
readings are shown in (16a,b), respectively.
(16)	a. [DP [ip ... ] [np [ip [ruby or pearl]-gen Adv predicate] N] D]
b. [DP [ip ... ] [dp [ruby or pearl]-GENi [NP [IP な Adv predicate] N] D]]
ga/no conversion 199
The fact that (15b) has the raising reading is also expected under Ochi's ap-
proach, because in this case, the genitive subject rubii-ka sinzyu "ruby or pearl'
must be in Spec,DP in overt syntax, as shown in the structure in (17).
(17)	[dp [ruby or pearl]-genj [dp [IP... ] [NP [IP な Adv predicate] N] D]]
The remaining question is why (15b) does not have the in-situ reading. On the basis
of the independent claims that A'-movement allows (scope) reconstruction
(Miyagawa 1993, among many others), and that A-movement does not allow
(scope) reconstruction (Miyagawa 1993, Chomsky 1995, and Lasnik 1999, among
others), Ochi answers this question by claiming that in (15b), the movement of the
genitive subject to Spec,DP is A-movement, which implies that Spec,DP is con-
sistently an A-position. If this is true, there is no scope reconstruction in (15b), and
the fact that the in-situ reading is absent in (15b) is expected.
8.3.1.3 A problem
We have seen that the DP/movement approach by Ochi (2001)is attractive and
accounts for important data. However, it contains one theoretical problem: it is not
clear why overt raising of the genitive subject is optiona!一that is, in some cases, it
may move to Spec,DP in overt syntax, and in other cases, only the Case feature of
the genitive subject moves to D in covert syntax. Ochi(2ooi:sect. 4.3.) attempts to
answer this question. He states that what actually checks genitive Case is N, not D,
and D, when it is present, triggers the overt raising of the genitive subject. If this is
correct, though, a problem emerges in terms of the categorical status of a given
nominal expression, because a complex NP with a prenominal gapless clause is an
NP in cases such as (15a) with the in-situ reading, and the same complex NP is a DP
in cases such as (15a) with the raising reading. It is theoretically desirable if nominal
expressions are consistently NPs or DPs.
8.3.2	The Non-DP Approach
8.3.2.1 Hiraiwa (2001a)
Hiraiwa's (2001a) approach to the GNC essentially follows another important
previous study by Watanabe (1996), which provides an insight that cross-linguistic
observation is useful in elucidating the nature of the GNC.6 In fact, Hiraiwa
observes that GNC phenomena are broadly found in relative clauses in many other
languages, such as Cuzco Quechua, Chamorro, Turkish, and so on, and argues that
a certain typological difference in C is crucially related to the possibility of the
GNC, which we briefly discuss later. Furthermore, Hiraiwa argues that the Japa-
nese GNC depends on the existence of the rental form, but not any overt D,
showing that there is a set of clauses allowing the GNC that do not involve a noun.
Hiraiwa^ data are listed in (18) (with the exception of (18a), which is from Wa-
tanabe 1996).
200
THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(18)	a.	John-wa	[Mary-ga/no	yonda yori]	takusan-no hon-o	yonda.
John-Top	Mary-NOM/GEN read	than	many-GEN book-ACC read
'John read more books than Mary did.'
b.	John-wa	[ame-ga/no	yamu	made]	ofisu-ni ita.
John-Top	rain-NOM/GEN	stop	until	ofifice-at was
'John was at his office until the rain stopped.'
c.	[Boku-ga/no omoo-ni], John-wa Mary-ga sukini tigainai.
I-nom/gen think-dat John-Top Mary-NOM like	must
'I think that John likes Mary.'
d.	Kono atari-wa [hi-ga/no kureru ni-ture] hiekonde-kuru.
this around-TOP sun-NOM/GEN go-down as colder-get
'It gets chillier around here as the sun goes down.'
e.	John-wa [toki-ga/no	tatu to tomoni] Mary-no koto-o
John-Top time-NOM/GEN pass with as Mary-GEN thing-ACC
wasurete-itta.
forget-went
'Mary slipped out of John's memory as time went by.'
f.	[John-ga/no	kuru to konai	to]-dewa, ootigai	da.
John-NOM/GEN	come and come-not	and-TOP great-difference be
'It makes a great difference whether John comes or not.'
g.	[John-ga/no	sikar-are-ta-no] -wa,	Mary-ni da.
John-NOM/GEN	scold-PASS-PAST-coMP-TOP Mary-by be
'It is by Mary that John was scolded.'
h.	John-ga	[sara-no	ue-ni ringo-ga/no oiteatta-no]-o
John-NOM plate-GEN On-DAT apple-NOM/GEN put-COMP-ACC
katteni	tabeta.
without-permission ate
'Without permission, John ate an apple, which was on the plate.'
i.	[Sengetu	ikkai John-ga/no	soko-ni it-ta	(k)kiri] daremo
last month once John-NOM/GEN there-to go-PAST since anybody
itte inai.
go not-PRES
'Nobody went there since John went once last month.'
All of the examples in (18) do not involve an overt nominal head inside the
brackets, yet each example allows the subject to be marked genitive. This fact led
Hiraiwa to claim that what licenses a genitive DP in a clause is not a noun (or an
outer D) but a special inflection一that is, the rentai (attributive) form of the
predicate.
Based on Chomsky's (2000) theory of agreement in terms of the operation
called Agree, Hiraiwa (2001a) proposes that in Japanese, the inflectional mor-
phology in the normal declarative sentence is a result of an Agree relation of T, (v),
and V. For example, the normal inflection (the syuusi, or conclusive, form) cor-
responds to the T-(v)-V amalgamate created via Agree in syntax. However, the
ga/no conversion
201
special inflection (the rental or attributive, form) results from an Agree relation of
T, (v), V, and a special type of C. Hiwaira hypothesizes that C in Japanese relative
clauses is null and affixal and that the affixal C requires an Agree relation with the
T-(v)-V to circumvent the situation where the affixal C is left stranded. Through
this type of Agree relation, T's ^-feature is copied or transferred onto the special C
(i.e., Caw in Hiraiwa's terms), creating the C-T-(v)-V amalgamate, which obtains
a single set of (^-features. In Hiraiwa's approach, the crucial difference between the
syuusi (conclusive) and rentai (attributive) forms is, thus, whether the Agree re-
lation involves the special type of C. Furthermore, adopting Chomsky's framework
for Case in terms of the operation Agree between the probe and its matching goal,
Hiraiwa assumes that the categorical property of the probe determines Case values
on the goal. That is, when the probe is the (^-feature of C, the Case of the goal is
valued genitive. However, when it is the (^-feature of T, the Case of the goal is
valued nominative.
Given this, the examples in (18) are analyzed in the following way. In each, the
clause in the brackets is assumed to be dominated by Caffix,and this Cg^x licenses
genitive Case of the subject of the clause via Agree. This is schematically shown
in (19).
(19)	Agree
[cp [tp [Subjli-GEN^]
[vP -- predicate「emai ] • • • T^^ ] [caffix C[0]]]
▲ ▲ ▲
C-T(-v)-V amalgamate via Agree
The rentai form thus indicates an occurrence of the Agree relation among Cad T,
(v), and the predicate, which enables licensing of genitive Case for the subject.
Two examples in (18) pose an apparent problem. The cleft sentence in (18g)
and the head-internal relative clause in (i8h) seem to have an overt complemen-
tizer no rather than a Caffix in the brackets. Under Hiraiwa's hypothesis, such an
overt Comp does not license genitive Case in Japanese. However, he argues that
under these constructions, the morpheme no itself is not a complementizer but a
manifestation of the Agree relation between Caffix and the genitive subject, and as
such, it appears on Caffix as no, the same morphology of the genitive Case marker.
In relation to this, Hiraiwa points out that clauses headed by genuine overt
complementizers一such as ka 'q', to 'that', to-no 'that-GEN', and to-iu 'that-say'—
do not allow the GNC. This is because these overt complementizers are not affixal
and do not trigger the Agree relation necessary for licensing genitive Case of the
subject.
Moreover, Hiraiwa (2001a) claims that the distribution of the GNC follows from
the locality condition on Agree. Specifically, Hiraiwa adopts his theory of multiple
202 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
applications of the operation, which he calls Multiple Agree (Hiraiwa 2001b). That
is, Agree is applicable to more than one matching goal derivationally simulta-
neously. Let us briefly review how it works. According to Hiraiwa, in the multiple
feature-checking configuration, the probe has a [+multiple] feature and continues
its search, even after it matches with the closest matching goal. Suppose that the
search reaches the second-closest matching goal and stops there (because there is no
other matching element in the search domain). Multiple Agree takes place in this
configuration, and the probe agrees with the two matching goals simultaneously,
violating no locality condition on Agree (hence, triggering no defective intervention
effect; Chomsky 2000). Hiraiwa claims that the mechanism of Multiple Agree ac-
counts for the GNC in a clause with a nominative object and the GNC in the
possessor raising construction. The relevant examples are shown in (20).
(20)	a.	Totemo	yoku	John-ga/*no	nihongo-ga/*no	dekiru.
very	well	John-NOM/*GEN Japanese-NOM/*GEN do-can
'John can speak Japanese very well?
b.	[totemo	yoku	John-ga/no	nihongo-ga/no	dekiru] riyuu
very	well	JoIiii-nom/gen	Japanese-NOM/GEN	do-can reason
'the reason why	John can speak Japanese	very welF
c.	John-ga/no	se-ga/*no	takai.
John-NOM/GEN	height-NOM/*GEN	high
'John is tall?
d.	[John-ga/no	se-ga/no	takai]	riyuu
John-NOM/GEN	height-NOM/GEN	high	reason
"the reason why John is tall.'
The agentive subject and the thematic object in (20a) and the possessor subject
and the thematic subject in (20c), when they appear in a clause modifying a noun,
can be marked either nominative or genitive in any combination, as shown in
(20b) and(2od). Let us, for instance, consider the case of the ga-no combination
in the possessor raising construction in(2od), in which the higher and lower
subjects are marked nominative and genitive, respectively. What is peculiar
about this example is that the genitive subject is not closest to its licensor (whether
it is C or the outer N/D), because the higher nominative subject intervenes between
them. In terms of Hiraiwa's Multiple Agree, the nominative subject and the gen-
itive subject are simultaneously licensed by the same probe一that is, the(|)-feature
that is copied/transferred onto from T. Here, no Minimality violation or
defective intervention effect is induced, even though there is more than one
matching goal. Furthermore, according to Hiraiwa5s assumption on valuing Case
via ©-feature agreement, which was briefly mentioned before, the Case for the
subjects in(2od) can be freely valued either genitive or nominative on the grounds
that the probe (^-feature on Caffix has a twofold character一that is, the property of
both C and T (given that the ©-feature originates from T).7 As for the case of
the nominative object construction in (20b), the same analysis applies, if we as-
ga/no conversion 203
sume that there is no probe for the nominative object other than the (^-feature
On CaflJx.
Hiraiwa's (2001a) approach is briefly summarized in (21).8
(21)	a. The special inflection of a predicate, such as the rentai (attributive) form in
Japanese, results from an Agree relation among V, v, T, and Caffix.
b.	T's ©-feature is transferred onto Caffix through the Agree relation in
(21a).
c.	Caffix with the ^-feature transferred from T can license genitive Case of
the subject in Spec,TP via Agree.
8.Z.2.2 A problem
The non-DP approach proposed by Hiraiwa (2001a) is highly attractive, because it
deals with a broader range of facts, such as the GNC in clauses without an overt
head noun. There are some empirical problems, however, including one that we
believe to be particularly serious. Let us again look at the examples in (18), which do
not contain a head noun, at least overtly. What we have noticed is that examples
(i8a-f) have counterparts that do contain a noun, as shown in(22a-f). A question
that naturally arises is whether Hiraiwa's "head noun-less" examples are simply
instances of GNCs with head nouns where the head noun is somehow implicit. (For
the remaining two examples, (18g,h), we also show that they contain a head noun.)
(22)	a. John-wa	[Mary-ga/no	yonda.-teedo/no yori] takusan-no
John-Top Mary-NOM/GEN read-degree/NO than many-GEN
hon-o yonda.
book-ACC read
"John read more books than Mary did.'
b.	John-wa [ame-ga/no	yamu toki/zikan made] ofisu-ni ita.
John-Top rain-NOM/GEN stop time/time until office-at was
"John was at his office until the rain stopped.'
c.	[Boku-ga/no omoo-no-ni], John-wa Mary-ga sukini tigainai.
I-nom/gen think-NO-DAT John-Top Mary-NOM like	must
‘I think that John likes Mary.'
d.	Kono atari-wa [hi-ga/no kureru-no
this around-TOP sihi-nom/gen go-down-NO
ni-ture] hiekonde-kuru.
DAT-go-together colder-get
Tt gets chillier around here as the sun goes down.'
e.	John-wa	[toki-ga/no	tatu-no to-tomo-ni]	Mary-no
John-Top time-NOM/GEN pass-NO and-together-DAT Mary-GEN
koto-o wasurete-itta.
thing-ACC forget-went
"Mary slipped out of John's memory as the time went by.'
204 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
f.	[John-ga/no	kuru-no to konai-no	to]-dewa,
John-NOM/GEN come-NO and come not-NO and-TOP
ootigai	da.
great-difference be
Tt makes a great difference whether John comes or not.'
In (22a) -teedo/no 'degree/No' are inserted between the rental form of the verb and
yori 'than', and in (22b) toki/zikan 'time/time' are inserted between the rental form
of the verb and made 'until'. In(22c-f), -no 'no' is inserted after the rental form of
the verb. It is natural to consider teedo/toki/zikan 'degree/time/time' as nouns. In
the case of (22a), given that no 'no' and the noun teedo 'degree' appear in the same
position, it is natural to claim that no 'no' in (22a) is either a noun or a nomi-
nalizer, which makes the entire clause function as a noun.
Could we analyze no 'no' in(22c-f) as the same noun/nominalizer as in (22a)?
One might argue, following Hiraiwa (2001a), that no 'no' in(22c-f) is a com-
plementizer (to be precise, a morphological realization of the Agree relation among
V, (v), T, and Caffix on Caffix). The strength of Hiraiwa's analysis rests on the
parallelism between the morphologically realized C and the no that appears in the
cleft sentence in (18g) and the head-internal relative clause in (i8h). It is normally
assumed that the instance of no in (18g,h) is a complementizer. We question this
assumption about (18g,h) and, in turn, question the status of no as a comple-
mentizer for(22C-f).
Let us consider the cleft sentence in (18g), reproduced as (23).
(23)	[John-ga/no sikar-are-ta-no] -wa, Mary-ni da.
John-NOM/GEN scold-PASs-PAST-coMP-TOP Mary-by be
'It is by Mary that John was scolded.'
Hiraiwa (2001a) assumes that (23) is a perfectly grammatical sentence. However,
Murasugi (1991)states that a genitive subject makes the cleft sentence in which it
appears less acceptable and provides examples such as those in (24).9
(24)	a. [[Mary-ga nigedasita] -no] -wa gakkoo kara da.
Mary-NOM ran-away-NO-TOP school from is
'It is from school that Mary ran away.'
b. ??[[Mary-no nigedasita]-no]-wa gakkoo kara da.
Mary-GEN ran-away-NO-TOP school from is
'It is from school that Mary ran away.'
Murasugi, pursuing Hoji's (1990) work on cleft sentences in Japanese, claims that
no 'no' in cleft sentences is not a pronoun but a complementizer, based on data
from the Toyama dialect of Japanese. In Murasugi's analysis, Comp does not license
genitive Case, so that (24b) should be predicted to be ungrammatical. However, she
suggests that a genitive subject is allowed in cleft sentences such as (24b), when no
'no' is interpreted as a pronoun corresponding to something such as 'action' or
'event'. If Murasugi's suggestion is correct, the no 'no' in (23) is considered a
ga/no conversion 205
pronoun or nominal, not a complementizer, which constitutes an argument for the
approach that genitive Case is licensed by N/D.10
Next, let us consider the head-internal relative example in (i8h), reproduced
as (25).
(25)	John-ga [sara-no ue-ni ringo-ga/no
John-NOM plate-GEN oii-dat apple-NOM/GEN
oiteatta-no]-o katteni	tabeta.
put-coMP-ACC without-permission ate
"Without permission, John ate an apple, which was on the plate?
In (25), the elements in the brackets are replaced by the pronoun sore 'it', as shown
in (26).
(26)	John-ga [sore]-o katteni	tabeta.
John-NOM it-ACC without-permission ate
"Without permission, John ate it.'
This indicates that the head of the head-internal relative clause no "no' in (25)
should be a nominal, just like the pronoun sore "it'. Therefore, the claim that no
"no' in the clause-final position is uniformly C is contradicted by the above data.
Hence, we conclude that no "no' in the examples (18g,h) and(22c-f) is either a
noun or a nominalizer. This, again, questions the non-DP analysis of GNC.
Turning to the final example from Hiraiwa, (i8i), we question the status of the
morpheme kiri "since' that ""heads" the clause with the GNC. Hiraiwa's assumption is
that it is not a noun, so that the entire clause is a CP, but, in fact, we can show that it is a
noun. The morpheme kiri "since' has the basic meaning of ""endpoint," such as the
endpoint of a temporal duration. This kiri is the renyoo (continuous) form of the verb
kiru "cut/break'. The renyoo form of a verb can be used as a noun in Japanese, as seen in
examples such as kikoe "hearing' (continuous) < kikoeru "hear' (conclusive) and oyogi
"swimming' (continuous) < oyogu "swim' (conclusive). The use of -kiri as a noun is
found in examples such as hutari-(k)kiri [two-only] "only two' and pin-kara kiri-
made [the first-from-the last-to] "from the best to the worst'. In the latter case, kiri is a
complement of the postposition made "to', and it is obvious that it functions as a noun.
To summarize the problem for the non-DP approach, the examples that
Hiraiwa (2001a) provides to support the non-DP approach all turn out to have
counterparts that contain a noun or a clause nominalizer. This suggests that the
""head-noun-less" examples that Hiraiwa offers are instances in which a nominal
element such as a head noun or a nominalizer is simply unpronounced in the overt
form but present in the structure.
8.3.3	A Refinement of the Two Approaches
Thus far, we have reviewed the strengths and limitations of the two types of ap-
proaches: the DP-approach (Miyagawa 1993, Ochi 2001)and the non-DP approach
(Hiraiwa 2001a). In this section, we suggest a refinement of the two approaches by
206 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
integrating the core ideas of the approaches. We show (a) that the proposed analysis
allows unified treatment of the regular genitive and the genitive in GNC and (b)
that it captures scope facts. We then demonstrate how the proposed approach can
deal with two other distinctive properties of the GNC, the transitivity restriction
and optionality, which have not been discussed thus far.
In section 8.3.1.3, we pointed out a potential problem in Ochi's DP approach
concerning movement of the genitive DP to Spec,DP. In section 85.2.2, we also
pointed out a problem in Hiraiwa's non-DP approach, which is that the occurrence
of a nominal element such as a head noun, overt or covert, in the GNC construction
suggests the existence of D. We therefore suggest a refinement of the two ap-
proaches. Specifically, we suggest that D licenses genitive Case in the GNC construc-
tion and that the DP marked genitive does not move to Spec,DP, as shown in (27).11
(27)	[[[... DP-GEN ... predicate] N (overt/covert)] D]
An Altaic language called Dagur provides cross-linguistic evidence for the
refined DP approach. Hale (2002) reports that in the Dagur object relative con-
struction, the subject of the relative clause is marked genitive, and the head
noun, but not the verb in the relative clause, is obligatorily accompanied by a
postpounded reduced copy of the genitive subject pronoun. This is shown in (28).
(28)	[mini au-sen] mery-miny] sain.
isg.gen buy-PERF horse-iSG.GEN good
'The horse I bought is good/
In (28), the subject of the relative clause is mini 'isg.gen', and the head noun me^
'horse' is accompanied by the copy of the genitive subject pronoun miny 'isg.gen'.
Hale states that this agreement pattern is also seen in simple possessive con-
structions, as shown in (29).
(29)	[mini mery-miny] sain.
ISG.GEN horse-iSG.GEN good
'My horse is good.'
In (29), the head noun is accompanied by the copy of the possessor pronoun.
However, in simple verbal clauses, agreement holds between the subject and verb,
and the subject is in the nominative, as shown in (30).
(30)	bi nek mery au-sem.	(au-sema < au-sen-bi)
isg.nom one horse buy-PERF：iSG.NOM
‘I bought a horse.'
These facts clearly suggest that in the Dagur object relative construction, the
genitive subject of the relative clause is in agreement with the head noun (D) and
provides cross-linguistic support for the refined DP approach.
The refined DP approach explains the facts in Japanese thus far observed, as we
show. First, the proposed analysis allows unified treatment of the regular genitive
and the genitive in GNC. A simple possessor construction, such as (31), and the
ga/no conversion 207
GNC construction, such as (32), share a common property—that is, a DP-gen
appears within a phrase headed by a nominal element.
(31)	[John-no [neko] D]
John-GEN cat
'John's cat'
(32)	[[[John-no kita] hi] D]
John-GEN came day
'the day John came'
This fact is correctly accounted for by the analysis suggested here, because genitive
Case is licensed by D in either case.
Note that although the DP approach also correctly captures this parallelism,
the non-DP approach cannot, because under this approach, the element that
licenses genitive Case in the GNC construction is not identical to the element that
licenses genitive Case in the possessor construction. Also, the feet that genitive Case
appears in the former construction and the fact that the same Case appears in the
latter construction are coincidental.
Furthermore, under the refined approach, Hiraiwa's problem does not arise.
This is because under the refined approach, the parallelism with respect to the
GNC between the seemingly "head-noun-less" examples and their counterparts
with head nouns is naturally captured. They are all instances of DPs, with the
structure shown in (27).
Second, the proposed analysis correctly captures scope facts, without invoking
Ochi's (2001)problem. Because genitive Case licensing does not require movement
into D/Spec,DP, no question arises as to why overt movement of the genitive subject
takes place, when the raising reading is allowed, whereas covert movement of the
genitive Case feature occurs when the in-situ reading is allowed. Furthermore, under
our analysis, the category of the genitive subject is consistently DP, regardless of the
scope of the genitive subject. This is theoretically desirable, whereas under Ochi's
叩proach, the distinction between overt and covert movement is linked to the
difference in the categorical status of the genitive subject (i.e., NP vs. DP).
The proposed analysis provides an account of the left-edge effect on scope,
different from Ochi's (2001)approach. Consider again the examples in (10a,b),
reproduced here as (33a,b), respectively.
(33)	a. [[[Rubii-ka sinzyu]-no kotosi-kara yasuku-natta] riyuu]-o
ruby-or pearl-GEN this year-from cheap-became reason-ACC
osiete.
tell-me
i.	'Tell me the reason that rubies or pearls became cheap starting this
year.'
ii.	'Tell me the reason that rubies became cheap starting this year or the
reason that pearls became cheap starting this year.'
reason > [ruby or pearl]; [ruby or pearl]> reason
208 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
b. [[Kotosi-kara	[rubii-ka sinzyu]-no yasuku-natta] riyuu]-o
this year-from ruby-or pearl-GEN cheap-became reason-ACC
osiete.
tell-me
i.	'Tell me the reason that rubies or pearls became cheap starting this
year.'
ii.	必Tell me the reason that rubies became cheap starting this year or
the reason that pearls became cheap starting this year.'
reason > [ruby or pearl]; *[ruby or pearl]> reason
Although (33a), in which the genitive subject is at the left edge of the sentential
modifier, allows scope ambiguity, (33b), in which it is preceded by an adverb in the
sentential modifier, only allows the in-situ reading. We suggest that under the
approach proposed here, the left-edge effect actually indicates that the genitive
subject at issue is base-generated in Spec,DP and functions as a modifier of the
noun rather than as a subject of the sentential modifier, based on the fact that (34),
with a structure slightly different from (33a), has the raising reading.
(34)	[[Rubii-ka sinzyu]-nituite-no [(sore-ga) kotosi-kara yasuku-natta]
ruby-or pearl-about-GEN it-NOM this year-from cheap-became
riyuu]-o osiete.
reason-ACC tell-me
i.	必Tell me the reason, about rubies or pearls, that rubies or pearls became
cheap starting this year/
ii.	'Tell me, about rubies or pearls, the reason that rubies became cheap
starting this year or the reason that pearls became cheap starting this
year.'
^reason > [ruby or pearl]; [ruby or pearl]> reason
In (34), the genitive subject in (33a) has been changed to the form [DP-about-GEN],
and (34) has the raising reading. Let us consider why this is so. Suppose that rubii-
ka sinzyu-nituite-no '[ruby or pearl]-about-GEN' is base-generated in Spec,DP.
Under the assumption that the PP headed by nituite 'about' is transparent, and
thus, the complement DP can c-command the elements c-commanded by the PP,
rubii-ka sinzyu 'ruby or pearl' c-commands the head noun riyuu 'reason'. There-
fore, the former may take scope over the latter, which yields the raising reading.
The fact that (34) cannot have the in-situ reading, in spite of the fact that the
pronoun in the parentheses sore 'it' referring to rubii-ka sinzyu ' ruby or pearl' is c-
commanded by the head noun riyuu 'reason', is treated in the same way as the
English example in (35), where the quantifier at least three students cannot take
scope over the pronoun it referring to the quantifier every book base-generated in
the clause-initial position, although the former c-commands the latter (Mamoru
Saito, pers. comm.).
(35)	For every book, there were at least three students who read it.
every book > at least three students; *at least three students > every book
ga/no conversion 209
Thus, the left-edge effect is correctly predicted if we assume that the genitive
subject in (33a) is actually base-generated in Spec,DP, just like the [DP-about-GEN]
in (34). In this case, the nonovert nominative subject is base-generated within the
sentential modifier. Also, the fact that (33b) only has the in-situ reading follows
from the fact that the genitive subject is simply within the sentential modifier due
to the adverb in the clause-initial position, and the genitive subject is unable to be
at the position as high as Spec,DP.
Furthermore, the base-generation hypothesis under the refined approach in
turn accounts for the scope facts of Ochi's (2001)examples in (15a,b), reproduced
here as (36a,b).
(36)	a. [kono	kompyuutaa-ga	keesan-sita]	[[rubii-ka	sinzyu] -no
this	conputer-NOM	calculated	ruby-or	pearl-GEN
kotosi	yasuku-naru]	kanoosee
this year	cheap-become	probability
"the probability [that rubies or pearls become cheap this year]
[which this computer calculated]J
(?)'[[the probability that rubies become cheap this year] or [the
probability that pearls become cheap this year] ] [which this
computer calculated]J
probability > [ruby or pearl];(?)[ruby or pearl]> probability
b. [[rubii-ka sinzyu]-no, [kono kompyuutaa-ga keesan-sita],
ruby-or pearl-GEN this computer-NOM calculated
kotosi yasuku-naru kanoosee]
this year cheap-become probability
必the probability [that rubies or pearls become cheap this year] [which
this computer calculated] *
'[[the probability that rubies become cheap this year] or [the proba-
bility that pearls become cheap this year] ] [which this computer
calculated]J
^probability > [ruby or pearl]; [ruby or pearl]> probability
Example (36a) has both the in-situ and raising readings, whereas (36b) has only the
raising reading. The fact that (36a) is ambiguous is expected under the refined
叩proach, because in (36a), the genitive subject rubii-ka sinzyu 'ruby or pearl' may
be base-generated in Spec,DP or within the sentential modifier. The former case
yields the raising reading, because the genitive subject c-commands the head noun,
and the latter case yields the in-situ reading, because the head noun c-commands
the genitive subject.
The fact that (36b) has the raising reading is also expected under the refined
approach, because in this case, the genitive subject rubii-ka sinzyu "ruby or pearl' is
base-generated in Spec,DP and c-commands the head noun. The fact that (36b)
cannot have the in-situ reading is given the same account as example (34).
Having examined the coverage of the proposed analysis, let us see how it can
deal with the transitivity restriction on the GNC and the optionality of the GNC.
210
THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
First, let us consider the transitivity restriction (hereafter, TR) on the GNC. The TR
prohibits co-occurrence of an accusative DP with the genitive DP (Harada 1971,
Miyagawa 1993, Watanabe 1996, among others), as shown in (37).
(37)	[Taroo-ga/*no hon-o kasita] hito
Taroo-NOM/GEN book-ACC lent man
"the man Taroo lent the book to'
In (37), the predicate in the relative clause is a transitive verb kas 'lend', and the
subject and object are marked nominative ga and accusative 〇, respectively.
However, in this configuration, a genitive subject is not allowed. The effect of the
TR is, therefore, that the subject cannot be marked genitive as long as the object is
marked accusative. Next, we show Miyagawa's (2003) treatment of the TR based on
his hypothesis about the nature of Tense (T) in Japanese and suggest that the
proposed analysis is not inconsistent with Miyagawa's hypothesis on T, so that it
can potentially deal with the TR.12
Miyagawa (2003) first argues that in Japanese, morphological case marking must
be licensed by T; he bases this analysis on scrambling data, where the object un-
dergoes A-movement scrambling (by the EPP feature on T). Then, Miyagawa sug-
gests that there are two types of T in Japanese—one that licenses the morphological
case markers ga 'nom', 〇 ’acc', and ni 'dat' (call this type Ti), and another that does
not (call it T2).13 Miyagawa's idea is that Ti appears in a normal sentence, where the
predicate takes the syuusi form, and licenses ga 'nom', 〇 <acc', and ni 'dat', whereas
T2 appears in the GNC contexts, where the predicate takes the rentai form, and
licenses the genitive Case no 'gen' but not any of the morphological case markers.
Given this, (37) with the nominative subject, which has ga 'nom' and 〇 ’acc' si-
multaneously, is predicted to be grammatical, because these morphological cases are
licensed by Ti. However, (37) with the genitive subject, which has no Wen' and 〇
'acc' at the same time, is predicted to be ungrammatical, because the accusative case,
one of the morphological cases, is not licensed by T2.
Note here that, at first sight, Miyagawa's (2003) claim that T2 licenses genitive
Case and our claim that N/D licenses genitive Case seem to be inconsistent.
However, these two claims are not inconsistent, because in Miyagawa's approach,
genitive Case and T2 co-occur, and in our approach, genitive Case and N/D co-
occur, so that whenever T2 appears, N/D appears at the same time. Therefore, the
claim that T2 licenses genitive Case and the claim that N/D licenses genitive Case
are not incompatible.
Miyagawa (2003) presents another piece of evidence supporting the hypothesis
that only the morphological case marking is licensed by Ti. Harada (1971)points
out that unlike the accusative object, a dative goal phrase can occur in the GNC
with the genitive subject, as shown in (38).
(38)	[Mary-nij John-no * kasita] hon
Mary-dat John-GEN lent book
4the book that John lent to Mary'
ga/no conversion
211
If Miyagawa's hypothesis is correct that only morphological case marking is li-
censed by Ti,the grammaticality of (38) suggests that the tense of the prenominal
clause should be T2, because it co-occurs with a genitive subject, and the dative
marker of the dative goal phrase should not be a Case marker but a postposition.
Miyagawa (1989) points out that there are two types of "dative”一that is, Case
marker and postposition一and the latter, but not the former, cannot co-occur with
a floated numeral quantifier. Miyagawa (2003) shows that this suggestion is correct
based on an example with a floated numeral quantifier:
(39)	[gakusei-ni san-nin； John-ga/*no	有 kasita] hon
student-DAT 3-CL	John-NOM/GEN lent book
"the book that John lent to three students'
In (39), when the subject is genitive, the example is ungrammatical. This is because
either (a) the occurrence of the genitive subject forces the tense of the prenominal
clause to be T2, which does not license the morphological dative case, or (b) the
occurrence of the floated numeral quantifier forces the dative to be a morpho-
logical case, which in turn forces the tense of the prenominal clause to be Ti,which
cannot license the genitive subject. However, when the subject is nominative, (39)
is perfect, because the tense of the prenominal clause is Ti,which licenses the
nominative subject and the dative goal phrase at the same time. Therefore, the data
with the dative goal subject provides support to Miyagawa's (2003) hypothesis that
only morphological case marking is licensed by Ti.
The hypothesis that only morphological case marking is licensed by Ti, along
with a certain assumption on abstract Case, explains the grammaticality of ex-
amples with an overt genitive subject and a covert accusative object originally
noted by Harada (1971),as shown in (40).
(40)	[Taroo-ga/no 4 kaita] kon,
Taroo-NOM/GEN wrote book
'the book Taroo wrote'
Miyagawa (2003) states that in (40), the covert object presumably has Case, but it is
only abstract Case. If this is true, the covert object in (40) does not need mor-
phological case marking by Ti, and the example is correctly predicted to be
grammatical, given a proper licensing mechanism for abstract Case on the covert
object. If, as Miyagawa suggests, abstract Case on the covert object is licensed by v
(Chomsky 1995), the grammaticality of (40) is expected under the assumption that
only morphological case marking is licensed by Ti. Therefore, as long as Miyagawa
(2003) is correct, the proposed analysis, which is not inconsistent with Miyagawa's
hypothesis on T, can potentially capture (the lifting of) the TR.
Second, let us address the issue of the optionality of the GNC from the view-
point of the hypothesis on the Japanese T proposed by Miyagawa (2003). Although
the GNC has been extensively studied since Harada 1971,it seems that none of the
previous analyses has come up with an ultimate solution to the optional nature
of the GNC as well as the TR in Japanese. According to Miyagawa, Ti licenses
212
THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
morphological case marking. Therefore, it can appear with a nominative subject.
On the other hand, T2 does not retain the ability to license morphological case
marking or accusative Case on a covert object. Therefore, it may only appear with a
genitive subject (along with elements that are not Case related, such as adverbs).
Notice that if there are two types of T in Japanese, then the optionality issue of the
GNC does not actually arise because a genitive subject may only appear with T2,
and a nominative subject may appear only with Ti.These combinations are com-
pletely fixed. Therefore, the optionality of the appearance of genitive and nomi-
native subjects in the GNC is only apparent under the following circumstances: (a)
whenever Ti is selected out of the lexicon, only the nominative subject is allowed;
and (b) whenever T2 is selected from the lexicon, only the genitive subject is
permitted. The other two combinations (the nominative subject and T2, and the
genitive subject and Ti) are excluded due to an unlicensed Case.14 This argument, if
correct, indicates that there is no optionality with the GNC in Japanese, and the
apparent optionality is not an issue in light of the (strong) minimalist thesis that
does not allow any optional operation.
8.4	Implications for the General
Theory of Syntax
Investigation into the GNC in Japanese provides us with interesting implications
for the general theory of syntax, especially with respect to the nature of operation
Agree and the nature of Case systems.
First, as seen in the approaches reviewed in sections 8.3.1 and 8.3.2, any account
of the GNC crucially concerns the mechanism of Case licensing, which has been an
important issue concerning theory in generative grammar. Based on the empirical
generalization shown here, we have suggested a refinement of some previous ap-
proaches, essentially following the findings and core ideas by the three researchers
whose ideas we presented. That is, genitive Case in the GNC is licensed via Agree
with D. Thus, the GNC in Japanese indicates a pure instance of Case licensing by
Agree, in contrast to licensing by raising, in which agreement is followed by
movement of a genitive DP to the specifier of the agreeing head. Therefore, the
GNC in Japanese provides support to the hypothesis that Agree is an operation
independent of movement.
Second, as discussed in section 8.3.3, the transitivity restriction (TR) on the
GNC suggests that there are two types of T in Japanese, and the ways they license
Case are different. If this is correct, Japanese has two completely different types of
Case-licensing systems. This implies that Universal Grammar (UG) allows these
two types of Case-licensing systems and, at the same time, raises interesting
questions concerning in what languages the two types of Case-licensing systems
ga/no conversion 213
may appear and what factors correlate with the appearance of the two types of
Case-licensing systems.
NOTES FOR CHAPTER 8
An earlier version of this chapter was presented at the Workshop on Linguistic Theory and
the Japanese Language of the 2005 MIT-Harvard LSA Summer Institute held at Harvard
University on July 29, 2005. We would like to thank the audience at the meeting, as well as
the following people: Fiona Clark, Ronald Craig, Jessica Dunton, Michiyo Hamasaki,
Hironobu Kasai, Jaklin Kornfilt, Elizabeth Laurenqot, Michael Lopresti, Keiko Miyagawa,
Shigeru Miyagawa, Yoichi Miyamoto, Takashi Munakata, Fumikazu Niinuma, Kunio
Nishiyama, Masao Ochi, Naoko Okura, Paul Rankin, Mamoru Saito, Shigeki Taguchi,
Yukiko Ueda, Akira Watanabe, and an anonymous reviewer for their helpful comments.
We are especially indebted to Shigeru Miyagawa and Mamoru Saito for their suggestions at
various stages of this work. All errors are our own. Research by the first author was
supported in part by Center for Linguistics, Nanzan University, of which he was an adjunct
researcher (from June 1,2004 to March 31,2006).
1.In what follows, we refer to the category D, omitting N, just for simplicity of
discussion.
2.	The class of adjectives is called keeyoo doosi (adjectival verb) in terms of traditional
Japanese linguistics. The morphological distinction between the rentai and syuusi forms
was once clear in many predicates in Old Japanese, as shown by the contrast of ari <have/be,
(the conclusive form) versus aru (the attributive form). It is said that the distinction had
been gradually lost somewhere between the twelfth and sixteenth centuries (the Kamakura
era through the Muromati era). Accordingly, in Modern Japanese, the predicate form in a
prenominal position is morphologically ambiguous between the two forms. The class of
adjectives discussed in the text (i.e., keeyoo doosi) is the only case in which the contrast is
retained.
3.	The adjective appears in the prenominal position. This is the reason why the rentai
form is alternatively dubbed the "prenominal form" in English.
4.	Chomsky (1995) argues that any movement operation simply affects features rather
than categories, because feature checking only requires a relevant feature. He attributes the
impossibility of moving a feature alone in overt syntax to a PF requirement that only a
category can be phonetically interpreted. This hypothesis about movement is called the
Move-F hypothesis.
5.	Note that (14b) is grammatical if it has the different reading shown in (i), in which
John functions as a possessor of the car.
(i)	John's very new car that he was driving yesterday
6.	Watanabe (1996) points out that the GNC is allowed, even when there seems no
outer N/D, based on comparative clauses in Japanese, such as (18a). Given that compar-
ative clauses as well as relative clauses both involve w/z-movement of some kind, Watanabe
claims that the GNC results from w/z-agreement. Watanabe observes that Japanese GNC
and French stylistic inversion show a striking similarity in distribution, and he argues that
both phenomena are explained under his framework of w/z-agreement. Furthermore,
under Watanabe's analysis, the presence of a predicate in rentai form means that the
214 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
inflectional system of the clause is changed from the normal inflection to a special in-
flection due to some factor such as wh-agreement.
7.	It is not clear, however, how and why the categorical property of the head (e.g., T or
C) that has the probe feature (e.g., (^-feature) is connected to the process of Agree oper-
ation between the probe and the goal in terms of the matching feature (e.g., ch-feature); in
particular, the determination of Case value of the goal.
8.	Based on Turkish Case alteration, Kornfilt (2003) independently proposes an ap-
proach along almost the same line as Hiraiwa's, which holds that there is a mechanism that
crucially relies on Agree in C (between nominalized Agr that is raised up to C and the
genitive subject).
9.	We thank Mamoru Saito (pers. comm.) for bringing this set of data to our attention.
10.	As Murasugi (1991)notes, however, the question remains as to what noun the no
'no' in (24b) is the pro-form o£ We leave this issue open here.
11.	See Lees 1965 for the same type of analysis of genitive Case marking in
Turkish subordinate clauses. Lees (1965) proposes that nominalized argument clauses are
actually complements of phonologically unrealized nominal heads. See Kornfilt 2003,
however, for a more promising approach to genitive Case marking in Turkish syntax.
12.	Watanabe (1996) regards the TR as one of the core properties of Japanese GNC, as
well as French stylistic inversion, arguing that the TR follows from his analysis of wh-
agreement. However, Hiraiwa's (2001a) treatment of the TR is entirely different. Hiraiwa
points out that the TR on the GNC is found in languages such as Japanese and Chamorro
but not languages such as Turkish. Under Hiraiwa's approach, the TR follows indepen-
dently of the mechanisms of the GNC. See also Saito 2004 and Ochi 2005, among others,
for other promising approaches to (the lifting of) the TR.
13.	See also Miyagawa and Ekida 2003 for an analysis of morphological case marking in
Old Japanese and its relationship with the historical change in the verbal inflection system
(briefly mentioned in note 2).
14.	There is a fact that might be a potential problem for Miyagawa's (2003) two-T
hypothesis, on which our refined approach relies. Under Miyagawa's hypothesis, Ti,the
licensor of the morphological case such as -gti, co-occurs only with a predicate in its syuusi
(conclusive) inflection. It is thus predicted that the GNC is never allowed in a clause
without a syuusi (conclusive) predicate. In the case of a clause in which the predicate is a
verb, this prediction cannot be checked, because, as we briefly discussed in section 8.2,
verbs in modern Japanese do not show morphologically visible distinction between the
syuusi (conclusive) and rentai (attributive) forms. The only class of predicate maintaining
this morphological distinction is the so-called keeyoo doosi (adjectival verb). In a clause
with the rentai form of this type of predicate (i.e., an adjectival verb), the GNC is actually
possible, as shown in (ii).
(ii)	Watasi-wa [[John-ga/no kenkoo-na]	riyuu]-o sitteiru.
I-top John-NOM/GEN healthy-NA(attributive) reason-ACC know
T know the reason why John is healthy.'
Unless we take the inflectional morphology of the adjectival verb to be just an ex-
ception (assuming, e.g., that its rentai form is an allomorph of the syuusi form and can
appear under limited conditions such as this case), this fact suggests, contrary to the two-T
hypothesis, that the rentai predicate has a feature compatible both with the licensor of
nominative Case and with the licensor of genitive Case. Examples such as (ii) then suggest
that the predicates appearing in GNC contexts all take the rentai inflections, whether the
subjects are marked nominative or genitive.
ga/no conversion 215
There is evidence that the rentai inflection does not signify the mechanism of the Case
conversion. Rather, a certain structural condition causes the special inflection on a
predicate apart from the condition on the GNC. This is shown by the fact that the GNC is
impossible, even if there is a rentai predicate in the sentence, as shown in (iii).
(iii)	a. [Hanako-ga/*no yuushuu-na-noni]	hoka-wa
Hanako-NOM/GEN excellent-Na(attributive) -but the-others-TOP
dameda.
not-good
"Hanako is excellent, but the others are not good/
(Shigeki Taguchi, pers. comm.)
b. Taroo-wa [Hanako-ga/*no itsumo yuushuu-na-noka]
Taroo-Top Hanako-NOM/GEN always excellent-NA(attributive)-Q
sira-nakat-ta.
know-not-PAST
'Taroo did not know whether Hanako was always excellent/
In these examples, the predicates in the bracketed clauses are rentai forms, yet the
genitive subject is disallowed. These examples clearly indicate that the presence of a rentai
form is certainly a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for licensing of genitive Case.
Therefore, it is necessary to separate the source of the GNC from that of the rentai
inflection. We suggest that the unavailability of genitive Case in (iii) indicates that the
elements right after the rentai predicates {noni 'but' in (iia) and noka 'q' in (iiib)) do not
have the same feature as the one in N/D that can license genitive Case.
REFERENCES
Bedell, George.1972. On no. In UCLA papers in syntax 3; Studies in East Asian syntax, ed.
George Bedell,1-2〇• Los Angeles: University of California.
Chomsky, Noam.1995. Categories and transformations. In The Minimalist Program, 219-
394. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Chomsky, Noam. 200〇. Minimalist inquiries: The framework. In Step by step, ed. Roger
Martin, David Michaels, and Juan Uriagereka, 89-155. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Fukui, Naoki.1986. A theory of category projection and its applications. Doctoral dis-
sertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Hale, Ken. 2002. On the Dagur object relative: Some comparative notes. Journal of East
Asian Linguistics 11:109-122.
Harada, Shin-Ichi.1971.Ga-no conversion and ideolectal variations in Japanese. Gengo
Kenkyu 60:25-38.
Hiraiwa, Ken. 2001a. On nominative-genitive conversion. In MITWPL 39: A few from
Building E39, ed. Elena Guerzoni and Ora Matushansky, 66-125. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Working Papers in Linguistics.
Hiraiwa, Ken. 2001b. Multiple Agree and Defective Intervention Constraint. In MITWPL
40: HUMIT 200〇, ed. Ora Matushansky, Albert Costa, Javier Martin-Gonzalez, Lance
Nathan, and Adam Szczegielniak, 67-8〇. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working Papers in
Linguistics.
Hoji, Hajime.199〇• Sloppy identity in Japanese. Ms., University of Southern California,
Los Angeles.
216 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Inoue, Kazuko.1976. Henkee bunpoo to nihongo [Transformational grammar and Japa-
nese] .Tokyo: Taishukan.
Kornfilt, Jaklin. 2003. Subject Case in Turkish nominalized clauses. In Syntactic structures
and morphological information, ed. U. Junghanns and L. Szucsich, 129-215. Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Lasnik, Howard.1995. Last Resort and Attract F. In Proceedings of the 6th annual meeting
of the Formal Linguistics Society of Mid-America 1,ed. Leslie Gabriele, Debra Hardison,
and Robert Westmoreland, 62-81. Bloomington: Indiana University Linguistics
Club.
Lasnik, Howard.1999. Chains of arguments. In Working minimalism, ed. Samuel D. Ep-
stein and Norbert Hornstein, 189-216. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Lees, Robert B.1965. Turkish nominalizations and a problem of ellipsis. Foundations of
Language 1-2:112—121.
Miyagawa, Shigeru.1989. Structure and Case marking in Japanese. San Diego, Calif: Aca-
demic Press.
Miyagawa, Shigeru.1993. Case-checking and Minimal Link Condition. In MITWPL 19:
Papers on Case and agreement II, ed. Colin Phillips, 213-254. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Working Papers in Linguistics.
Miyagawa, Shigeru. 2003. A-movement scrambling and options without optionality. In
Word order and scrambling, ed. Simin Karimi, 177-20〇. Oxford: Blackwell.
Miyagawa, Shigeru, and Fusae Ekida. 2003. Historical development of the accusative Case
marking in Japanese as seen in classical literary texts. Journal of Japanese Linguistics
19:1-109.
Murasugi, Keiko.1991.Noun phrases in Japanese and English: A study in syntax, learn-
ability, and acquisition. Doctoral dissertation, University of Connecticut, Storrs.
Nakai, Satoru.198〇. A reconsideration of ga-no conversion in Japanese. Papers in Lin-
guistics 13:279-32〇.
Ochi, Masao. 2001.Move F and ga/no conversion in Japanese. Journal of East Asian Lin-
guistics 10:247-286.
Ochi, Masao. 2005. Gal no conversion and overt object shift in Japanese. Nanzan Linguistics
2:61-8〇•
Saito, Mamoru.1983. Case and government in Japanese. In Proceedings of the 2nd West
Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics, ed. Michael Barlow, David P. Flickinger, and
Michael T. Westcoat, 247-259. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI Publications.
Saito, Mamoru. 2004. Genitive subjects in Japanese: Implications for the theory of null
objects. In Non-nominative subjects 2, ed. Peri Bhaskararao and Karumuri Venkata
Subbarao, 103-118. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Sakai, Hiromu.1994. Complex NP Constraint and case-conversions in Japanese. In Current
topics in English and Japanese, ed. Masaru Nakamura, 179-203. Tokyo: Hituzi Syoboo.
Shibatani, Masayoshi.1975. Perceptual strategies and the phenomena of particle conversion
in Japanese. In Papers from the Parasession on Functionalism, ed. Robin E. Grossman,
L. James San, and Timothy J. Vance, 469-48〇. Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society.
Shibatani, Masayoshi.1977. Grammatical relations and surface Case. Language 53:789-809.
Shibatani, Masayoshi.1978. Nihongo no bunseki [Analyses of Japanese]. Tokyo: Taishukan.
Ura, Hiroyuki.1993. L-relatedness and its parametric variation. In MITWPL 19: Papers on
Case and agreement II, ed. Colin Phillips, 377-399. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working
Papers in Linguistics.
Watanabe, Akira.1996. Nominative-genitive conversion and agreement in Japanese: A
cross-linguistic perspective. Journal of East Asian Linguistics 5:373-41〇.
CHAPTER 9
PROCESSING
SENTENCES IN
JAPANESE
EDSON T. MIYAMOTO
9.1	Introduction
This chapter summarizes research investigating how sentences are processed in
Japanese (see Nakayama, Mazuka, and Shirai 2006, for a recent collection of papers
on Japanese psycholinguistics; see also Kess and Miyamoto 1994 for an extensive
survey of early work). The goal in this field is to examine how people uncover the
meaning intended when they read (or hear) a sentence. Ambiguity plays a central
role. At each point in the sentence, how do readers choose among alternative
interpretations often available? What do those preferences tell us about the way
grammatical knowledge (as well as world knowledge and social conventions) is put
to use? What are the cognitive resources (e.g., working memory, attention) used,
and how do they shape this process?
Sections 9.2 and 9.3 provide basic background. Section 9.4 introduces a con-
troversy involving head-final languages and summarizes related experimental re-
sults in Japanese. Sections 9.5-97 discuss how clause boundaries are determined in
Japanese and how readers recover from initial misanalyses. Section 9.8 describes the
processing of long-distance dependencies for fronted 印/！-phrases. The remaining
sections summarize work related to such dependencies in relative clauses, scram-
bling, and in-situ 印//-phrases.
218 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
9.2	Description of the Core Data
The simplest way to collect data on sentence comprehension is to ask readers to
rate sentences (according to their naturalness, acceptability, and so on). This type
of questionnaire data is off-line as it only provides a measurement after reading of
the entire sentence has finished.
Although off-line results provide critical information, they often have to be
complemented with on-line studies in which measurements are taken as the sen-
tence is being read. The time scale of interest is usually in the order of a few hundred
milliseconds (ms).
9.2.1	Reading Time Measurements
This discussion draws primarily from reports of reading experiments, in which
similar sentences are compared and relatively longer reading times are taken as a
sign of difficulty. In eye-tracking, eye movements are recorded every few millisec-
onds and measures of difficulty include fixations (how long the eyes fixate on a word
or sequence of words) and regressions (how often the eyes return to a prior region;
see Rayner 1998 for a summary).
Because eye-tracking requires special equipment and can be taxing on partici-
pants (accurate data collection may require participants1 heads to be kept immobile
through the use of chin rests and bite-bars), computer-based methods are often used.
In self-paced reading, participants press a button to see the next region of the sen-
tence, and the elapsed time between button presses is assumed to correspond to the
reading time for that region. A region can include one or more words (usually one or
more bunsetsus in Japanese) depending on the hypothesis being tested, but it is
crucial that the segmentation be chosen carefully so that it does not lead to artificial
breaks or groupings (words in a region tend to be grouped together during reading).
Presentation can be center-screen, so that a new region replaces the previous region in
the center of the screen at each button press. Or it can be of the noncumulative
moving-window type, in which case the whole sentence is presented masked, with
each character replaced with dashes or dots (in Japanese, spaces are used to indicate
the regions of presentation), and for each button press a new region is revealed while
all other regions remain masked. Although readers cannot return to previous re-
gions, self-paced results (of the noncumulative moving-window type in particular)
are well correlated with eye-tracking data (Just, Carpenter, and Woolley 1982).
To determine whether a word is read slowly in a given sentence, its reading times
are compared to those of a word in a similar baseline sentence. The choice of an
adequate baseline is crucial. Such comparisons are only meaningful if the words are
similar in terms of length, part of speech, frequency, and familiarity. Moreover,
because readers may speed up as they read more words in the sentence, comparisons
are preferentially made between words that occupy similar linear positions in the
sentences.
PROCESSING SENTENCES IN JAPANESE 219
In rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP), words are flashed on a computer
monitor for short periods of time一around 350 ms per word in English, and 700
ms per bunsetsu in Japanese. The difference in presentation rates in the two
languages is largely explained by the fact that bunsetsus usually include both a
content word and a functional word; therefore, they contain twice as much in-
formation. RSVP is particularly useful in brain imaging studies, in which partic-
ipants are required to read sentences without moving their bodies (including
hands and eyes).
9.2.2	Brain Responses
The brain responses discussed are similar to those observed for other languages. For
event-related potentials (ERP), difficulty in integrating a word into the syntactic
representation of the sentence (in syntactic violations in particular) leads to a P600
response (i.e., a positive deflection peaking 600 ms after the onset of the un-
grammatical word; e.g., after the declarative particle yo following a w/i-phrase,
Nakagome et al.2001).Semantically unexpected words (e.g., dekaketa 'went out' in
zisyo-ni dekaketa "went out to a dictionary') elicit an N400 (a negative response that
peaks 400 ms after the offending word; Nakagome et al.2001;see also Kiguchi and
Miyamoto 2004, for its localization using magnetoencephalography, MEG).
In functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), Broca's area, a brain region
usually associated with grammatical functions (see, e.g., Sakai et al. 2002 and
references therein for more specific localizations), is more active during the pro-
cessing of scrambling (Koizumi 2005) and center-embedding constructions (Inui
et al.1998).
9.3	Working Memory
Working memory (see Baddeley 1992 for a summary; Baddeley 2000 for recent
developments; and Just and Carpenter 1992, Caplan and Waters 1999 for models
specific to language processing) plays a role in much of the following discussions.
Working memory is where information is held for short periods of time (roughly
up to two seconds) in order for various types of cognitive tasks to be performed,
and it is severely constrained in the amount of information it can hold (consider
how hard it is not to forget a phone number while dialing it). Item length is also
important as the number of words that can be recalled decreases if the words are
long. This word length effect indicates that one of the components of working
memory is phonologically based (the other component handles visual informa-
tion). The phonological nature of the encoding is further supported by the pho-
nological similarity effect—the difficulty in recalling items that sound similar.
220
THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
The small capacity in working memory is compensated by chunking (Miller
1963), an operation that associates items together so that they occupy fewer slots in
working memory. Consider how much harder it is to recall the sequence of ten
digits 6-5-1-9-4-5-2-0-1-0 than the three numbers 65-1945-2010, or that in 2010 it
will have been sixty-five years since the end of World War II. A rough parallel can
be drawn with sentence processing as we associate words together (e.g., a subject
with a verb) creating links with our long-term memory (e.g., that a war ended in
1945) to create a more abstract representation that occupies fewer slots so that we
have more capacity to process upcoming words in the sentence.
9.3.1	Individual Differences and Reading Ability
Individual differences in working memory capacity for reading can be measured
with reading span (Daneman and Carpenter 1980), which is defined as the largest
number of sentences a person is able to read aloud and later recall the last word for
each one of them. Readers with different reading spans have been argued to display
divergent reading patterns to long-distance dependencies (King and Just 1991;but
see Caplan and Waters 1999 for criticisms).
Using the Japanese version of the reading span task (Osaka 1998))in which the
word to be recalled is not necessarily the last one in the sentence so that its part of
speech can be varied, reading span has been shown to improve if the word to be
recalled is the one regarded independently as being the most important in the
sentence (Osaka et al.2002).
Whereas reading span reflects readers' abilities in handling transient infor-
mation in working memory, reading also requires retrieving information from
long-term storage. In one such a measure, participants are shown words (written in
kanji) that are commonly used in Japanese but rarely written in kanji and asked to
write down their pronunciation (the Hyakurakan test; Amano and Kondo 1999).
Reading span correlates poorly with vocabulary tests but correlates well with
general reading abilities (as measured by multiple-choice university entrance ex-
aminations). In contrast, the Hyakurakan test has not only a high correlation with
vocabulary but also a higher correlation with reading abilities than reading span
does (Jincho, Mazuka, and Namiki 2004). One way of understanding this contrast
is that reading span is a better predictor of local processing (e.g., how fast a sentence
segment will be read), whereas long-term memory measures may correlate better
with how well a text is understood overall.
9.4	Controversies
One basic question is how similar the processing of sentences is across different
languages. One extreme view is that each language requires a specific processing
algorithm apart from its own distinct grammar. In other words, not only is the
PROCESSING SENTENCES IN JAPANESE
221
grammar parameterized, but also the way people use the grammar to process sen-
tences differs for each language. This approach raises issues in learnability (children
have to set grammatical and processing parameters simultaneously, but see Mazuka
1998 for a constrained parameterization and its possible trigger and Hasegawa 1990
and Inoue and Fodor 1995 for criticisms of earlier versions of Mazuka's proposal),
and it is also conceptually more complex than its alternative, which is the null
hypothesis often assumed in the field. In this other type of proposal, the assumption
is that all that children need to set are the parameters in the grammar, as the
processing algorithm is universal to all languages (Fodor 1998).
9.4.1	Incremental Processing
One central topic within the parameterization debate is whether sentences in head-
final languages like Japanese are processed incrementally, so that each word read is
interpreted immediately in relation to the previous words in the sentence. The
alternative is for comprehension to lag behind the actual reading of the words in
the sentence (see Inoue and Fodor 1995 for discussion). For head-initial languages,
there is a consensus that there is no delay. The problem is clearest at the clausal
level. For example, in the fragment Mary brought, it is unnecessary to wait for the
next words in order to interpret Mary as the agent of brought. Because verbs come
at the end in head-final languages, incremental processing is more contentious. In
the following example, each individual NP can be created and interpreted im-
mediately (i.e., there are 'a student from Fukuoka', ca teacher', and ca letter').
(1)Fukuoka syussin-no gakusei-ga	sensei-ni tegami-o
Fukuoka native-GEN student-NOM teacher-dat letter-ACC
The question is to what extent the NPs are associated together as part of a single
representation before the verb is seen. An incremental solution is to assume that
case markers provide enough information for readers to understand that the stu-
dent did something to the letter for the benefit of the teacher, although the exact
action is not known. But that is enough to bind the NPs together in one single
chunk based on the prediction of an underspecified predicate (i.e., partial infor-
mation about the predicate is used to project the necessary structure, e.g., a VP
node, to associate the NPs; see Den and Inoue 1997, Miyamoto 2002, Yamashita
2000, for related discussions).
In contrast, in head-driven models the lexical head has to be present for a node
to be projected (e.g., Pritchett 1991).As a by-product, processing must be non-
incremental in Japanese, as all arguments (and adjuncts) cannot be associated
together until the verb is read because only then is the VP node created. Few
experimental studies claim to support this type of model (e.g., O'Grady, Nakamura
and Lee 2002, but the result is compatible with incremental models that adopt a
proposal such as Gibson 1998), and most arguments have been conceptual (head-
driven processing is obligatory if one adopts Chomsky's [1981]Projection Principle
in a strict fashion in performance; Pritchett 1991),computationally based (to
222
THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
circumvent limitations in top-down and bottom-up parsers, Abney 1989; but see
Abney and Johnson 1991 for an alternative algorithm), or based on problems with
incremental parsing in Japanese. One such problem is that case markers cannot aid
in interpretation because they do not have a one-to-one correspondence with
thematic roles (Pritchett 1991).However, it is known nowadays that lexical am-
biguity does not prevent incremental interpretation. For example, when reading an
ambiguous verb that allows more than one argument structure, English speakers
interpret an NP using the argument structure most frequently used with that verb
(Garnsey et al.1997). Similarly, Japanese speakers may interpret a case-marked NP
based on the most common use of that case marker with such a noun.
Head-driven models have serious problems of their own (see Miyamoto 2002
for discussion). For example, they predict a considerable memory load, as argu-
ments have to be memorized individually until the predicate is read, whereas in
incremental models constituents are associated together and can occupy fewer slots
in working memory. The burden implied by head-driven models should be par-
ticularly problematic fbr the acquisition of head-final languages (e.g., leading to
shorter utterances), but such typological discrepancies have not been reported.
Apart from detailed discussions based on intuitive judgments (A. Inoue 1991),
current evidence supporting incremental models include studies examining
reading times (Kamide and Mitchell1999) and ERPs (Oishi and Sakamoto 2004) to
clause-final predicates. More critical to the resolution of the controversy, various
studies have examined reactions prior to the predicate. These include eye move-
ments while listening to sequences ofNPs (Kamide, Altmann, and Haywood 2003);
ERPs fbr sequences ofNPs (Garnsey et al.2001)and for scrambled NPs (Ueno and
Kluender 2003); and reading times for scrambled NPs (Mazuka, Itoh and Kondo
2002; Miyamoto and Takahashi 2002a, 2004), for scrambled 印万-phrases (Aoshima,
Phillips, and Weinberg 2004), for pronouns (Aoshima, Phillips, and Weinberg
2003), and for sequences of case-marked NPs (Miyamoto 2002). Although each
result considered individually is unlikely to settle the issue, taken together the
results make a strong case against a large class of nonincremental models. The
following sections elaborate on two lines of evidence.
9.4.2	Anticipatory Eye Movements
While listening to instructions (e.g., pick up the candy), English speakers' eyes move
to the relevant object about 145 ms after the end of its name. Because more than 150
ms are necessary to execute eye movements, the result suggests that the decision to
move the eyes can occur even before the end of the word is heard (Tanenhaus et al.
1995; see Mazuka et al.2005 for data on Japanese). Such rapid reactions allow this
type of methodology to be used to investigate how listeners comprehend utterances
in detail. In a study investigating incremental processing, Japanese speakers heard
sentences as in (2) while looking at a picture of a waitress, a client, a hamburger,
and other objects (Kamide, Altmann, and Haywood 2003).
PROCESSING SENTENCES IN JAPANESE 22Z
(2)	a. Dative object condition
Ueitoresu-ga kyaku-ni	tanosigeni hanbaagaa-o	hakobu.
waitress-NOM customer-d at merrily	hamburger-ACC carry
'The waitress merrily carries the hamburger to the customer?
b. Accusative object condition
Ueitoresu-ga kyaku-o	tanosigeni karakau.
waitress-NOM customer-ACC	merrily	tease
'The waitress merrily teases the customer?
By the time the word 'merrily' is heard, the sentences in (2) differ only in the
case marker of'customer'. However, already by then, participants had made more
anticipatory eye movements toward the hamburger while listening to the dative-
object sentence in (2a) compared with when they heard the accusative condition in
(2b) (Kamide, Altmann, and Haywood 2003). This result suggests that the par-
ticipants considered the hamburger to be a more natural continuation tor the
dative object. The result is unexpected if NPs were processed independently as
argued by nonincremental models.
9.4.3	Case Markers as Indicators of Clause Boundaries
If processing is incremental in Japanese, the question arises as to how readers
interpret a sequence of NPs (and PPs) in relation to each other before the predicate
is read. Because embedded clauses in Japanese do not have any markers to indicate
their beginning (see A. Inoue 1991 for a discussion), readers may not even know
how many clauses there are in a sequence of NPs unless they read the sentence until
the end. But under some circumstances, case markers can indicate where clause
boundaries lie. For example, in a sequence containing two accusative NPs, readers
can assume that at least two clauses are necessary based on the double-o constraint,
according to which two accusative NPs cannot be in the same clause in Japanese
(Harada 1973 and references therein). In fact, long reading times can be observed at
the second NP-o in such cases. That the long reading times are not simply a sign of
surprise to an unusual sequence of NPs is suggested by fester reading times to the
head of a relative clause later in the sentence (Miyamoto 2002). The result is
compatible with the claim that the long reading times at the second accusative NP
are used to create the initial boundary for an embedded clause, which fecilitates
processing at the head noun of the relative clause.
Furthermore, given the special properties of nominative NPs in Japanese (they
cannot be scrambled, Saito 1985; they have to be associated with an inflected
predicate, Takezawa 1987), it is possible that readers use such NPs as anchors around
which other NPs in the same clause are interpreted (Miyamoto 2002; see also
Uehara and Bradley 2002, experiment 3, on the preference to have each animate
nominative NP in a separate clause, and Mazuka, Itoh and Kondo 2001,for a P600
to nominative NPs).
224 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
The use of case markers to determine clause boundaries is illustrated in the
following example (from Kamide and Mitchell1999).
(3)	Kyoozyu-ga gakusei-ni tosyokansisyo-ga kasita
professor-NOM student-dat librarian-NOM lent
komonzyo-o miseta.
manuscript-ACC showed
"The professor showed the manuscript that the librarian had lent to the
student?
As in its English translation, ‘student-DAT’ in (3) is ambiguous and can be the
recipient of 'showed' or 'lent'. In a self-paced reading experiment, the 'showed'
interpretation was found to be preferred, even though 'student-DAT' is closer to
'lent' (Kamide and Mitchell1999). Noting that no verb in Japanese can take the
first three NPs as arguments, already at the third NP it is clear that at least two
clauses are needed in this case. The result then can be explained if one assumes that
there is a preference to insert a clause boundary where it is first clear to be necessary
(at 'librarian-NOM') leaving 'student-DAT' in the matrix clause where it attaches to
the matrix verb (see Miyamoto 2003 for discussion).
Another way of indicating the beginning of an embedded clause is to use
numeral classifier mismatch as in the following example (from Yoshida, Aoshima,
and Phillips 2004).
(4)	San-satu-no sensei-ga yonda hon
three-CL-GEN teacher-NOM read book
'Three books that the teacher read
Because the numeral classifier satu cannot be used to count people, it creates
the prediction for an upcoming noun such as 'book', and the noun 'teacher' is
taken to be the beginning of a relative clause (Yoshida, Aoshima, and Phillips
2004).
Although particles are unlikely to be the only source of information (see Iguchi
and Miyamoto 2006 and Muraoka and Sakamoto 2004 on the role of animacy), the
research above suggests how sequences of NPs can be interpreted in complex
multiple clauses before the predicate is seen.
9.4.4	A Single Processing Mechanism
The rest of this chapter assumes that processing is strictly incremental in Japanese
and that there is a single processing mechanism that subserves the processing of all
human languages. The goal then is to characterize this single processing mecha-
nism and consider how its general properties are instantiated in Japanese. One line
of research that can be pursued is to show that a strategy attested in various
languages (e.g., for w/z-phrases) is also adopted in Japanese. Another possibility is
PROCESSING SENTENCES IN JAPANESE 22Z
to investigate apparent differences in the way Japanese is processed (e.g., in relation
to relative clauses) and the issues they raise for models that assume a single pro-
cessing mechanism.
9.5	Reanalyses of Clause
Boundaries
In section 9.4.3, some clause boundaries were claimed to be inferred from case
markers. But in the absence of clause-initial markers, it is often the case that
relative clauses are only detected when material after the verb is read (but see
Misono et al.1997; Venditti 2006; Venditti and Yamashita 1994, for prosodic cues
in speech).
9.5.1	Subject Reanalyses
Up to "delivered5 in (5a) (from Inoue 1990a), the single-clause interpretation 'Taro
delivered flowers to Masako' is favored.
(5)	a. Subject reanalysis
Taro-ga	Masako-ni	hana-o	todoketa	otoko-o	tasikameta.
Taro-NOM	Masako-DAT	flower-ACC	delivered	man-ACC	scrutinized
'Taro scrutinized the man who delivered flowers to Masako.'
b.	Taro-ga	Masako-ni	hana-o	todoketa	koto-ga	wakatta.
Taro-NOM	Masako-DAT	flower-ACC	delivered	fact-NOM	found out
Tt was found out that Taro delivered flowers to Masako.'
c.	Masako-ni hana-o	todoketa	otoko-o Taro-ga tasikameta.
Masako-DAT flower-ACC delivered	man-ACC Taro-NOM scrutinized
'Taro scrutinized the man who delivered flowers to Masako.'
When the noun 'man' is read in (5a), it is clear that it is the head of a relative
clause, and the subject 'Taro-NOM' must be reanalyzed out of the clause so that a
gap can be created. A series of experiments by Masakatsu Inoue provide evidence
for difficulty at the head noun. In an eye-tracking experiment, first-pass fixations
were longer and more regressive eye movements were observed at 'man' in (5a)
compared with 'fact' in (5b) and 'man' in (5c) (Inoue 1990a). The cost to reanalyze
'Taro' out of the simple clause initially built for (5a) has also been reported for
transitive and intransitive clauses replacing the embedded ditransitive clause
headed by 'delivered' (Inoue 1990b). Furthermore, the finding that reading times
to 'man' are shorter if Taro is marked with the topic wa (M. Inoue 1991)is
compatible with the claim that displacing topicalized NPs is relatively easy
226 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
because they are in the periphery of the clause and only hold an aboutness relation
with it.
An fMRI study detected more activity in Broca's area for subject reanalysis
sentences such as (5a) compared with the left-branching (5c) with a transitive
clause replacing the ditransitive embedded clause (Inui et al.1998). The result was
claimed to be due to the center-embedding configuration of (5a), but it is also
possible that reanalysis contributed to the result.
9.5.2	Subject-Object Reanalyses
The sentences in (6) have been extensively compared (Mazuka and Itoh 1995; see
also Kondo and Mazuka 1996 regarding eye movements while reading such con-
structions aloud).
(6)	a. Subject reanalysis
Yoko-ga kodomo-o koosaten-de mikaketa onnanoko-ni
Yoko-NOM child-ACC intersection-LOC saw girl-DAT
koe-o-kaketa.
called
'Yoko called the girl who saw the child at the intersection.'
b. Subject-object reanalysis
Yoko-ga	kodomo-o koosaten-de	mikaketa takusii-ni noseta.
Yoko-NOM child-ACC	intersection-LOC saw	taxi-dat put
'Yokoj made the child get on the taxi she, saw at the intersection.'
Up to the verb 'saw' in (6a,b), the single-clause interpretation 'Yoko saw the
child at the intersection' is favored. When a head noun is detected next, the simple
clause must be reanalyzed to insert a gap for the relative clause. Mazuka and Itoh
(1995), based on intuitive judgments, observed that reanalysis is harder in (6b) than
in (6a) because of the number of arguments that have to be displaced in each case. In
(6a), only the subject 'Yoko' is displaced to the newly built matrix clause, whereas
in (6b) both 'Yoko' and the object 'child' have to be displaced. This observation has
been discussed within various reanalysis frameworks (e.g., Gorrell1995, Sturt and
Crocker 1996).
Experimental work suggests that the difficulty in (6b) comes from the ambi-
guity of 'taxi' (it can be the object or the subject of 'saw'), which hinders the
reanalysis process (Hirose and Inoue 1998). However, another self-paced reading
study indicates that even with unambiguous head nouns, (6b) is still difficult to
process (Miyamoto 2002).
Displacing more NPs is not always dispreferred. The two objects in ditransi-
tive constructions can be displaced together in situations where displacing the
accusative NP alone would be sufficient, which thus argues against proposals in
which the amount of revisions is always minimized during reanalysis (Miyamoto
2003).
PROCESSING SENTENCES IN JAPANESE 227
9.6	Implicit Prosody in
Silent Reading
The influence of prosody on the comprehension of utterances (see Venditti 2006
for a summary; see also Richards, this volume, on wh-phrases) has been recently
expanded by claims that underlying prosodic contours influence processing
decisions during silent reading as well (Fodor 2002). For example, a short modifier
('kind') is preferentially attached to the closer noun ('student'), but along modifier
('extremely kind') is preferentially attached to the farther noun ('student's sister')
so that the lengths of modifier and modifiee are similar (Hirose et al.1998, Inoue
and Fodor 1995).
(7)	(kyokutanni) sinsetsuna gakusei-no imooto
extremely kind student-GEN sister
"(extremely) kind student's sister'
Implicit-prosody effects have also been observed in the resolution of clause-
boundary ambiguities. Until 'trusted' in (8a,b), a single-clause interpretation is
preferred.
(8)	a. Single-name subject
Morisita-ga sinyaku-o	kokorokara sinyoosita yuuzintati-ni
Morisita-NOM medicine-ACC truly	trusted	friends-DAT
b.	Conjoined-name subject
Hosokawa-to	Morisita-ga	sinyaku-o	kokorokara sinyoosita
Hosokawa-and Morisita-NOM medicine-ACC truly	trusted
yuuzintati-ni
friends-DAT
c.	... syohoosen-o okutta.
prescription-ACC sent
Single name: "Morisita sent the prescription to the friends who really
trusted the medicine.'
Conjoined names: 'Hosokawa and Morisita sent the prescription to the
friends who really trusted the medicine.'
Reanalysis at 'friends' can build two types of relative clauses (see section 9.5.2).
The object 'medicine-ACc' can remain as part of the relative clause (subject re-
analysis) or be displaced to the matrix clause together with the subject (subject-
object reanalysis).
The nominative subjects in the fragments in (8a,b) differ in their lengths
(as measured by the number of minor phrases or accentual phrases), which lead to
different prosodic contours when read aloud. A majorphrase boundary (also known
as intermediate phrase) tends to be produced immediately after the conjoined
names, whereas with the single-name subject it is produced after 'medicine-ACc'
228 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(Hirose 2003, experiment 2). Those two positions for the major phrase boundary
correspond to the beginning of the embedded clause in the subject-reanalysis in-
terpretation and the subject-object reanalysis, respectively.
When asked to write sentences starting with the fragments in (8a,b), Japanese
speakers are more likely to produce completions with the subject-reanalysis in-
terpretation after reading the conjoined names in (18b) (Hirose 2003, experiment 1;
see Sato, Kobayashi, and Miyamoto 2007 for related data from deaf readers of
Japanese). This is compatible with the claim that speakers assign implicit prosodic
contours while reading in silence and that the position of the major phrase
boundary influences the interpretation of the fragments.
Furthermore, when (8a,b) are continued as in (8c), the matrix clause contains
‘prescription-ACC’,thus only the subject-reanalysis interpretation is possible (two
accusative NPs cannot be part of the same clause, hence 'medicine' has to be part of
the embedded clause). For such sentences, readers take longer at 'prescription-acc'
in the single-name subject condition than in the conjoined-names condition. This
suggests that 'medicine' is more likely to be interpreted as part of the matrix clause
in the single-name condition, where it clashes with 'prescription' (Hirose 2003,
experiments 4 and 5).
9.7	Verb Morphology
Apart from auxiliaries expressing animacy (e.g., production mistakes in animacy
agreement with iru and aru\ Nicol1998), experimental studies have been reported
on empathy markers (e.g., kureru) and on the internal structure of verbal com-
pounds.
9.7.1	Subject Reanalysis with Kureru
The auxiliary kureru at the end of (9) expresses empathy (i.e., who benefits from the
action) and has been used to force subject reanalysis (Mazuka et al.1989).
(9)	Yuuzin-ga mootyoo-de	nyuin-siteita	toki mimai-ni kite-kureta.
friend-NOM appendicitis-for hospitalized-was when visit-DAT came
'When I was hospitalized with appendicitis, my friend came to visit.'
The NP 'friend' is interpreted as the subject of 'hospitalized' until kureta
signals that the speaker was the beneficiary of the visit. This forces a subject
reanalysis to displace 'friend' to the matrix clause and insert a phonologically null
subject (identified with the speaker) in the embedded clause. Mazuka and col-
leagues did not detect difficulty for (9) (78 percent correct in truth-false judgments
and whole-sentence reading times comparable to other sentences). However, in
PROCESSING SENTENCES IN JAPANESE 229
other studies, in which participants were given the embedded verb and asked to
produce its subject, performance was at chance at the end of the sentence and only
improved gradually thereafter (Nagata 1993).
9.7.2	V-te-V Compounds
A self-paced reading study investigated sentences as in (10) (Nakatani 2006).
(10)	a. Shuzii-ga	byoositu-ni	tyuusyaki-o	mot-te-kita.
doctor-NOM	ward-DAT	syringe-ACC	brought	in
"The doctor brought a syringe into the hospital ward.'
b. Shuzii-ga	byoositu-ni	tyuusyaki-o	mot-te	tootyakusita.
doctor-NOM	ward-DAT	syringe-ACC	holding	arrived
"The doctor arrived at the hospital ward holding a syringe.'
The critical words (from the dative NP until the last word shown in (ioa,b))
were presented in one single region, and their reading times were longer in (10b)
than in (10a) and in other baseline conditions. The longer reading times for (10b)
are expected because the NP-必 is far from 'arrived', given the intervening em-
bedded clause. Thus, the result suggests that there is no embedded clause in (10a)
and motte-kita is processed as a unit.
9.8	Filler-Gap Dependencies
The processing oi filler-gap dependencies has been shown to underline a variety of
phenomena across a number of different languages. The typical example is fronted
wh-phrases in English as illustrated in the following sentence (adapted from Crain
and Fodor 1985).
(11)	Filled-gap effect (FGE)
Whoj did the children force [X] us to sing the songs for gapx last week?
As soon as the filler who in (11) is read, it triggers the search for a gap (the
thematic position of the 印万-phrase). As each ensuing word is processed, readers
look for a position where the gap can be inserted. When force is read, the gap can be
inserted (as indicated by [X]) and who can be interpreted as the direct object of this
verb. A slow down occurs when the word us is read next as it becomes clear that the
position of the gap is incorrect (Crain and Fodor 1985). This type of filled-gap effect
is evidence for strict incremental processing as the required gap is inserted without
look-ahead to check the next word in the sentence.
The preference to insert the gap as soon as possible is consistent with the claim
that long dependencies consume cognitive resources such as working memory
2)0 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
necessary to keep the filler and its gap requirement active until the gap position is
found. In some models, this is a special case of a general phenomenon as readers
are assumed to keep track of the syntactic heads necessary to complete the sen-
tence. The memory cost at each point in the sentence depends on the number of
predicted heads and the amount of material processed since each head was first
predicted. The idea is that the maintenance of each prediction consumes cognitive
resources, thus the more predictions and the longer they are kept active in working
memory, the more costly their processing (Gibson 1998, and references therein,
also Babyonyshev and Gibson 1999, for a discussion on Japanese).
Many of the discussions in the following sections revolve around filler-gap
dependencies or generalizations of them. It is important to emphasize that the claims
made here are related to the parsing process and not to syntax. For example, by
handling scrambling in Japanese and fronted wh-phrases in English as a single
phenomenon subsumed under filler-gap dependencies, the intention is not to claim
that those constructions are syntactically identical. Rather, the point is that scram-
bling and fronted wh-phrases share similar types of configurations from the point of
view of parsing in the sense that both constructions involve a dislocated filler that has
to be held in working memory until its corresponding gap is found in the sentence.
9.9	Relative Clauses
Cross-linguistic work on relative clauses has been particularly active in the in-
vestigation of gap position (the position that is relativized in the clause) and
attachment ambiguities. Of particular interest is the fact that relative clauses across
different languages can come after the head noun they modify (postnominal rel-
ative clauses) or precede the head noun {prenominal relative clauses). Such a
difference in relative position is crucial because it changes the types of information
available at each point.
9.9.1	Relative Clauses and Gap Position
Given that relative clauses involve a dependency between a filler (the modified noun)
and a gap, a preference to minimize such dependencies has been claimed to explain
why postnominal relative clauses with the gap in subject position are easier to
understand than those with the gap in object position in a number of European
languages (English: King and Just 1991;French: Holmes and 〇,Regan 1981;inter
alia).
(12)	a. Subject-gap relative clause
the senator； that gapi accused the reporter
b. Object-gap relative clause
the senator that the reporter accused gapi
PROCESSING SENTENCES IN JAPANESE 2ZI
For prenominal relative clauses, the filler-gap distance predicts that object gaps
should be easier to understand than subject gaps, contrary to results in Japanese
using questionnaires (Sheldon 1976) and sei仁paced reading (Ishizuka, Nakatani
and Gibson 2003, Miyamoto and Nakamura 2003).
Interestingly, self-paced reading results for prenominal relative clauses in
Mandarin Chinese have been claimed to favor gaps in object position (Hsiao and
Gibson 2003; see Hsu 2003 for criticisms; also Lin, Fong, and Lever 2005 for a
subject preference with possessor relative clauses), and data from aphasic patients
indicate that object gaps are also easier in Cantonese (Law and Leung 2000). Thus,
Japanese may be exceptional, and its preference for subject gaps may be caused by
the syntactic properties of its relative clauses (see Miyamoto and Nakamura 2003
for discussion), which may also explain the availability of constructions usually not
seen in other languages (for the processing of some of such constructions, see
Nakamura and Miyamoto 2006 on double-gap relative clauses, Yamashita 1995 on
gapless relative clauses, Yoshida and Sano 2001 on head-internal relative clauses).
9.9.2	Relative Clause Attachment
Another line of research started with the finding that when reading the daughter of
the colonel who suffered the accident in their native language, speakers of English
prefer the interpretation in which the relative clause attaches to the low noun in the
tree structure (colonel), whereas Spanish speakers prefer the high noun (daughter)
interpretation (Cuetos and Mitchell1988; for a list of results for various languages,
see http://etm4rc.googlepages.com/table.html). Questionnaires indicate that there
is an overall preference for the high noun in Japanese (Kamide and Mitchell1997,
experiment 1;also Hirose 2001;Sturt, Branigan, and Matsumoto-Sturt 1999).
Reading times have also been measured for unambiguous sentences (disambigu-
ated through plausibility manipulations) as in (13).
(13)	a. High attachment
[RC Hoosekibako-no sumi-ni	nokotteita] hannin no
jewelry-box-GEN corner-LOC remained criminal gen
simon	〇	keisatu-ga	nantoka mitukedasita.
fingerprint acc police-NOM somehow found
'The police somehow found the fingerprint of the criminal that
remained in the corner of the jewelry box?
b. Low attachment
[RC Gozyuudai dansei-to suiteisareru] hannin no simon	〇
5os	male-as supposed criminal gen fingerprint acc
keisatu-ga nantoka mitukedasita.
police-NOM somehow found
'The police somehow found the fingerprint of the criminal who is
supposed to be a male in his 50s.'
232 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
The high attachment sentence in (13a) was read more slowly at the low noun
'criminal', the genitive marker, and the high noun 'fingerprint', but it was faster at the
end of the sentence (Kamide and Mitchell1997, experiment 2). Three types of ex-
planations have been suggested fbr this reversal in reading times. First, the genitive
marker no was shown separate from the noun 'criminal' in the self-paced reading
presentation, delaying the realization that another noun was upcoming, thus possibly
giving an artificial advantage to the low noun interpretation (Kamide et al.1998).
However, even when the two nouns and markers are shown in one single
region {hannin-no simon-o), there is still an initial preference for the low noun
interpretation (Miyamoto, Nakamura, and Takahashi 2004).
A second possibility is that readers are nondeterministically considering dif-
ferent interpretations at different points in the sentence (Kamide and Mitchell
1997), but recent evidence suggests otherwise as the same interpretation is main-
tained throughout (Aoyama and Inoue 2005).
A third explanation is that the relative clauses are initially interpreted as matrix
clauses, and the reanalysis process to turn them into relative clauses favors the
low noun as the attachment site. When canonical versions of (13a,b) are used,
making the embedded clause reading available before the head nouns, the initial
advantage for low attachment disappears (Miyamoto, Nakamura, and Takahashi
2004).
Other factors have also been investigated by varying the types (e.g., inalien-
ables; Uetsuki and Tokimoto 2004) and number of head nouns (Miyamoto et al.
1999) involved.
9.10	Scrambling
Some initial studies did not detect behavioral differences to scrambled orders and
their canonical versions and have been used to support nonconfigurational models
of Japanese syntax or gap-less representations for scrambled orders (Yamashita
1997; see also section 9.12 for discussions of Nakayama 1995, Sakamoto 2002).
However, mounting evidence suggests that scrambled orders are harder to un-
derstand (apart from the studies discussed in the following sections, see Hagiwara
and Caplan 1990 for data from aphasic patients, and Koizumi 2005 for an fMRI
study).
9.10.1	Reading Times to Scrambled Orders
Self-paced reading studies did not find statistically reliable differences between
scrambled and canonical orders when using ditransitive verbs (Yamashita 1997) or
transitive verbs (Miyamoto and Takahashi 2002b, Nakayama 1995; see also section
9.12 for the probe recognition results of these experiments). Similarly, a center-
PROCESSING SENTENCES IN JAPANESE 2ZZ
screen self-paced reading experiment did not detect differences between the
transitive sentences below (Mazuka, Itoh, and Kondo 2002; the coindexed gap
indicates the canonical position of the scrambled constituent).
(14)	a. Canonical order
Mariko-ga otooto-o yonda.
Mariko-NOM brother-ACC called
b. Scrambled order
Otooto-Oj Mariko-ga gapi yonda.
brother-ACC Mariko-NOM called
'Mariko called her brother.5
However, in an eye-tracking experiment, 'Mariko-NOM5 in the scrambled
(14b) was read more slowly than 'brother-ACC5 in the canonical (14a), according to
total reading times and regressive eye movements, but not in more immediate
measures such as first-pass fixations (Mazuka, Itoh, and Kondo 2002; see Kondo,
Mazuka, and Kakehi 2002 for similar eye-tracking results and an interaction be-
tween lexical familiarity and word order; also Mazuka, Itoh, and Kondo 2001 for
ERP data).
In the same studies, Mazuka and colleagues also included sentences like the
following in which the second argument is modified by a prenominal relative
clause.
(15)	a. Canonical order
Mariko-ga [RC soto-de buranko-ni notte-ita] otooto-o	yonda.
Mariko-NOM	outside swing-DAT riding	brother-ACC called
'Mariko called her brother who was riding on a swing outside.5
b. Scrambled order
Mariko-Oi [RC soto-de buranko-ni notte-ita] otooto-ga
Mariko-ACC	outside swing-DAT riding	brother-NOM
gapi yonda.
called
'The brother who was riding on a swing outside called Mariko.5
The canonical sentence is initially misanalyzed as 'Mariko was riding the swing
outside5 and a subject reanalysis is necessary at the head noun (section 9.5); nev-
ertheless, 'brother5 is read more quickly in the canonical sentence than in the
scrambled sentence. The difficulty at 'brother-NOM5 in (15b) was detected in self-
paced reading as well as in first-pass gaze time, total gaze time, and number of
regressive eye movements (Mazuka, Itoh, and Kondo 2002).
Longer reading times were also detected in self-paced reading with ditransitive
clauses followed by two other clauses in a left-branching configuration (Miyamoto
and Takahashi 2002a, experiment 1).The extra clauses and the inclusion of a
comprehension question after each sentence may have forced participants to read
more carefully than usual, thus depleting cognitive resources and making the
difficulty with scrambling more evident.
234 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
The results indicate that the difficulty in processing simple sentences with
scrambled order is relatively small and may not be detected in sei仁paced reading.
Slow reading times are more readily detected in complex sentences.
9.10.2	Plausibility Judgments and Word Order
A plausibility task has also been used to investigate scrambled word orders by
measuring the time necessary to decide if a sentence makes sense. For transitive
constructions (such as (14)))it took longer to decide that the sentence made sense
when the order was scrambled (Chujo 1983). Recently, various constructions have
been investigated (see Koizumi 2005 for a summary). For example, reaction times
are faster for the ga-ni-o order than the ga-o-ni order for ditransitive verbs (Koi-
zumi and Tamaoka 2004). The ga-ni order elicits faster reaction times for passives,
but the ni-ga order is faster for potentials (Tamaoka et al.2005, who also inves-
tigated causatives).
The results from the plausibility task confirm that there is a processing cost
associated with scrambled orders, even in simple sentences without artifically long
phrases. But because the whole sentence is shown at once, this task is not very
informative and it cannot indicate where exactly in the sentence the reader is
having difficulty. Therefore, it is unclear whether this type of task can be used to
disentangle the various sources of difficulty in scrambling (for discussion, see
Miyamoto and Nakamura 2005) or to make claims about nonincrementality (as in
Tamaoka et al.2005).
9.10.3	Sources of Difficulty in Scrambling
A number of factors may be involved in the longer reading times for scrambled
sentences compared with their canonical versions as the ones in (14) (see Miya-
moto and Takahashi 2002a for discussion). When the sentence-initial direct object
is read, the subject may be assumed to have been dropped, thus some time may be
necessary to create a null subject. Then, when the nominative subject is detected,
reanalysis is necessary to remove the null subject.
A second factor is frequency. For example, an accusative object is rarely fol-
lowed by a nominative NP (see section 9.10.5). Thus, there is the possibility that
long reading times occur at the nominative NP because it is rarely expected in such
a configuration.
Another factor is the adjacency constraint—the preference for direct objects to
be next to the verb. After a scrambled accusative NP, a constituent other than the
expected verb is likely to be disruptive. ERP data indicate that immediately after a
scrambled NP-o, a demonstrative (the first word of a NP-g〃) elicits a P600 (Ueno
and Kluender 2003), which suggests difficulty in integrating this word into the
syntactic representation.
PROCESSING SENTENCES IN JAPANESE 2ZZ
Those factors are not necessarily independent of each other, and to some
extent they may all be related to the filler-gap dependency needed for the inter-
pretation of scrambled constituents. Whenever possible, readers may prefer to
avoid the cost of such dependencies by assuming that a constituent is in its ca-
nonical position.
9.10.4	Filler-Gap Dependencies in Scrambling
In an ERP study, a long subject following a scrambled direct object elicited a
sustained anterior negativity before the verb was seen (Ueno and Kluender 2003), a
response usually associated with extra memory load. This may have been caused by
the processing of a filler-gap dependency between the scrambled constituent (the
filler) and its thematic position in a manner similar to the processing of fronted
w/i-phrases (section 9.8). The results of a self-paced reading experiment using
sentences such as the following (from Miyamoto and Takahashi 2004) support this
interpretation.
(16)	a.	Ueitoresu-wa	doogu-ga	okareteiru	sooko-de	kokku-Oj
waitress-10?	tools-NOM	stored	room-LOC	cook-ACC
rezigakari-ni gap\ syookaisita sooda.
cashier-DAi	introduced	seems
b.	Ueitoresu-wa	kokku-o,	doogu-ga	okareteiru	sooko-de
waitress-10?	cook-ACC	tools-NOM	stored	room-LOC
rezigakari-ni gap\ syookaisita sooda.
cashier-DAi	introduced	seems
"The waitress seems to have introduced the cook to the cashier in the
room where the tools are stored.5
In (16a,b), ‘cook-ACC’ was scrambled and a gap is necessary after the dative NP.
The assumption is that the gap is created as soon as it is clear that the NP-o was
scrambled, in other words at the dative NP, before the verb is seen (see Aoshima,
Phillips, and Weinberg 2004 for related evidence). Because the distance between
filler and gap is greater in (16b), it should be harder to create the gap in this
sentence (see Gibson 1998 on the effects of dependency length). This was in fact
the case, as the reading times for 'cashier-DAi' were longer in (16b) than in (16a),
whereas no differences were found between similar sentences with the direct ob-
ject in canonical position (Miyamoto and Takahashi 2004). Furthermore, cor-
pus counts suggest that these reading time patterns cannot be explained by the
frequency of these constructions in newspapers (Miyamoto and Takahashi
2002a).
It is possible that for simple sentences (as in (14)), the cost of the filler-gap
dependency is too small to be detected in self-paced reading, and it is picked up
only in more sensitive measurements such as eye-tracking. With long dependen-
cies, the cost may be large enough to be revealed in self-paced reading as well. In
2)6 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
ERP, length seems to matter as well given that long NPs preceding transitive verbs
lead to differences at the NPs themselves (Ueno and Kluender 2003), whereas short
NPs in ditransitive constructions only lead to reliable differences at the predicate
(Koso, Hagiwara, and Soshi 2005).
The filler-gap model is also supported by a self-paced reading result with
scrambled wh-phrases in which a filled-gap effect (see section 9.8) was detected
(Aoshima, Phillips, and Weinberg 2004; see also section 9.12 for reactivation effects).
9.10.5	Frequency of Scrambled Orders
Scrambled orders are commonly claimed to be infrequent, but there are few re-
ports with exact figures. The subject-object-verb (SOV) order has been claimed to
be seventeen times as frequent as the OSV order (Kuno 1973:353-354). In a survey of
2,635 sentences from various sources, fewer than 1 percent included scrambled
constituents (Yamashita 2002).
Moreover, corpus counts and completion data indicate that a sentence-initial
object NP is rarely in a scrambling configuration preceding an overt subject. Out
of 4,621 sentence-initial accusative NPs in the Kyoto University Corpus (Kurohashi
and Nagao 1997), fewer than 2 percent were followed by an overt subject; in
the remaining 98 percent of the cases, the subject was left implicit (Miyamoto
and Nakamura 2005). Similarly, when asked to write a sentence starting with
a NP-o, native speakers of Japanese dropped the subject in 210 instances (84.3
percent) and included a subject in 39 instances (15.7 percent). For NP-ni, 47
completions (19.8 percent) were followed by an overt subject (Miyamoto and
Nakamura 2005).
In the same completion study, NP-o was likely to be immediately followed by a
predicate (64.7 percent) but rarely by NP-nz (2 percent). In contrast, NP-ni was
equally likely to be followed by a predicate (36.7 percent) or NP-0 (33.3 percent;
Miyamoto and Nakamura 2005). In other words, the canonical ni-o order is fre-
quent, but the scrambled o-ni is rare.
9.11	Production
A survey of sentence production is beyond the scope of this chapter; however, two
studies are discussed as examples of how production may affect the frequency with
which people are exposed to different constructions.
Whether frequency-based accounts can explain comprehension difficulty re-
mains an open question, and they may seem unsatisfactory conceptually. If a
construction is easy to understand because it is frequently used, that begs the
question as to why the construction is frequently used in the first place. One
PROCESSING SENTENCES IN JAPANESE 2)/
possibility is that production factors determine the frequency with which syntactic
constructions are used. Two factors often claimed to affect the production of
scrambled constituents are NP length and information status in discourse.
With short NPs, fewer than 5 percent of utterances produced are scrambled
(08V). However, when the object is long, that number rises to 20 percent (Ya-
mashita and Chang 2001).One possible explanation is that speakers prefer to front
the long object to keep the argument heads close to the predicate, thus shortening
the dependencies.
However, another study did not find effects of information status on scram-
bling. After hearing ditransitive constructions, speakers were more likely to reverse
the order of the two objects when the original order was scrambled (thus, recalling
ni-o after hearing o-ni 67.2 percent of the time) than when the original order was
canonical (29.2 percent). There was also a preference to recall given information
before new information, but information status did not interact with word order,
as the advantage for the given-new order was virtually the same for both orders
(20.2 percent for ni-o and 20.3 percent for o-ni; Ferreira and Yoshita 2003, figure 3);
this suggests that scrambling in Japanese is not used to indicate information status
in discourse.
9.12	Antecedent Resolution for
Pronouns and Gaps
Work in English indicates that the antecedent of pronouns and gaps is reactivated
when those elements are processed during sentence comprehension (Lever and
McElree 1988). Immediately after reading sentences such as the following, partic-
ipants are shown a probe word and have to decide whether it appeared in the
sentence.
(17)	a. [The astute lawyer who faced the female judge] j was suspected gapi
constantly.
b. The astute lawyer who faced the female judge was suspicious constantly.
Participants are faster to recognize the probe astute in the passive condition
(17a) than in the adjective condition (17b). The assumption is that the gap in the
passive condition has to access its antecedent, refreshing its representation and
facilitating recognition.
9.12.1	Antecedent Reactivation in Scrambling
Reactivation observed in unaccusative constructions (compared with unergatives)
indicates that reactivation at gaps occurs in Japanese as well (Nakayama 1991,
also briefly reported in Nakayama 1995). Hence, if scrambled constituents involve
2)8 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
filler-gap dependencies, facilitation should be observed for (18a) compared with
(18b) (Nakayama 1995).
(18)	a. Scrambling condition
[Syukudai-o	wasureta seito-o]i	mondai-o dasita
homework-ACC forgot student-ACC question-ACC posed
sensei-ga	gap\ sikatta.
teacher-NOM scolded
"The teacher who posed the question scolded the student who forgot
the homework?
b. Canonical condition
Mondai-o	dasita sensei-ga	syukudai-o	wasureta
question-ACC posed teacher-NOM homework-ACC forgot
seito-o sikatta.
student-Acc scolded
"The teacher who posed the question scolded the student who forgot the
homework?
Contrary to the filler-gap predictions, 'homework' was recognized faster after
the canonical (18b). But note that 'homework' is closer to the sentence end in (18b),
thus potentially facilitating recognition (also (18b) requires a subject reanalysis, as
discussed in section 9.5.1; see Miyamoto and Takahashi 2002b for discussion). When
the probe is in the same linear position, either no difference is detected (Nakayama
1995, experiment 2) or the probe in the scrambled NP is recognized faster as pre-
dicted by the filler-gap model (Miyamoto and Takahashi 2002b; see Nakano, Felser,
and Clahsen 2002 for cross-modal priming with long-distance scrambling).
9.12.2	Antecedent Reactivation with Zibun
In (19), the antecedent for the reflexive pronoun zibun can be either the subject
'Taro-Top' or the agent of the passive 'Hanako-DAT'.
(19)	Taro-wa	Hanako-ni	zibun-no	kazoku-no	hanasi	bakari	sareta.
Taro-TOP	Hanako-DAT	self-GEN	family-GEN	talk	only	was
'Taroj was told by Hanakoj nothing but stories about his/herj own family?
At various points during the i-second per bunsetsu RSVP, a probe was shown
surrounded by angle brackets and participants had to decide whether it had ap-
peared previously in the sentence. Reaction times were faster for subject probes
than passive-agent probes immediately after zibun as well as at sentence end
(Nagata 1991,experiment 1;see also experiment 2 for similar results when the order
of the first two NPs is swapped, although the difference was not reliable immedi-
ately after zibun; see Nagata 1992 for evidence that there is no subject advantage in
sentences without zibun). With contexts favoring the passive-agent reading, no
difference was detected at the sentence end, although the subject advantage re-
PROCESSING SENTENCES IN JAPANESE 2Z9
mained immediately after ziburi (Nagata 1991,experiment 3). When causatives are
used as in (20), only the dative NP can be the antecedent; nevertheless, subject
probes were recognized faster immediately after zibun as well as at the sentence end.
(20)	Simizusan-wa Katosan-ni zibun-no sigoto-o tanosimaseta.
Simizu-TOP Kato-DATi selfj-GEN work-ACC enjoy-made
"Simizu made KatOj enjoy self's work?
One possibility is that the verb morphology has a late effect. Alternatively, it is
conceivable that the causative did not have the effect intended, and participants
maintained the subject interpretation throughout.
9.12.3	Antecedent Resolution in Control Constructions
Studies with control constructions (Kooiti-ga Tamae-ni Tokyo iki-o V, where V was
a subject-control verb such as moosideru <offered, or an object-control verb such as
saisokusuru 'urge', as in 'Kooiti offered/urged Tamae PRO going to Tokyo') have
yielded inconclusive results. After hearing a sentence with a subject and an object in
the matrix clause, Japanese speakers were faster to recognize the antecedent for
PRO in the embedded clause if the matrix predicate was a subject-control verb
rather than an object-control verb (Sakamoto 2002, experiment 1;see also exper-
iment 2 for the same outcome when the object is scrambled prior to the subject).
Because the stimuli were created by splicing words pronounced individually, the
experiment was replicated using sentences spoken with normal prosody. The task
was also modified so that participants had to say aloud the antecedent for PRO.
With this setup, reaction times for object-control verbs were faster (Sakamoto 2002,
experiment 3; see also experiment 4 for the same result when the object was
scrambled). A methodological problem in those experiments is that, for all sen-
tences, participants were instructed to determine which person in the sentence had
gone to Tokyo, which potentially allowed for the use of task-specific strategies (see
Sakamoto 2002 and references therein for other factors that may explain the di-
verging results).
9.13	Center-Embedding and
Multiple Nominative NPs
Center-embedding constructions, in which clauses are nested within one another,
are known to be difficult to understand compared with sentences with the same
clauses arranged in right- or left-branching structures (Miller and Chomsky 1963).
Sentence (21) is probably unprocessable for most speakers (from Uehara and
Bradley 2002; see also Mazuka et al.1989 for whole-sentence reading times to
center-embedding and left-branching sentences; see section 9.5 for a discussion of
24〇 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Inui et aL 1998, who reported an fMRI study comparing center-embedding and
left-branching sentences).
(21)	Sensei-ga	gakusei-ga onnanoko-ga syoonen-o mikaketa-to
teacher-NOM student-NOM girl-NOM	boy-ACC saw-that
hanasita-to itta.
told-that said
'The teacher said that the student told that the girl saw the boy.'
Ambiguity in nominative NPs (they usually mark subjects but can mark the
object of stative predicates) is unlikely to be the source of the difficulty. When asked
to write sentences starting with an animate nominative NP, Japanese speakers
virtually always (98 percent of the time) use the nominative NP as the subject of the
sentence (Nakamura and Miyamoto 2007). Moreover, because the topic marker wa
is even more ambiguous (it is preferentially interpreted as a subject in 78 percent of
sentence completions; Nakamura and Miyamoto 2007), it should make the sen-
tence harder to understand if the issue is ambiguity. However, the sentence be-
comes easier when the first nominative marker is replaced by the topic marker
(Babyonyshev and Gibson 1999, experiment 1;Uehara and Bradley 2002, experi-
ment 1,for questionnaire studies; Miyamoto 2002, for self-paced reading data).
Moreover, according to completion data (Uehara and Bradley 2002, experi-
ment 3), each nominative NP tends to be interpreted as part of a separate clause.
Speakers do not interpret an NP-gq as the object of a stative verb, even though that
would decrease the number of predicates (and of embedding levels) necessary to
complete the sentence.
The difficulty in processing multiple nominative NPs can be explained in
terms of the load that such sequences impose, because they require the prediction
of several syntactic heads to complete the sentence (see section 9.8; see also Ba-
byonyshev and Gibson 1999 and Nakatani and Gibson 2003 for comparisons of
different types of embeddings and the predictions of various versions of memory-
load models of processing). However, this still fails to explain why topicalization
facilitates comprehension. The proposal that the same case marker used in suc-
cession leads to phonological interference (Lewis and Nakayama 2002) is sup-
ported by Korean data, according to which a sequence of nominative NPs is easier
to process when they are phonologically distinct (Lee and Nakayama 2003, but see
Uehara and Bradley 2002, experiment 2).
9.14	In-situ Wh-Phrases
In-situ 诚-phrases do not require a gap, thus they lack the feature that has at-
tracted the most attention in fronted wh-phrases. However, they require a question
particle (see Nakagome et al.2001 for a P600 response to the declarative particle yo,
PROCESSING SENTENCES IN JAPANESE 241
instead of a question particle, following a w/i-phrase). In (22), 'what kind of
computer-ACC, is in situ and is licensed by the question particle no.
(22)	Senmu-ga donna-pasokon-o tukatteiru-to kakarityoo-ga
director-NOM what-kind-computer-ACC using-is-that supervisor-NOM
itta-no?
said-Q
'What kind of computer did the supervisor say the director is using?'
Self-paced reading experiments indicate that in-situ w//-phrases trigger the
search for a question particle in a manner similar to gap searching for w/i-phrases in
English. Readers slow down at the embedded verb with the declarative comple-
mentizer to 'that' in (22) in comparison with a similar sentence containing the
question particle ka after the embedded verb. In this typing mismatch effect, the
expectation for a question particle at the earliest point allowed by the grammar is
violated by a constituent with declarative typing (Miyamoto and Takahashi 2002c).
This effect has been claimed to be the in-situ equivalent of the filled-gap effect (see
section 9.8) and has been shown to obey grammatical constraints and to be ob-
servable even when the initial segment of the sentence indicates that another
possible position for the question particle is upcoming in the sentence (Miyamoto
and Takahashi 2002d, experiments 2 and 3). The typing mismatch effect has also
been detected for scrambled dative wh-phrases (Aoshima, Phillips, and Weinberg
2004), negative polarity items (Yoshida 2004), and exclamatives (Ono et al.2006).
W/z-phrases exemplify how the same processing strategy can surface in dif-
ferent guises in different languages. To be interpreted, w/z-phrases require their
scope and thematic role to be determined. English indicates the scope position by
pronouncing the 诚-phrase at the relevant clausal level, and the thematic-role
requirement is satisfied by searching for a gap. In Japanese, by contrast, wh-phrases
are pronounced at the thematic position, and scope requires searching for a
question particle. In short, the constituent sought (a gap or question particle)
is determined by the grammar of each language, but the search process is similar,
as would be expected if a single processing algorithm is used for all human lan-
guages.
9.15	Implications for
the General Theory
An implicit assumption throughout this chapter is that grammatical knowledge
guides processing by providing alternative interpretations, from which factors such
as cognitive resources and plausibility choose (e.g., when a 印万-phrase is read, the
grammar of Japanese indicates the possible positions where a question particle can
occur, but it is memory cost that eventually favors the earliest one among them).
242 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
However, alternative views for the role of the grammar have been proposed. In the
competition model, the grammar is not as crucial and can be overridden if enough
cues supporting an ungrammatical interpretation are available (see Sasaki and
MacWhinney 2006 for results on Japanese within this framework). It remains to be
seen whether the competition model is able to cover constructions more complex
than the single-clause structures usually examined.
There are also approaches in which the grammar takes an even more critical
role than assumed here, as syntactic complexity is claimed to be the primary
determinant of processing difficulty. Those include recent proposals linking the
difficulty in scrambled orders with the complexity of their syntactic representation
(Koizumi 2005, Koizumi and Tamaoka 2004) and proposals based on the height of
the syntactic structure (see Hagiwara 2006 for a summary of how the number of
Merge operations counted from the bottom up in the structure explains data from
aphasic patients and ERP studies). Since the 1970s it has been known that a large
portion of processing difficulty lies in extracting the meaning intended from su-
perficial cues in the sentence (Fodor, Lever, and Garrett 1974). Hence, the challenge
for competence-based models of performance is to describe how their metrics
affect processing on-line, as each word is read, and then support their predictions
with evidence that cannot be explained by independent factors (e.g., plausibility,
frequency, ambiguity).
Clearly, whichever the approach adopted, many issues still need to be addressed
in the mapping between grammar and its use in parsing, and their resolutions are
likely to affect our understanding of performance as well as competence-related
issues in language.
REFERENCES
Abney, Steven P.1989. A computational model of human parsing. Journal of Psycho-
linguistic Research 18:129-144.
Abney, Steven and Mark Johnson.1991.Memory requirements and local ambiguities of
parsing strategies. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 20:233-25〇.
Amano, Shigeaki, and Tadahisa Kondo.1999. Nihongo-no goitokusei [Lexical properties of
Japanese]. Tokyo: Sanseido.
Aoshima, Sachiko, Colin Phillips, and Amy Weinberg. 2003. On-line computation of two
types of structural relations in Japanese. Paper presented at the 16th annual CUNY
Conference on Human Sentence Processing, Cambridge, Mass., March.
Aoshima, Sachiko, Colin Phillips, and Amy Weinberg. 2004. Processing filler-gap de-
pendencies in a head-final language. Journal of Memory and Language 51:23-54.
Aoyama, Ikuko, and Masakatsu Inoue. 2005. Kouzou aimaisei-no kaisyou katei-ni okeru
tougo/goyouronteki zyouhou-ni motoduku syorino senkousei [Syntactic/plausibility
information precedence in structural ambiguity resolution]. In Proceedings of the 22nd
annual meeting of the Japanese Cognitive Science Society, 372-373.
PROCESSING SENTENCES IN JAPANESE 243
Babyonyshev, Maria, and Edward Gibson.1999. Japanese nesting complexity. Language
75：423-45〇•
Baddeley, Alan.1992. Working memory. Science 255:556-559.
Baddeley, Alan. 200〇• The episodic buffer: A new component of working memory? Trends
in Cognitive Science 4:417-423.
Bever, Thomas G., and Brian McElree.1988. Empty categories access their antecedents
during comprehension. Linguistic Inquiry 19:35—43.
Caplan, David, and Gloria S. Waters.1999. Verbal working memory and sentence com-
prehension. Brain and Behavioral Sciences 22:77-94.
Chomsky, Noam.1981.Lectures on government and binding. Dordrecht: Foris.
Chujo, Kazumitsu.1983. Nihongo tanbun-no rikai katei: Bunrikai sutoratezi-no sougo
kankei. Japanese Journal of Psychology 54:250-256.
Crain, Stephen, and Janet D. Fodor.1985. How can grammars help parsers? In Natural
language parsings ed. David R. Dowty, Lauri Karttunen, and Arnold M. Zwicky, 94-
128. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cuetos, Fernando, and Don C. Mitchell.1988. Cross-linguistic differences in parsing:
restrictions on the use of the Late Closure strategy in Spanish. Cognition 30:73-103.
Daneman, Meredyth, and Patricia A. Carpenter.198〇• Individual differences in work-
ing memory and reading. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 19:450-466.
Den, Yasuharu, and Masakatsu Inoue.1997. Disambiguation with verb-predictability:
Evidence from Japanese garden-path phenomena. In Proceedings of the 19th annual
conference of the Cognitive Science Society, ed. Michael G. Shafto and Pat Langley,179-
184. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Ferreira, Victor S., and Hiromi Yoshita. 2003. Given-new ordering effects on the production
of scrambled sentences in Japanese. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 32:669-692.
Fodor, Janet D.1998. Learning to parse? Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 27:285-319.
Fodor, Janet D. 2002. Prosodic disambiguation in silent reading. In Proceedings of NELS
32, ed. Masako Hirotani, 113-132. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA Publications.
Fodor, Jerry A., Thomas G. Bever, and Merrill F. Garrett.1974. The psychology of language.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Garnsey, Susan, Neal J. Pearlmutter, Elizabeth Myers, and Melanie Lotocky.1997. The
contributions of verb bias and plausibility to the comprehension of temporarily
ambiguous sentences. Journal of Memory and Language 37:58-93.
Garnsey, Susan M., Hiroko Yamashita, Kiwako Itoh, and Madelena McClure. 2001.What
when the verb at the end is happens? An ERP study of Japanese sentence compre-
hension. Paper presented at the 14th annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence
Processing, Philadelpha, March.
Gibson, Edward.1998. Linguistic complexity: Locality of syntactic dependencies. Cognition
68:1-76.
Gorrell, Paul.1995. Syntax and parsing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hagiwara, Hiroko. 2006. Neural basis of syntactic processing in Japanese. In Handbook of
Japanese psycholinguistics, ed. Mineharu Nakayama, Reiko Mazuka, and Yasuhiro
Shirai, 298-306. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hagiwara, Hiroko, and David Caplan.199〇• Syntactic comprehension in Japanese aphasics:
effects of category and thematic order. Brain and Language 38:159-17〇.
Harada, 8.-1.1973. Counter equi NP deletion. Annual Bulletin of the Research Institute of
Logopedics and Phoniatrics 7:113-147. Research Institute of Logopedics and Phoniatrics,
University of Tokyo.
244 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Hasegawa, Nobuko.199〇• Comments on Mazuka and Lust's paper. In Language processing
and language acquisition^ ed. Lyn Frazier and Jill de Villiers, 207-223. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Hirose, Yuki. 2001.Li and L2 processing of RC attachment ambiguity. Paper presented at
the Japanese Language Processing Workshop, Nara Institute of Science and Tech-
nology, Ikoma, Japan, July.
Hirose, Yuki. 2003. Recycling prosodic boundaries. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research
32:167-195.
Hirose, Yuki, and Atsu Inoue.1998. Ambiguity of reanalysis in parsing complex sentences
in Japanese. In Sentence processing: A crosslinguistic perspective, ed. Dieter Hillert,
71-93. San Diego, Calif.: Academic Press.
Hirose, Yuki, Atsu Inoue, Janet D. Fodor, and Dianne Bradley.1998. Adjunct attachment
ambiguity in Japanese: The role of constituent weight. Paper presented at the 11th
annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing, Rutgers University, New
Brunswick, N.J., March.
Holmes, V. M., and J. K. 〇,Regan.1981.Eye fixation patterns during the reading of relative
clause sentences. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 20:417-43〇.
Hsiao, Franny, and Edward Gibson. 2003. Processing relative clauses in Chinese. Cognition
90:3-27.
Hsu, Chun-Chieh. 2003. Revisiting the processing of prenominal relative clauses in Chi-
nese. Paper presented at the University of Delaware Linguistics and Cognitive Science
Graduate Student Conference, University of Delaware, April.
Iguchi, Yoko, and Edson T. Miyamoto. 2006. The interpretation of nominative NPs is
modulated by possessor relations. In Proceedings of the 23rd annual meeting of the
Japanese Cognitive Science Society, 118-119.
Inoue, Atsu.1991.A comparative study of parsing in English and Japanese. Doctoral
dissertation, University of Connecticut, Storrs.
Inoue, Atsu, and Janet Fodor.1995. Information-paced parsing of Japanese. In Japanese
sentence processing, ed. Reiko Mazuka and Noriko Nagai, 9-63. Mahwah, N.J.:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Inoue, Masakatsu. 1990a. Kouzou-teki aimai bun-no rikai-ni okeru gaaden pasu-ka
[Garden paths in the comprehension of structurally ambiguous sentences]. In Pro-
ceedings of the 32nd Japanese Association of Educational Psychology, 378.
Inoue, Masakatsu. 1990b. Kouzou-teki aimai bun-no rikai-ni okeru goku-no nagasa-no
kouka [Phrasal length effects in the comprehension of structurally ambiguous sen-
tences] .In Proceedings of the 54th Japanese Psychological Association, 678.
Inoue, Masakatsu.1991.Bun-no tougo syori-ni okeru zyosi-w-no kinou [The function of
the particle wa in sentence parsing]. In Proceedings of the 33rd Japanese Association of
Educational Psychology, 55-56.
Inui,rFoshio, Yukio Otsu, Shigeki Tanaka, Tomohisa Okada, Sadahiko Nishizawa, and
Jyunji Konishi.1998. A functional MRI analysis of comprehension processes of Jap-
anese sentences. Neuroreport 9:3325-3328.
Ishizuka, Tomoko, Kentaro Nakatani, and Edward Gibson. 2003. Relative clause extraction
complexity in Japanese. Paper presented at the 16th annual CUNY Conference on
Human Sentence Processing, Cambridge, Mass., March.
Jincho, Nobuyuki, Reiko Mazuka, and Hiroshi Namiki. 2004. Bunsyo rikai-ni okeru wa-
kingu memori youryou-to gengo chisiki-no eikyo [The influence of knowledge and
working memory span in sentence comprehension]. In Proceedings of the 68th annual
conference of the Japanese Psychological Association, 897.
PROCESSING SENTENCES IN JAPANESE 245
Just, Marcel A., and Patricia A. Carpenter.1992. A capacity theory of comprehension:
individual differences in working memory. Psychological Review 99:122-149.
Just, Marcel A., Patricia A. Carpenter, and Jacqueline D. Woolley.1982. Paradigms and pro-
cesses in reading comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 3:228-238.
Kamide, Yuki, Gerry T. M. Altmann, and Sarah L. Haywood. 2003. The time-course of
prediction in incremental sentence processing: Evidence from anticipatory eye
movements. Journal of Memory and Language 49:133-156.
Kamide, Yuki, and Don C. Mitchell.1997. Relative clause attachment: Nondeterminism in
Japanese parsing. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 26:247-254.
Kamide, Yuki, and Don C. Mitchell.1999. Incremental pre-head attachment in Japanese
parsing. Language and Cognitive Processes 14:631-662.
Kamide, Yuki, Don C. Mitchell, Janet D. Fodor and Atsu Inoue.1998. Relative clause
attachment ambiguity: Further evidence from Japanese. Paper presented at the nth
annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing, Rutgers University, New
Brunswick, N.J., March.
Kess, Joseph F., and Tadao Miyamoto.1994. Japanese psycholinguistics: a classified and
annotated research bibliography. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Kiguchi, Hirohisa, and Edson T. Miyamoto. 2004. MEG responses in the comprehension
of Japanese sentences. In Proceedings of the 5th Tokyo Conference on Psycholinguistics,
ed. Yukio Otsu, 207-228. Tokyo: Hitsuji Syobo.
King, Jonathan, and Marcel A. Just.1991.Individual differences in syntactic processing: The
role of working memory. Journal of Memory and Language 30:580-602.
Koizumi, Masatoshi. 2005. Syntactic structure of ditransitive constructions in Japanese:
Behavioral and imaging studies. Paper presented at the Tokyo Conference on Psy-
cholinguistics, Tokyo, March.
Koizumi, Masatoshi, and Katsuo Tamaoka. 2004. Cognitive processing of Japanese sen-
tences with ditransitive verbs. Gengo Kenkyu 125:173-19〇.
Kondo, Tadahisa, and Reiko Mazuka.1996. Prosodic planning while reading aloud: On-
line examination of Japanese sentences. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 25:357-381.
Kondo, Tadahisa, Reiko Mazuka, and Kazuhiko Kakehi. 2002. Nihon-go bun no dokkai-
katei-ni okeru gotokusei oyobi gozyun no eikyo [The influence of word order and
lexical properties in sentence reading in Japanese]. Cognitive Studies: Bulletin of the
Japanese Cognitive Science Society 9:543-563.
Koso, Ayumi, Hiroko Hagiwara, and Takahiro Soshi. 2005. Cognitive processes involved in
parsing Japanese ditransitives: An event-related potential study. Paper presented at the
Tokyo Conference on Psycholinguistics, Tokyo, March.
Kuno, Susumu.1973. The structure of the Japanese language. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Kurohashi, Sadao, and Makoto Nagao.1997. Kyoto University text corpus project (in
Japanese). In Proceedings of the 3rd annual meeting of the Association for Natural
Language Processing, 115-118.
Law, Sam-Po, and Man-Tak Leung. 200〇. Sentence processing deficits in two Cantonese
aphasic patients. Brain and Language 72:310-342.
Lee, Sun-Hee, and Mineharu Nakayama. 2003. Effects of syntactic and phonological
similarity in Korean center-embedding constructions. Paper presented at the 16th
annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing, Cambridge, Mass., March.
Lewis, Richard, and Mineharu Nakayama. 2002. Syntactic and positional similarity effects
in the processing of Japanese Embeddings. In Sentence processing in East Asian lan-
guages, ed. Mineharu Nakayama, 85-11〇. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI Publications.
246 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Lin, Chien-Jer, Sandiway Fong, and Thomas G. Lever. 2005. Local dependencies aren't
necessarily easier: Processing possessor relative clauses in Mandarin Chinese. Paper
presented at the 11th International Conference on Processing Chinese and Other East
Asian Languages (PCOEAL), Hong Kong, December.
Mazuka, Reiko.1998. The development of language processing strategies. Mahwah, N.J.:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Mazuka, Reiko, Gary Feng, Youngon Choi, and Li Yi. 2005. Japanese and Korean
speakers' errors and corrections during sentence comprehension: Evidence from
eye-movement monitoring in a picture selection task. Paper presented at the
18th annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing, Tucson, Ariz.,
March.
Mazuka, Reiko, and Kenji Itoh.1995. Can Japanese speakers be led down the garden path?
In Japanese sentence processing, ed. Reiko Mazuka and Noriko Nagai, 295-329. Mah-
wah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Mazuka, Reiko, Kenji Itoh, Shigeru Kiritani, Shinich Niwa, Kayo Ikejiri, and Kazuo
Naitoh.1989. Processing of Japanese garden path, center-embedded, and multiply-
left-embedded sentences: Reading time data from an eye movement study. Annual
Bulletin of the Research Institute of Logopedics and Phoniatrics 23:187—212. Research
Institute of Logopedics and Phoniatrics, University of Tokyo.
Mazuka, Reiko, Kenji Itoh, and Tadahisa Kondo. 2001.Event-related potential for
scrambled word order in Japanese. Paper presented at the 14th annual CUNY Con-
ference on Human Sentence Processing, Philadelphia, March.
Mazuka, Reiko, Kenji Itoh, and Tadahisa Kondo. 2002. Cost of scrambling in Japanese
sentence processing. In Sentence processing in East Asian languages, ed. Mineharu
Nakayama, 131-166. Stanford, Calif: CSLI Publications.
Miller, George A.1963. The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on
our capacity for processing information. In Readings in mathematical psychology 1,ed.
R. Duncan Luce, Robert R. Bush, and Eugene Galanter, 135-151. New York: John Wiley
and Sons.
Miller, George A., and Noam Chomsky.1963. Finitary models of language users. In
Handbook of mathematical psychology 2, ed. R. Duncan Luce, Robert R. Bush, and
Eugene Galanter, 419-491. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Misono, Yasuko, Reiko Mazuka, Tadahisa Kondo, and Shigeru Kiritani.1997. Effects and
limitations of prosodic and semantic biases on syntactic disambiguation. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research 26:229-245.
Miyamoto, Edson T. 2002. Case markers as clause boundary inducers in Japanese. Journal
of Psycholinguistic Research 31:307-347.	.
Miyamoto, Edson T. 2003. Reanalysis of clause boundaries in Japanese as a constraint-
driven process. Language and Speech 46:23-52.
Miyamoto, Edson T., Edward Gibson, Neal J. Pearlmutter, Takako Aikawa, and Shigeru
Miyagawa.1999. A U-shaped relative clause attachment preference in Japanese.
Language and Cognitive Processes 14:663-686.
Miyamoto, Edson T., and Michiko Nakamura. 2003. Subject/object asymmetries in the
processing of relative clauses in Japanese. In Proceedings of the 22nd West Coast
Conference on Formal Linguistics, ed. Gina Garing and Mimu Tsujimura, 342-355.
Somerville, Mass.: Cascad山a Press.
Miyamoto, Edson T., and Michiko Nakamura. 2005. Unscrambling some misconceptions:
A comment on Koizumi and Tamaoka 2004. Gengo Kenkyu 128:113-129.
PROCESSING SENTENCES IN JAPANESE 247
Miyamoto, Edson T., Michiko Nakamura, and Shoichi Takahashi. 2004. Processing
relative clauses in Japanese with two attachment sites. In Proceedings of NELS
34, ed. Keir Moulton and Matthew Wolf, 441-452. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA Pub-
lications.
Miyamoto, Edson T., and Shoichi Takahashi. 2002a. Sources of difficulty in the processing
of scrambling in Japanese. In Sentence processing in East Asian languages, ed. Mineharu
Nakayama, 167-188. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI Publications.
Miyamoto, Edson T., and Shoichi Takahashi. 2002b. Antecedent reactivation in the pro-
cessing of scrambling in Japanese. In MITWPL 43: Proceedings of HUMIT 2001,ed.
Tania Ionin, Heejeong Ko, and Andrew Nevins, 123-138. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Working Papers in Linguistics.
Miyamoto, Edson T., and Shoichi Takahashi. 2002c. The processing of w/i-phrases and
interrogative complementizers in Japanese. In Japanese/Korean linguistics 10, ed.
Noriko M. Akatsuka and Susan Strauss, 62-75. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI Publications.
Miyamoto, Edson T., and Shoichi Takahashi. 2002d. The processing of 诚-phrases in
Japanese. Scientific Approaches to Language 1:133-172.
Miyamoto, Edson T., and Shoichi Takahashi. 2004. Filler-gap dependencies in the pro-
cessing of scrambling in Japanese. Language and Linguistics 5:153-166.
Muraoka, Satoru, and Tsutomu Sakamoto. 2004. Tougokaiseki-ni-okeru setsukyoukai-no
goijouhou-no eikyou [The influence of lexical information during the parsing of
clause boundaries]. In Proceedings of the 21st annual meeting of the Japanese Cognitive
Science Society, 206-207.
Nagata, Hiroshi.1991.Temporal course of activation of the antecedent by the reflexive in
syntactically ambiguous sentences in Japanese. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research
20:501-52〇.
Nagata, Hiroshi.1992. Activation of the antecedent by the reflexive in Japanese: A sup-
plementary control experiment. Perceptual and Motor Skill 74:99-106.
Nagata, Hiroshi.1993. Unimmediate construction of syntactic structure for garden path
sentences in Japanese. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 22:365-381.
Nakagome, Kazuyuki, Satoru Takazawa, Osamu Kanno, Hiroko Hagiwara, Heizo Naka-
jima, Kenji Itoh, and Ichiro Koshida. 2001.A topographical study of ERP correlates of
semantic and syntactic violations in the Japanese language using the multichannel
EEG system. Psychophysiology 38:304-315.
Nakamura, Michiko, and Edson T. Miyamoto. 2006. Crossed dependencies and plausi-
bility factors in the interpretation of double-gap relative clauses in Japanese. Cognitive
Studies: Bulletin of the Japanese Cognitive Science Society 13:369-391.
Nakamura, Michiko, and Edson T. Miyamoto. 2007. Relative preferences in the processing
of relative clauses in Japanese. Ms., University of Tsukuba, Japan.
Nakano, Yoko, Claudia Felser, and Harald Clahsen. 2002. Antecedent priming at trace
positions in Japanese long-distance scrambling. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research
3i：53i-57i.
Nakatani, Kentaro. 2006. Processing complexity of complex predicates: A case study in
Japanese. Linguistic Inquiry 37:625-647.
Nakatani, Kentaro, and Edward Gibson. 2003. An on-line study of Japanese nesting
complexity. Paper presented at the 16th annual CUNY Conference on Human Sen-
tence Processing, Cambridge, Mass., March.
Nakayama, Mineharu.1991.Japanese motion verbs and probe recognition. Ms., Ohio State
University, Columbus.
248 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Nakayama, Mineharu.1995. Scrambling and probe recognition. In Japanese sentence pro-
cessings ed. Reiko Mazuka and Noriko Nagai, 257-273. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Nakayama, Mineharu, Reiko Mazuka, and Yasuhiro Shirai, eds. 2006. Handbook of Japa-
nese psycholinguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nicol, Janet L.1998. The production of agreement in English and Japanese: Animacy effects
(or lack thereof). In Sentence processing: A crosslinguistic perspective^ ed. Dieter Hillert,
113-128. San Diego, Calif: Academic Press.
〇,Grady, William, Michiko Nakamura, and Miseon Lee. 2002. Processing Japanese
and Korean: Full attachment versus efficiency. In Japanese/Korean linguistics 10,
ed. Noriko M. Akatsuka and Susan Strauss, 18-49. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI Publications.
Oishi, Hiroaki, and Tsutomu Sakamoto. 2004. Tougo kaiseki-no sokuzi/chiensei-no
kensyo: P6oo-wo sihyo-to site [Incrementality versus delay during parsing: Using the
P600 as an index]. Cognitive Studies: Bulletin of the Japanese Cognitive Science Society
11:311-318.
Ono, Hajime, Masaya Yoshida, Sachiko Aoshima, and Colin Phillips. 2006. Real-time
computation of Japanese exclamatives and the strength of locality biases in sentence
comprehension. Cognitive Studies: Bulletin of the Japanese Cognitive Science Society
13:261-287.
Osaka, Mariko.1998. Yomi to wakingu memori [Reading and working memory]. In Yomi:
No to kokoro-no zyohou syori [Reading: Information processing in the brain and
mind], ed. Naoyuki Osaka, 239-262. Tokyo: Asakura.
Osaka, Mariko, Yukiko Nishizaki, Mie Komori, and Naoyuki Osaka. 2002. Effect of focus
on verbal working memory: Critical role of the focus word in reading. Memory and
Cognition 30:562-571.
Pritchett, Bradley L.1991.Head position and parsing ambiguity. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research 20:251-27〇.
Rayner, Keith.1998. Eye movements in reading and information processing: 20 years of
research. Psychological Review 124:372-422.
Saito, Mamoru.1985. Some asymmetries in Japanese and their theoretical implications.
Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Sakai, Kuniyoshi L., Yasuki Noguchi, Tatsuya Takeuchi, and Eりu Watanabe. 2002. Se-
lective priming of syntactic processing by event-related transcranial magnetic stim-
ulation of kroca's area. Neuron 35:1177-1182.
Sakamoto, Tsutomu. 2002. Processing filler-gap constructions in Japanese. In Sentence
processing in East Asian languages, ed. Mineharu Nakayama,189-221. Stanford, Calif:
CSLI Publications.
Sasaki, Yoshinori, and Brian MacWhinney. 2006. The competition model. In Handbook of
Japanese psycholinguistics, ed. Mineharu Nakayama, Reiko Mazuka and Yasuhiro
Shirai, 207-314. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sato, Kaori, Mari Kobayashi, and Edson T. Miyamoto. 2007. Lack of implicit prosody
effects in deaf readers of Japanese. Journal of Japanese Linguistics 23:35-46.
Sheldon, Amy.1976. Speaker's intuition about the complexity of relative clauses in Japa-
nese and English. In Papers from the 12 th regional meeting of the Chicago Linguistic
Society, ed. Salikoko S. Mufwene, Carol A. Walker, and Steever B. Sanford, 558-567.
Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society.
Sturt, Patrick, Holly P. Branigan, and Yoko Matsumoto-Sturt.1999. The effect of clausal
and thematic domains on left branching attachment ambiguities. In Proceedings of the
21st annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society, ed. Martin Hahn and Scott C.
Stoness, 718-723. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum
PROCESSING SENTENCES IN JAPANESE 249
Sturt, Patrick, and Matthew Crocker.1996. Monotonic syntactic processing: A cross-
linguistic study of attachments and reanalysis. Language and Cognitive Processes 11:
449-494.
Takezawa, Koichi.1987. A configurational approach to case-marking in Japanese. Doctoral
dissertation, University of Washington, Seattle.
Tamaoka, Katsuo, Hiromu Sakai, Jun-Ichiro Kawahara, Yayoi Miyaoka, Hyungjung Lim,
and Masatoshi Koizumi. 2005. Priority information used for the processing of Japa-
nese sentences: Thematic roles, case particles or grammatical functions? Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research 34:281-332.
Tanenhaus, Michael K., Michael J. Spivey-Knowlton, Kathleen M. Eberhard, and Julie C.
Sedivy.1995. Integration of visual and linguistic information in spoken language
comprehension. Science 268:1632-1634.
Uehara, Keiko, and Dianne Bradley. 2002. Center-embedding problem and the contri-
bution of nominative case repetition. In Sentence processing in East Asian languages,
ed. Mineharu Nakayama, 257-287. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI.
Ueno, Mieko, and Robert Kluender. 2003. Event-related brain indices of scrambling in
Japanese. Brain and Language 86:243-271.
Uetsuki, Miki, and Shingo Tokimoto. 2004. Kouzouteki aimai bun syori-ni okeru meisi
houwasei-no eikyo [The influence of noun saturation in the processing of structurally
ambiguous sentences]. In Proceedings of the 21st annual meeting of the Japanese Cog-
nitive Science Society, 74-75.
Venditti, Jennifer J. 2006. Prosody in sentence processing. In Handbook of Japanese psy-
cholinguistics, ed. Mineharu Nakayama, Reiko Mazuka, and Yasuhiro Shirai, 208-217.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Venditti, Jennifer J., and Hiroko Yamashita.1994. Prosodic information and processing of
complex NPs in Japanese. In MITWPL 24: Proceedings of Formal Approaches to Jap-
anese Linguistics 1,ed. Hiroyuki Ur a and Masatoshi Koizumi, 375一39】• Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Working Papers in Linguistics.
Yamashita, Hiroko.1995. Verb argument information used in a pro-drop language: An
experimental study in Japanese. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 24:333-347.
Yamashita, Hiroko.1997. The effects of word-order and case marking information on the
processing of Japanese. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 26:163-188.
Yamashita, Hiroko. 200〇• Structural computation and the role of morphological markings
in the processing of Japanese. Language and Speech 43:429-459.
Yamashita, Hiroko. 2002. Scrambled sentences in Japanese: Linguistic properties and
motivations for production. Text 22:597-633.
Yamashita, Hiroko, and Franklin Chang. 2001."Long before short" preference in the
production of a head-final language. Cognition 81:645-855.
Yoshida, Masaya. 2004. When negative statements are easier: Processing polarity items in
Japanese. Paper presented at the 17th annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence
Processing, College Park, Md., March.
Yoshida, Masaya, Sachiko Aoshima, and Colin Phillips. 2004. Relative clause prediction in
Japanese. Paper presented at the 17th annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence
Processing, College Park, Md., March.
Yoshida, Masaya, and Tetsuya Sano. 2001.Psycholinguistic studies on Japanese head in-
ternal relative clauses. In MITWPL 41:Proceedings of Formal Approaches to Japanese
Linguistics 3, ed. M. Cristina Cuervo, Daniel Harbour, Ken Hiraiwa, and Shinichiro
Ishihara, 33-46. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working Papers in Linguistics.
CHAPTER 1 〇
THE ACQUISITION OF
JAPANESE SYNTAX
KEIKO MURASUGI AND KOJI SUGISAKI
10.1	Principal Questions
The knowledge of language comprises many complex and abstract properties that
are not shared by other modules of the human mind. Knowledge of Japanese is no
exception, as discussed in detail in other chapters of this book. As a simple illus-
tration, consider the sentences in (i), discussed by Harada (1972) and Saito (1989).
(1)a.	Ken-ga	[dare-ga	sono hon-o	katta	ka]	siritagatteiru	(koto).
Ken-NOM	who-NOM	that book-ACC	bought	q	want-to-know	(fact)
'Ken wants to know who bought that book/
b.	*Dare-ga	[Ken-ga	sono hon-o	katta	ka]	siritagatteiru	(koto).
who-NOM	Ken-NOM	that book-ACC	bought	q	want-to-know	(fact)
Adult native speakers of Japanese can tell that the sentence in (la) is acceptable and
the one in (ib) is not. The characterization of the knowledge responsible for this
contrast is argued to involve the structural notion of c-command: Whereas the wh-
phrase dare-ga is c-commanded by the question-particle ka in (la), it is not in the
case of (ib). This notion is abstract in that it depends on the phrase structure of
sentences, which we cannot directly perceive from the given string of words. Ad-
ditionally, no property that makes crucial use of this notion has been observed in
other modules of human cognition.
In contrast, the linguistic experience available to children to acquire such
properties is severely limited in that it is structurally simple for the most part and
provides no systematic information as to which sentences are ungrammatical in the
target language. The absence of systematic "negative evidence" can be illustrated by
the following dialogue between a two-year-old girl(2；n) and her mother.1'2
THE ACQUISITION OF JAPANESE SYNTAX 2ZI
(2)	Mother: Ashita	minna-de	pikunikku ikou	ka?
tomorrow everyone-with	picnic	go	Q
"Shall we go on a picnic tomorrow?5
Child:	Osoto	tabe-i (— tabe-ni)	iku,	mama.
outside	eat-to	go	mom
"Mom, I want to go	outside	to eat.'
Mother:	Doko-ni	ikou ka?
where-to	go q
"Where shall we go?'
Child:	Ike	kara iku?
pond	from go
(Intended meaning) "Shall we go to a pond?'
Mother:	Soudane. Ike,	line.	Ike-ni	siyou.
right pond	good	pond-to	let's
"Right. A pond sounds good. Let's go to a pond.'
Notice that in her second turn, the child incorrectly said ike kara iku? ("Shall we go
from a pond?'), when she intended to say ike ni iku? ("Shall we go to a pond?').
Despite this error, her mother did not point it out but, rather, agreed with what the
child said.
Given the qualitative gap between linguistic experience and the acquired
knowledge of language, a question arises as to why children are able to acquire the
knowledge of their native languages under this ""poverty of the stimulus" situation,
also known as ""Plato's problem" (Chomsky 1986) or "the logical problem of
language acquisition" (Baker and McCarthy 1981,Hornstein and Lightfoot 1981).
The task for modern linguistic theory is to provide an answer to this problem.
The proposed solution postulates that a human child is genetically equipped with
Universal Grammar (UG), which narrowly constrains the space of hypotheses to
entertain. Under the principles-and-parameters approach to UG (Chomsky 1981),
UG consists of (a) a number of principles that specify the properties to be satisfied
by any language, and (b) a small number of parameters that sharply restrict the
range of possible cross-linguistic variation. The major task for modern linguistic
theory, then, is to reveal the exact nature of such principles and parameters.
The theory of language acquisition aims to answer a broader question of how
language is acquired in real time. The theory has to address (at least) the following
two principal questions, in addition to specifying the exact nature of the initial
state (UG).
(3)	Principal questions
a.	When and how do principles of UG emerge in the child grammar?
b.	What factors explain the gradual, noninstantaneous nature of actual lan-
guage development?
In this chapter, we review some representative studies on the acquisition of
Japanese that attempt to answer the questions in (3) and hence have a direct
bearing on the construction of the theory of language acquisition. Our summary is
252 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
highly selective in that it is mainly limited to studies, on the acquisition of syn-
tax that provide intriguing empirical findings.3 Given that Japanese has various
syntactic characteristics that are not observed in Germanic or Romance lan-
guages, the investigation of its acquisition process can be especially valuable for
acquisition theory. We hope that this chapter demonstrates this point in a con-
vincing way.
10.2	Addressing the Principal
Question i:Early Emergence
of UG Principles
Principles of UG are, by definition, innately given and are reflected in any adult
grammar. Because no learning from experience is involved to acquire these prin-
ciples, the simplest possibility for their emergence is that they constrain language
acquisition from virtually the very beginning of life. In other words, their effects
should be observed as soon as the child becomes able to use relevant lexical items
and structures. A large number of experimental investigations of the acquisition of
English indicate that this simplest possibility is, in fact, correct for various UG
principles.4 For example, Crain and McKee (1986) and Murasugi (1988) examined
children's knowledge of condition C of the binding theory, which informally says
that a referential NP cannot be coreferential with a pronoun that c-commands it
(Reinhart 1976; Lasnik 1976,1991,among others). This principle dictates that a
coreferential interpretation between the pronoun and the referential NP is possible
in (4a), but not in (4b).
(4)	a. While he】 was dancing, the Ninja Turtle】 ate pizza.
b.キHe】 ate the hamburger when the Smurg was inside the fence.
Using the truth-value judgment task, Crain and McKee found that English-
speaking three- and four-year-olds accepted the coreferential reading of (4a) 73
percent of the time and rejected it in (4b) 84 percent of the time. These findings
suggest that the UG principle of condition C is operative in children's grammar
before the age of three years. Along the same lines, Murasugi (1988) provided
further supporting evidence for young children's knowledge of condition C by
proposing that the pragmatic felicity condition termed "plausible denial" (adopted
in Crain and Thornton 1998, among others) is required in order to avoid accidental
coreference in the experimental situation.
Studies on the acquisition of Japanese have provided novel pieces of evidence for
such early emergence of UG principles. As a first illustration, consider the con-
figurationality of human languages, discussed in the introduction of this handbook
THE ACQUISITION OF JAPANESE SYNTAX 2ZZ
In the early 1980s, Hale (1980) proposed that Japanese is a typical example of a non-
configurational language and has a flat structure as in (5a), which is responsible for its
flexible word order. Yet, Saito and Hoji (1983), Hoji (1985), and Saito (1985) argued
against this proposal and presented strong evidence that Japanese is configurational
(like English) and is hierarchically organized as in (zb). These studies revealed that
there is a principle of UG, which in effect makes every human language fall into the
class of configurational languages.3
(5)	a.	IP	b.	IP
NP NP V	NP VP
NP V
In light of this finding, Otsu (1994a) investigated whether the principle relevant
to configurationality is operative in early child Japanese, by making use of the Case
Marker Drop (CMD) phenomenon. In colloquial speech, Case markers can some-
times drop. Yet, there seems to be a contrast between the nominative marker ga
and the accusative marker 〇: Although the latter can easily be dropped, the former
resists this process.
⑹	a.	Eri-ga nani-o tabeta	no?	
		Eri-NOM what-ACC ate	Q	
		'What did Eri eat?'		
	b.	Eri-ga nani-0 tabeta	no?	
(7)	a.	Dare-ga kono ringo-o	tabeta	no?
		who-NOM this apple-ACC	ate	Q
		'Who ate this apple?'		
	b.	*Dare-0 kono ringo-o	tabeta	no?
The contrast between (6b) and (7b) can be accounted for if we assume that Jap-
anese sentences have hierarchically organized structures like (zb) and that CMD
applies only to those Case markers that are structurally close enough to verbs (Saito
1985, Takezawa 1987).
In one of the two experiments reported in Otsu 1994a, twenty three- and four-
year-olds were asked to answer questions such as (8).
(8)	Dare-0 taosita	no?
who knocked-down q
In the adult grammar, this sentence is only interpreted as meaning "Who did
(someone) knock down?' because of a hierarchical structure like (5b) and the
condition on CMD. The results succinctly showed that children are completely
adultlike and never interpret (8) as meaning "Who knocked down (someone)?' This
finding suggests that child Japanese is just as configurational as adult Japanese,
254 the OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
which in turn demonstrates that the UG principle relevant to configurationality is
operative from the early stages of Japanese acquisition.6,7
Murasugi (1991)demonstrated the early emergence of UG principles in a
complementary way, by analyzing children's apparent "errors" concerning genitive
Case marking. In adult English, whereas NP complements to nouns require of-
insertion, PP complements never trigger this operation.
(9)	a. John's destruction *(of) [NP the building]
b. John's claim (*of) [PP about his marriage]
Stowell(1981)attributed this difference to a principle of UG called the Case Re-
sistance Principle, which states that projections of Case-assigning categories (such
as P) cannot be assigned Case.
Murasugi (1991)reported that there are cases where Japanese-speaking chil-
dren successfully insert the genitive Case marker no after NPs but still under-
generate it after PPs.
(10)	a. Emi-no	zyuusu
Emi-GEN	juice
'Emi's juice'	(Emi, 259)
b.	murasaki-no ribon
purple-GEN ribbon
'the purple ribbon'	(Emi, 259)
c.	Santa san kara purezento
Santa from present
'a present from Santa'	(Emi, 3;〇)
In adult Japanese, no is required after the PP, Santa san-kara, in (10c). Murasugi
attributed this requirement to a language-particular operation of genitive Case-
marker insertion that inserts no after NPs and PPs within noun phrases. Then, she
suggested that because children have to learn this specific operation and, in par-
ticular, that it overrides the Case Resistance Principle, there can be a stage in which
children strictly conform to the UG principle and do not insert no after PPs. Then,
what appear to be "errors" made by Japanese-speaking children in fact provide
another piece of evidence that principles of UG constrain language acquisition
from the earliest observable stages.8
Sugisaki (2000) examined Japanese-speaking children's knowledge of a uni-
versal constraint on w/z-movement. The sentence in (11a) is structurally ambiguous
with respect to the position of the adjunct w/z-phrase naze 'why': It can be
contained in the adjunct clause, or it can be located outside the adjunct clause and
hence can be an element of the matrix clause. Yet, the former possibility is excluded
by the conflict between the LF 印五-movement of naze to the matrix CP specifier and
the principle of UG that bans extraction out of an adjunct clause (Huang 1982).
This is why the example in (11a) is interpreted as a question asking the reason for
John's anger but not asking why John read that book.
THE ACQUISITION OF JAPANESE SYNTAX 2ZZ
(ii)	a.	Naze 80110 hon-o yomu	maeni John-wa	okotta	no ?
why that book-ACC read	before John-Top	got angry	q
'Why did John get angry before reading that book?'
b.	Dooiu riyuu de sono hon-o	yomu maeni	John-wa	okotta	no ?
for-what-reason that book-ACC read before	John-Top	got angry q
'For what reason did John get angry before reading that book?'
Sugisaki conducted an experiment to determine how three- and four-year-
old children respond to structurally ambiguous questions like (na). The subjects
were seventeen children, ages z；4 to 4；8 (mean age 4；2). The task was compre-
hension. Each subject was told a story, which was accompanied by an animation
presented on a laptop computer, and at several points during the story, the
experimenter asked a question about the story. The child's task was to answer
these questions. The results showed that children never interpret naze as an
element of the adjunct clause, which in turn suggests that the relevant UG
principle on the locality of w/i-movement is already in the grammar of Japanese-
speaking children. Kabuto (2007), furthermore, examined the acquisition of wh-
questions such as (11a,b) and reported that three-year-old Japanese-speaking
children can interpret these types of sentences like adults and know that dooiu-
riyuu 'what reason' can be unselectively bound in situ, whereas naze 'why' cannot
be unselectively bound and has to be moved out into the specifier position of the
matrix CP.
In sum, the studies of Japanese acquisition reviewed in this section confirm the
early emergence of UG principles, but the syntactic phenomena that are taken up
to demonstrate this point are quite different from those in the acquisition of
English, which makes these studies quite intriguing from the viewpoint of acqui-
sition theory.
10.3	Addressing the Principal
Question 2: Identifying
Developmental Factors
The finding that many UG principles are functioning from the outset of devel-
opment provides strong support for the innateness of these properties. Yet, at the
same time, it raises the following important question, whose answer definitely
constitutes a crucial part of acquisition theory: Why does grammar acquisition
take time and proceed gradually?
As a first step to answering this question, we note that several factors are
proposed as potentially relevant to the gradual, noninstantaneous nature of lan-
guage development:
256 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(12)	a. Parameter setting
b.	Maturation of UG properties
c.	Acquisition of lexical items
In the following subsections, we review representative studies on the acquisition of
Japanese that attempt to evaluate these developmental factors.9
10.3.1	Parameter Setting
Within the principles-and-parameters (P&P) framework, one major task for
children is to identify the correct parameter settings for the community's language
from among the possibilities permitted by the parameters of UG, as we can see in
the following statement by Chomsky (1995:6).
(13)	[Within the P&P approach] language acquisition is interpreted as the
process of fixing the parameters of the initial state in one of the permissible
ways.
Given that children determine correct parametric values by analyzing and ac-
commodating the input data around them, there can in principle be a situation in
which this process of data analysis and accommodation takes a certain amount of
time, and hence the shift from the nontarget value to the target value gives rise to
observable developmental effects. Hyams 1986 is the first study that attempted to
show that this possibility is in fact realized in the course of child language ac-
quisition. It is widely known that in the acquisition of obligatory subject languages
such as English, children before or around the age of two years optionally omit
subject pronouns, as illustrated in (14).
(14)	a. See window.
b. Want more apple.	(Hyams 1986:63)
Based on the observation that the availability of null-subject sentences is a distinc-
tive property of adult Italian and Spanish, Hyams proposed that subject omission in
the child's speech follows from an early nonadultlike setting of the null-subject
parameter.
Even though Hyams's (1986) parametric account of null subjects ran up against
a number of empirical challenges (e.g., Bloom 1990, Lillo-Martin 1991,Valian 1991,
Hyams and Wexler 1993, among others), the important question of whether
parameter setting contributes to the noninstantaneous and gradual nature of
language development continues to be explored in acquisitional studies of many
languages, including Japanese.
Murasugi (1991)provided evidence for such adelayed parameter setting”
through investigating the syntax and acquisition of Japanese relative clauses.
Japanese children, at one point in language acquisition, overgenerate no imme-
THE ACQUISITION OF JAPANESE SYNTAX 257
diately after prenominal sentential modifiers, as observed by Nagano (1960) and
Yokoyama (1990), among others.10
(15)	a. kiiroi no ohana	(2；i)
yellow-is flower
"the yellow flower'
b.	tigau no outi	(Emi, 3;〇)
differ house
'the different house,
c.	Emi-tyan-ga kaita no sinderera (Emi, 2；n)
Emi-NOM drew Cinderella
'the Cinderella that Emi drew'
This overgeneration of no has attracted much attention in the acquisition litera-
ture on Japanese. Regarding the syntactic status of the overgenerated no, three
hypotheses have been proposed: (a) no as a noun (Nagano 1960, Murasugi and
Hashimoto 2004a), (b) no as the genitive Case marker (Iwabuchi and Muraishi
1968, Clancy 1985, Yokoyama 1990, among many others), and (c) no as a comple-
mentizer (Murasugi 1991,Murasugi and Hashimoto 2004a).
One piece of evidence that the no in question is not the genitive Case marker
can be found in the utterances of children speaking the Toyama dialect (a dialect
spoken in the mid-north region of Japan). In the Tokyo dialect, no could be the
genitive Case marker, a pronoun (corresponding to one in English), or a com-
plementizer, as they are all homophonous as shown in (16).
(16)	a. John-no hon
John-GEN book
'John's book'
b.	akai no
red-is one
'the red one'
c.	Robusutaa-o tabeta no-wa Bosuton-de da.
lobster-ACC ate	c-top Boston-in is
'It is in Boston that (I) ate lobster.'
In the Toyama dialect, the genitive Case is realized as no, as in the Tokyo dialect,
but the other two no's (N and C) are realized as ga. Examples from this dialect are
shown in (17)-(19).
(17)	Genitive Case marker
a.	Emi-no	hon
Emi	book
'Emi's book'
b.	heya-no okatazuke
room cleaning-up
'cleaning up of the room'
258 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(18)	Pronoun
a.	akai ga
red-18 one
the red one'
b.	hasittoru ga
running-18 one
'the one that is running'
(19)	Complementizer
[John-ga kane-o	nusunda ga] -wa [PP koko-kara] da-t-tya
John-NOM money-ACC stole	c-top here-from is
Tt is from here that John stole money.'
The overgeneration in (15) is observed also with children speaking the Toyama
dialect. Interestingly, they overgenerate ga and not the genitive Case marker no.
The following instances are reported in Murasugi 1991.11
(20)	a. akai ga boosi
red cap
a red cap'	(Ken, 2；n)
b. Anpanman tuitoru ga koppu
(a character) attaching cup
'a cup bearing the image of Anpanman'	(Ken, 2；n)
The data in (20) constitute evidence that the overgenerated element is not a
pronoun, either. Those children who showed the overgeneration illustrated in (20)
had already acquired the rule of genitive 〃〇-insertion in noun phrases, applying it
properly in the position after prenominal NPs. Therefore, if they assumed that the
ga in question was a pronoun, then they should have inserted the genitive no after
the NP headed by this pronoun. This is illustrated in (21).
(21)	[np [np [Modifier • • • ] gd]-no head noun]
However, this prediction was not borne out. The subjects never inserted no in
this context. That is, they did not produce ill-formed strings such as those
in (22).
(22)	a. akai	ga-no	boosi
red-is	n-gen	cap
'the red cap'
b. Anpanman tuitoru ga-no koppu
(a character) attaching-is n-gen cup
"the cup bearing the image of Anpanman'
Hence, Murasugi (1991)concluded that the overgenerated no and ga in (15) and
(20) are not pronouns but complementizers.
THE ACQUISITION OF JAPANESE SYNTAX 2Z9
Building on this finding and independent syntactic analysis, Murasugi
(1991)proposed that relative clauses in Japanese are TPs (IPs) whereas those in
English are CPs.12 Under this hypothesis, the overgeneration of nolga can be
construed as follows. Children initially take the CP value of the relative-
clause parameter and realize the C head of the relative clause by inserting an
overt morpheme. Positive evidence that C can be lexically realized as nolga is
provided, for example, by cleft sentences such as (16c). This implies that the
unmarked setting for the CP/TP parameter for relative clauses is CP. Japanese-
speaking children later reset the value to TP, based on the positive evidence
available, and consequently retreat from the overgeneration of nolga in the posi-
tion of C.13
The above account raises the question of why the TP value of the relative-
clause parameter is set at a later stage of acquisition. One possibility, suggested in
Murasugi 1991,is that it takes time because the required positive evidence is not
readily available in the input. The complementizer that is optional in English
relative clauses. Hence, the mere absence of nolga in adult Japanese relatives cannot
serve as evidence that they are TPs. However, the complementizer is obligatory in
English pure complex NPs, as shown in (23a).
(23)	a. the fact *(that) John was fired
b. John-ga kubi-ni natta (*no) zizitu
John-NOM fired	was c fact
If this property of (23a) follows from a principle dictating the distribution of
empty C heads, as argued by Stowell(1981),then the absence of no in its Japanese
counterpart in (23b) can serve as positive evidence that prenominal senten-
tial modifiers lack the C-projection in Japanese. But then, Japanese-speaking
children must be exposed to pure complex NPs and must analyze them to reset the
value of the relative-clause parameter (or more generally, the parameter that
dictates the categorial status of prenominal sentential modifiers) to TP. The ac-
quisition of Japanese relative clauses, then, is plausibly a case of delayed parameter
setting. If so, the process of parameter setting constitutes one important devel-
opmental factor.
Sugisaki and Isobe (2000) presented another piece of evidence from child
Japanese for delayed parameter setting, by making use of the Compounding
Parameter proposed by Snyder (1995, 2001,2002). Through his cross-linguistic
investigation of typologically diverse languages, Snyder found a generalization that
any language that allows transitive resultatives as in (24a) necessarily allows novel
endocentric compounds as in (24b). The results of his comparative survey are
summarized in (25).
(24)	a. John painted the house red.
b. banana box 'box in which bananas are stored'
260 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(25)	Cross-linguistic survey (modified from Snyder 2002:34):
Novel N-N compounds? Transitive resultatives?
Khmer:	Yes	Yes
Estonian:	Yes	Yes
Dutch:	Yes	Yes
Mandarin:	Yes	Yes
Thai:	Yes	Yes
Japanese:	Yes	Yes
American Sign Language:	Yes	Yes
Basque:	Yes	No
Egyptian Arabic:	No	No
Javanese:	No	No
Spanish:	No	No
Serbo-Croatian:	No	No
Snyder formulated this cross-linguistic correlation in terms of the syntactic
parameter given in (26).
(26)	The Compounding Parameter (Snyder 2002:33)
The language {allows, disallows} formation of endocentric compounds
during the syntactic derivation.
The fundamental idea behind this parameter is that in complex-predicate con-
structions like resultatives, the main verb and the secondary predicate constitute a
single word (namely, an endocentric compound) at the point of semantic inter-
pretation, and the operation necessary to form this is the same as the one required
to create nominal compounds.
Building on this proposal, Sugisaki and Isobe performed a cross-sectional
study on twenty three- and four-year-old Japanese children (mean age 4；2), to
test the prediction that transitive resultatives would be available to a given child
only if the child's grammar allowed novel, endocentric compounds. In their ex-
periment, each child received a test of novel compounds (as in (27)) in the form of
elicited production, and a test of transitive resultatives (as in (28b)) in the form of a
truth-value judgment task. The story for (28b) is presented in (29).
(27)	kame pan 'turtle bread' (i.e., bread in the shape of a turtle)
(28)	a.	Pikachu-wa	aka-i	isu-o	nutte-imasu.
Pikachu-Top	red	chair-ACC	painting-is
'Pikachu is painting the red chair.'
b.	Pikachu-wa	aka-ku	isu-o	nutte-imasu.
Pikachu-Top	red	chair-ACC	painting-is
'Pikachu is painting the chair red.'
THE ACQUISITION OF JAPANESE SYNTAX 261
(29)	Sample story (translated from Japanese to English)
Today, Pikachu is playing in Ash's room. In the room, there are two chairs. One
chair, which is blue, belongs to his good friend Ash, and the other chair, which
is red and small, belongs to Pikachu. Pikachu wants these chairs to be the same
color. He walks to Ash's chair and starts thinking about painting that chair with
red paint. However, Pikachu realizes that he will be scolded very much if he
paints that chair without Ash's permission. Then, what can he do? He gets a
good idea. He can paint his own chair. Now, he gets blue paint and starts
painting his chair with that paint.
If the child has the knowledge to interpret resultatives correctly, then s/he will
judge that the sentence in (28b) is false in this situation, because even though
Pikachu once thought about painting a chair red, he gave up that idea and started
painting his own chair with blue paint. However, if the child does not have
knowledge of the resultative and has wrongly assigned the interpretation that
corresponds to (28a), then s/he will accept the test sentence in (28b) even in this
situation.
The results showed a significant contingency between passing the com-
pounding test and passing the resultative test (^—.0194 by two-tailed Fisher Exact
Test). The children who failed both of these tests can be interpreted as having the
negative value of the Compounding Parameter, and those who passed both tests
can be viewed as having the positive value. Because the shift from the negative
setting to the positive one is observable in the course of acquisition, this finding
suggests that the Compounding Parameter undergoes delayed setting in the ac-
quisition of Japanese, and again that parameter setting contributes to the non-
instantaneous nature of actual language development.
In addition to such "global" parameters, a recent study by Goro and Akiba
(2004) suggested that UG contains a lexical parameter governing the semantics of
negation-disjunction expressions and that this parameter is initially misset by
Japanese-speaking children. They observed that negated disjunctions in English
and Japanese behave differently, as illustrated in (30). Whereas the English
disjunction or is interpreted within the scope of local negation and yields the
conjunctive interpretation, this interpretation is unavailable in the Japanese
counterpart containing ka: The Japanese disjunction must take scope above local
negation.
(30)	a. John cannot speak English or Japanese.
—John cannot speak English AND he cannot speak Japanese.
b. John-wa	eigo	ka	nihongo-o	hanas-e-nai.
John-Top	English	or	Japanese-Add	speak-able-NEG
— John cannot speak English OR he cannot speak Japanese./*Neg>OR
Goro and Akiba argued that this contrast should be captured by assuming
that Japanese disjunction is a positive polarity item (PPI), like English some, and
262 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
went on to propose that the PPI-hood of disjunction is governed by a lexical
parameter with values {土PPI}. Selecting the 4-PPI value yields Japanese-type
PPI disjunction, and selecting the -PPI value yields English-type non-PPI dis-
junction.
To determine how Japanese-speaking children interpret negated disjunctions,
Goro and Akiba (2004) conducted an experiment with thirty children, using a
truth-value judgment task. The results revealed that children accepted adultlike
"disjunctive" interpretation of ka only 25 percent of the time, which suggests that
Japanese-speaking children interpret ka conjunctively, as in adult English. Goro
and Akiba interpreted this finding as an indication that the -PPI value is the default
setting of the relevant semantic parameter, and that the shift to the correct setting
requires a certain amount of time, presumably due to the low frequency of the
relevant input data.
So far, we have seen evidence from child Japanese that the setting of various
parameters takes time and hence contributes to the noninstantaneous nature of
language acquisition. Yet, it is not necessarily the case that every parameter un-
dergoes such delayed setting. In fact, based on findings from the acquisition of
Germanic and Romance languages, Wexler (1998) proposed the hypothesis in (31),
which says that "basic” parameters such as those listed in (32) are already fixed to
the target value when syntactically relevant production begins.
(31)	Very Early Parameter-Setting (VEPS; Wexler 1998:25)
Basic parameters are set correctly at the earliest observable stages, that is,
at least from the time that the child enters the two-word stage, around
eighteen months of age.
(32)	Basic parameters are (at least) the parameters relevant to:
a.	Word order, such as VO versus OV (e.g., Swedish vs. German)
b.	V-to-I or not (e.g., French vs. English)
c.	V2 or not (e.g., German vs. English or French)
d.	Null subject or not (e.g., Italian vs. English or French)
Sugisaki (2005) confirmed the early setting of the word-order parameter in
Japanese, a free word-order language. In addition to its basic SOV order, Japanese
permits English-like 8VO order, at least in matrix contexts, as shown in (33). Yet,
this 8VO order exhibits various restrictions that do not apply to the SOV order,
which indicates that the former is a marked order, derived in some way from the
latter (see, e.g., Tanaka 2001).For example, the 8VO order is incompatible with
direct-object wh-questions, as illustrated in (34).
(33)	a. SOV: Eri-ga ringo-o tabeta (yo).
Eri-NOM apple-ACC ate (part)
cEri ate an apple?
b. SVO: Eri-ga tabeta(yo), ringo-o.
Eri-NOM ate (part) apple-Acc
THE ACQUISITION OF JAPANESE SYNTAX 26)
(34)	a.	SOV:	Eri-ga nani-o	tabeta	no?
			Eri-NOM what-ACC	ate	Q
			'What did Eri eat?'		
	b.	SVO:	*Eri-ga tabeta	no,	nani-o?
			Eri-NOM ate	Q	what-ACC
Japanese-learning children around the age of 2；z sometimes produce utterances
that contain VO order. To determine whether such VO sentences in the child's
speech have the same marked status as in adult language, Sugisaki (2005) analyzed
two longitudinal corpora for Japanese (Aki and Ryo; Miyata 2004a, 2004b) from
the CHILDES database (MacWhinney 2000), which provide a total sample of more
than thirty-three thousand lines of child speech. The results showed that both VO
sentences and direct-object w/i-questions occurred reasonably often, but there was
never an example of an object 印//-question with VO order. This finding indicates
that OV is the only basic word order even in early child Japanese and that the early
setting of the word-order parameter holds even for the acquisition of Japanese, a
free word-order language.
According to syntactic studies such as Fukui 1993 and Saito and Fukui 1998, the
availability of scrambling in Japanese is tightly connected to its head-final setting. If
so, the findings of Otsu (1994b) and Murasugi and Kawamura (2005) that
scrambling in Japanese is acquired very early conform to the early setting of the
word-order parameter. Yet, the view that scrambling is acquired early is a relatively
new development.
In the late 1970s, Hayashibe (1975) and Sano (1977) examined how Japanese-
speaking children interpret sentences with the canonical SOV order and those with
the scrambled OSV order, illustrated in (35). In this task, children were asked to act
out the meaning of the sentence by manipulating toy animals placed in front of
them.
(35) a.	SOV:	Kamesan-ga	ahirusan-o	osimasita.
turtle-NOM	duck-ACC	pushed
'A turtle pushed a duck.'
b.	OSV:	Kamesan-o	ahirusan-ga	osimasita.
turtle-ACC	duck-NOM	pushed
£A duck pushed a turtle.'
The results indicated that there seems to be a period in development, sometimes up
to five years old, where children tend to interpret scrambled sentences such as (35b)
as if they were nonscrambled sentences such as (35a). This finding raised the
possibility that the grammar of Japanese-speaking children lacks scrambling and
that this operation is acquired fairly late.
Otsu (1994b) pointed out the possibility that even though the child grammar
is equipped with the scrambling operation, children may have trouble creating
the discourse context by themselves that makes the scrambled sentence sound
natural. Specifically, he suggested that the scrambled NP usually needs to have been
264 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
established as a discourse topic and, hence, that children cannot comprehend
scrambled sentences in the absence of any discourse context. To evaluate this pos-
sibility, Otsu conducted an experiment in which each test sentence was preceded by
another sentence that established the scrambled NP as the discourse topic. An
example is given in (36).
(36) Kooen-ni
park-in
Sono
the
ahirusan-ga
duck-NOM
ahirusan-o
duck-ACC
imasita.
is-POL-PAST
kamesan-ga osimasita.
turtle-NOM push-POL-PAST
"There was a duck in the park. A turtle pushed the duck.'
The results showed that three- and four-year-old children had virtually no diffi-
culty in understanding OSV sentences, once the discourse context was provided.
This finding indicates that knowledge of scrambling is acquired early, even though
the knowledge relevant to creating the discourse context for scrambled sentences
may take more time to develop. Early acquisition of scrambling in Japanese is
further supported by Murasugi and Kawamura 2005. In addition to children's
comprehension of scrambled sentences, Murasugi and Kawamura tested the ac-
quisition of the reconstruction property of scrambling, one of the syntactic
properties associated with A'-movement. The sentences they used are exemplified
in (37).
(37)	a.	SOV:	Ahiru-ga】	usi -0	[zibun-nOj	niwa-de]	oikaketa.
duck-NOM	cow-acc	self-GEN	garden-at	chased
"The duck chased the cow at the garden of himself.'
b.	OSV:	Usi-〇！ [zibun-no2 niwa-de ]3	ahiru-ga2	tr t3 oikaketa.
cow-acc	self-GEN	garden-at	duck-NOM	chased
"The cow, at the garden of himself the duck chased.'
In (37a), the subject-oriented anaphor zibun is c-commanded and hence is bound
by the subject NP ahiru-ga. In (37b), this c-command requirement is satisfied
through reconstruction: The anaphor is properly licensed in its initial position.
Using an act-out task, Murasugi and Kawamura showed that even three-year-olds
have knowledge of the reconstruction property of scrambling. This finding is
significant in that it suggests that the children had indeed acquired scrambling as a
movement operation.
Going back to the issue of the early setting of parameters, Nakayama (1996)
investigated whether the null-argument parameter is fixed correctly from the very
beginning. Nakayama analyzed the use of empty arguments in the spontaneous
speech of three Japanese-speaking children and compared the obtained frequencies
with those of adults. The results revealed that the rate of empty arguments in the
children's speech is not very different from that in the adults' speech, which led
Nakayama to claim that Japanese-speaking children as young as one year old have
THE ACQUISITION OF JAPANESE SYNTAX 265
the same knowledge about empty arguments as adults. This finding suggests that
the null-argument parameter is also set correctly from the earliest stages of Japa-
nese acquisition.
The findings from the various studies reviewed so far lead to the conclusion
that there are two types of parameters一those that undergo early fixation (e.g., the
word-order parameter) and those that undergo delayed fixation (e.g., the relative-
clause parameter). Then, an important question arises as to what explains this
dichotomy. Some recent acquisition studies offer interesting proposals. For ex-
ample, Guasti (2003) suggested that early-set parameters are those that can be set
on the basis of prosodic information. Rizzi (2004) speculated that some parame-
ters, specifically those that are relevant to the dropping of materials, undergo
delayed fixation due to a grammatically driven strategy to reduce the workload
of the immature production system. Alternatively, the dichotomy might reflect
the fact that UG parameters are structured hierarchically (Baker 2001)and hence
that the settings of certain parameters depend on the settings of others. More
evidence concerning each parameter is called for in order to obtain a more definite
answer.
To summarize this subsection, we have reviewed evidence from the acquisition
of Japanese that certain parameters take time to reach the target value and that this
helps explain why actual language development is noninstantaneous. These studies
in turn indicate that the time course of child language acquisition is a potentially
rich source of evidence concerning the parameters of variation permitted by hu-
man language.14
10.3.2	Maturation of UG Properties
As we discussed in section 10.2, many principles of UG have been demonstrated to
emerge early. However, this is not the only logical possibility. In principle, there
could be properties of UG that emerge later in the course of acquisition due to
maturation: Their emergence is biologically controlled and hence they are not
available until the child reaches a certain stage of development.15
One area that several studies argued to involve maturation of UG properties is
the development of functional categories (e.g., Radford 1990) and the later ac-
quisition of IP and CP (e.g., Vainikka 1993/1994). It is widely observed that English-
speaking children before or around the age of two years frequently omit functional
elements such as determiners and auxiliaries.
(38)	Bee going window. Wayne sitting gate.	(Radford 1990:159)
Additionally, no productive use of modals, tense and agreement markers,
complementizers, or 印/！-movement are observed in this stage of language acqui-
sition.
266 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
To account for the lack of functional elements in the child's speech, Radford
(1990) proposed that the early grammar is a lexical-thematic system that includes
no functional categories (no D, I, or C) and that the availability of these categories is
subject to maturation: Although functional categories are part of UG, they are
programmed to emerge and become operative around the age of two years.16
Yet, later studies provided compelling evidence against the complete lack of
functional categories in early grammars. Pierce (1992) examined natural produc-
tion data from four French-speaking two-year-olds and made two striking find-
ings. First, children incorrectly use nonfinite verbs as the matrix verb.17 Second,
they make virtually no errors with respect to the syntactic position of the verbs:
Verbs precede the negation pas when they are finite but follow pas when they are
nonfinite. The following table summarizes the data from one of the four children,
Nathalie:
(39)	Verb placement in negatives as a function of tense (Pierce 1992:66)
+Finite —Finite
Verb-Neg	68 〇
Neg-Verb 3	82
This finding demonstrates that French children know that finite verbs must overtly
move to I across negation, which in turn suggests that the functional category of I
already exists in the children's grammar. This observation from child French and a
similar observation from child German led Poeppel and Wexler (1993) to argue
against Radford's (1990) claim and to propose instead that phrase structure in the
grammar of two-year-olds is equipped with a full array of functional categories and
is organized in exactly the same way that it is for adults (the Full Competence
Hypothesis).
Murasugi and Hashimoto (2004b) presented evidence from Japanese that the
child grammar projects the functional category of small v, which is responsible for
the assignment of an external 0-role (Chomsky 1995:315). Their longitudinal study
of the child called Akkun revealed that at around age 255, Akkun quite productively
ended utterances with the words tiyu/tita/tite, which correspond in meaning to
'do/did/doing' in English.
(40)	a.	Mama	Akkun	hai doozyo tiyu	(255)
Mommy	Akkun	yes please do
'Akkun(/1) will give it to Mommy.'
b.	Akkun	nezi	kuyukuyu	tite,	konoko	syaberu (259)
Akkun	screw	turn-around	doing	this-one	talk
"When Akkun(/ I) will wind this one around, it will talk.'
Murasugi and Hashimoto further observed that Akkun used tiyu/tita/tite to de-
scribe an activity that caused a certain event or change of state, and they proposed
the following structure for (40b).
THE ACQUISITION OF JAPANESE SYNTAX 267
(41)

Akkun	v'
v [+cause]
nezi kiyukiyu	I
tite
If this analysis of (40b) is correct, then the child's utterances involving tiyu/tita/tite
provide evidence for the レ-VP frame for agentive verbs in the child grammar and
hence undermine Radford's (1990) proposal that the emergence of all functional
categories is maturationally delayed.
Another UG property that has been argued to involve maturation is the ability
to form A-chains, as proposed initially by Borer and Wexler (1987).18 Their A-
chain maturation hypothesis was based on the following two observations con-
cerning the acquisition of passives in English. First, English-speaking children have
difficulty in comprehending and producing passives of nonactional verbs as in (42)
but not passives of actional verbs as in (43) (Maratsos et al.1985).
(42)	The doll was seen (by Mary).
(43)	The doll was combed (by Mary).
The second observation is that passives without a 奶-phrase (short passives) are
comprehended and produced earlier than passives with a 奶-phrase (long pas-
sives).
Borer and Wexler (1987) argued that these observations can be accounted for
by assuming that children are unable to form A-chains: In passives, the underlying
object moves to the subject position and forms an A-chain, but the child lacks the
ability to handle this property. This hypothesis directly accounts for children's
difficulty with sentences such as (42), which can only be analyzed as verbal passives.
In contrast, the participle in (43) is potentially ambiguous between a passive and an
adjectival interpretation. Thus, although the participle in (42) cannot appear
prenominally, this is possible with the participle in (43):
(44)	a.ヰthe seen doll
b. the combed doll
Given this distinction, Borer and 'Wexler claimed that children analyze examples
such as (43) as adjectival passives and hence are able to provide an interpretation.
They also suggested that the lack of long passives in the child's speech follows from
the fact that adjectival passives are in many cases incompatible with 奶-phrases, as
shown in (45).19
(45)	The fact was unknown (*by Peter).
Sugisaki (1999) and Minai (2000), among others, argued that the acquisition
of passives in Japanese is consistent with the prediction of the A-chain matu-
268 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
ration hypothesis. Japanese has two major types of passives.20 The direct passive
corresponds to the English fee-passive both structurally and functionally. In this
construction, the passive morpheme -rare is attached to the verb stem, and the
object NP of the active sentence appears in the subject position bearing nomi-
native Case. The subject NP of the active optionally appears as a PP with ni
'by.21
(46)	a. Active transitive
Eri-ga Ken-o osita.
Eri-NOM Ken-Acc pushed
cEri pushed Ken.'
b. Direct passive
Ken-ga (Eri-ni) os-are-ta.
Ken-NOM Eri-by pusH-pass-past
'Ken was pushed by Eri.'
The other major type of passive一the indirect passive—can be created not only
from a transitive verb but also from an intransitive verb. As in direct passives, the
passive morpheme -rare is attached to the verb stem, and the subject of the active
appears in a PP headed by ni 'by'. However, in indirect passives, an additional
argument appears as the surface subject, and this NP is interpreted as being ad-
versely affected by the state of affairs expressed in the rest of the clause. For this
reason, the indirect passive is often called the adversity passive.
(47)	a. Active intransitive
Ame-ga hutta.
rain-NOM fell/rained
'It rained/
b. Indirect passive
Ken-ga	ame-ni	hur-are-ta.
Ken-NOM	rain-by	fall-PASS-PAST
'Ken was adversely affected by rain.'
(48)	a. Active transitive
Ken-ga	kuruma-o	ketta.
Ken-NOM	car-ACC	kicked
'Ken kicked a car.'
b. Indirect passive
Eri-ga	Ken-ni	kuruma-o	ker-are-ta.
Eri-NOM	Ken-by	car-ACC	kick-PASS-PAST
'Eri was adversely affected by Ken's kicking a/her car.'
There are important structural differences between direct and indirect passives.
First, Kuno (1973) pointed out that the subject-oriented anaphor zibun 'self
takes the surface subject as its antecedent in direct passives, but it can refer to the
surface subject or the 出-phrase object in indirect passives. This contrast is illustrated
in(49).
THE ACQUISITION OF JAPANESE SYNTAX 269
(49)	a. Taroo-wa Hanako-ni zibun-no heya-de nagur-are-ta.
Taroo-Top Hanako-by self^GEN room-in hit-PASS-PAST
£Taroo was hit by Hanako in his room?
b.	Taroo-wa Hanako-ni zibun-no heya-de sawag-are-ta.
Taroo-Top Hanako-by self-GEN room-in make noise-PASS-PAST
'Taroo was adversely affected by Hanako's making noise in his/
her room.'
Based on this observation, Kuno proposed that the direct passive has a simple
structure similar to the English passive, whereas -rare is an independent verb in the
indirect passive. The passive morpheme takes a sentential complement in (49b),
and Hanako qualifies as a potential antecedent of zibun because it is the subject of
the embedded clause.
Second, Miyagawa (1989) observed that quantifier float is possible from the
surface subject of a direct passive but not from that of an indirect passive:
(50)	Direct passive
Yuube, kuruma-ga [Vp doroboo-ni ni-dai nusum-are-ta].
last-night car-NOM thieAby 2-cl steal-PASS-PAST
"Last night, two cars were stolen by the thief.'
(51)	Indirect passive
冷Kodomo-ga [vp ame-ni futari fur-are-ta].
children-NOM rain-by 2-cl fall-PASS-PAST
'Two children were rained on.'
Miyagawa argued that this contrast can be captured by assuming that direct pas-
sives involve A-movement of the NP from object to subject position and that the
locality requirement on quantifiers is satisfied between the numeral quantifier and
the trace of that movement. If so, the contrast between (50) and (51) suggests that
the formation of an A-chain between subject and object positions is involved in
direct passives but not indirect passives.
Sugisaki (1999) and Minai (2000) reasoned that if direct passives contain
A-chains but indirect passives do not, then the A-chain maturation hypothe-
sis predicts that indirect passives are acquired earlier than direct passives. Using
a picture-selection task, these studies showed that Japanese-speaking four- and
five-year-olds have much difficulty in interpreting direct passives and that indi-
rect passives are easier to comprehend for these children than direct pas-
sives.22
Other findings from child Japanese are consistent with the A-chain maturation
hypothesis. Miyamoto et al.(1999) examined in detail the Case-Marker Drop
phenomenon in the spontaneous speech data of one Japanese-speaking child (Aki;
Miyata 2004a) and made the following observation: Even though Aki generally
omitted Case markers only in environments that an adult would find acceptable,
one possible exception occurred with arguments of unaccusative verbs. Aki dropped
Case markers even in environments such as (52).
27〇 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(52)	a. Dare-ga	kita	no?
who-NOM	came	q
'Who came?'
b.	??Dare-(|)	kita	no?
Miyamoto et al. speculated that the lack of A-chains at this stage forced Aki to leave
the argument of unaccuatives within VP and thus the Case particle was close
enough to the verb to undergo Case omission.
Sugisaki and Isobe (2001)investigated experimentally whether Japanese-
speaking children around four years old can correctly interpret the ditransitive
constructions given in (53).
(53)	a. S-IO-DO-V
Eri-ga Ken-ni sono hon-o ageta.
Eri-NOM Ken-DAT that book-ACC gave.
'Eri gave that book to Ken.'
b. S-DO-IO-V
Eri-ga sono hon-o Ken-ni ageta.
Eri-NOM that book-ACC Ken-DAT gave.
The results from twenty children suggested that, although children showed no dif-
ficulty interpreting IO-DO order as in (53a), they had trouble interpreting DO-IO
order as in (53b). If syntactic analyses such as Nemoto 1993 and Tada 1993 are
correct in claiming that S-DO-IO-V order is derived from S-IO-DO-V order via
A-movement of DO, then these results are consistent with the A-chain maturation
hypothesis.23
In contrast, Sano (2000) and Sano, Endo, and Yamakoshi (2001)argued
against the maturation of A-chains, based on their experiment on Japanese-
speaking children's interpretation of full unaccusatives. They observed that
quantifier float is possible not only with the subject of direct passives but also with
the subject of "full unaccusatives" (unaccusaitves with -ni phrase), and they
claimed that full unaccusatives also involve the formation of A-chains in their
derivation.
(54)	a. Direct passive
Zousan-ga butasan-ni 2-hiki tukamae-rare-ta.
elephant-NOM pig-by 2-cl catch-PASS-PAST
b. Full unaccusative
Zousan-ga butasan-ni 2-hiki tukamat-ta.
elephant-NOM pig-by 2-cl catch(unacc)-past
'Two elephants were caught by a pig.'
Yet, contrary to the prediction of the A-chain maturation hypothesis, the three- to
five-year-old children they tested did not have much difficulty in comprehending
full unaccusatives, even though they made many errors in interpreting di-
rect passives. In light of this finding, Sano (2000) and Sano, Endo, and Yamakoshi
THE ACQUISITION OF JAPANESE SYNTAX 2/1
(2001)argued that children's difficulty lies not in the formation of A-chains but
rather in the transmission of an external 0-role from the passive affix to the by-
phrase.
Murasugi and Kawamura (2005) compared the acquisition of scrambling and
the direct passive and found not only that scrambling is acquired earlier than the
direct passive but also that the discrepancy is surprisingly large. As noted in
section 10.3.1, their (act-out) experiments indicated that even three-year-olds
know the reconstruction property of scrambling. However, children start assign-
ing correct interpretations to passive sentences around the age of four. Moreover,
a further experiment with test sentences that contained the subject-oriented
anaphor zibun 'self' suggested that the acquisition of direct passive is actually
further delayed. In the direct passive, the surface subject is the unique possible
antecedent of zibun, whereas in the indirect passive, both the surface subject
and the semantic subject in the 必-phrase (奶-phrase) qualify as possible ante-
cedents. In their experiment, none of the six four-year-old subjects showed the
ability to assign the correct antecedent to zibun in direct passive sentences, and
even three of the eight older subjects (ages five and six years) were unsuccessful in
this respect.
According to Murasugi and Kawamura (2005))these results suggest that
the four-year-olds (and some older children) who successfully acted out direct
passive sentences actually interpreted them as indirect passives. This is in line
with the conclusion of Sugisaki (1999) and Minai (2000) that the indirect passive
is acquired prior to the direct passive, which involves an A-chain, and hence the
acquisition of Japanese passives is consistent with the A-chain maturation hy-
pothesis. However, Murasugi and Kawamura pointed out that the delay in the
acquisition of the direct passive is too extensive if A-chain maturation is its sole
cause: It is dubious that A-chains take more than five years to mature. They
speculated, then, that morphological complexity plays at least some role in the
delayed acquisition of the direct passive. In the indirect passive, the passive
morpheme -rare is a verb that assigns the affectee role to the subject and takes a
sentential complement. In the direct passive, though, the morpheme's properties
are more complex. Hoshi (1994), for example, argued that it not only absorbs the
external 0-role and the objective Case of the root verb but also assigns the affectee
role to the surface subject when a 庆-phrase appears.24 It seems quite possible,
then, that these complex properties of -rare in the direct passive contribute to its
delayed acquisition.
As we can see from this discussion, the maturation of A-chains is still not a
settled issue (even) in the acquisition of Japanese, despite the fact that this issue is
one of the better studied areas in Japanese acquisition.
Before closing this review of studies on the maturation of UG properties, let us
look at another area in child Japanese that has been given a maturational account.
It has long been observed in the acquisition of Japanese that young children
occasionally produce errors with negation, as illustrated in (55a) (see, e.g., Clancy
1985). In this example, a finite verbal form is placed in front of the negation, even
272 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
though the correct adult counterpart requires a nonfinite irrealis verbal form, as
shown in (55b).
(55)	a. *hairu	nai
enter(NONPAST)neg
'(It) does not enter.J
b. haira	nai
enter(iRREALis) neg
To account for such errors, Sano (2002) proposed that the morphological oper-

ation of irrealis formation undergoes maturation and does not become operative
until children reach a certain point in development.
To summarize this subsection, evidence from child Japanese argues against
the maturation of functional categories, in line with evidence from the acquisi-
tion of other languages. In the case of the maturation of A-chains, however,
there are still competing views in the literature, and further investigation is
necessary to determine the validity of this hypothesis. Thus, we can reasonably
say that the acquisition of Japanese leaves the maturation of UG properties as a
potential contributor to the noninstantaneous nature of actual language devel-
opment.
10.3.3	Acquisition of Lexical Items: On the Lexical
Realization of Syntactic Categories
So far, we have seen two factors that may contribute to the noninstantaneous
nature of language acquisition: parameter setting and the maturation of UG
properties. Finally, we discuss the acquisition of lexical items and their syntactic
properties. We take up as a case study Murasugi and Hashimoto's (2004b) lon-
gitudinal study on the acquisition of verbs一in particular, transitive-unaccusative
pairs and causatives.
As noted earlier, Murasugi and Hashimoto (2004b) reported a longitudinal
study of a Japanese-speaking child, Akkun, and observed that he initially seemed to
realize v as tiyu/tita/tite 'do/did/doing'. A relevant example, (40b), is repeated here
as (56).
(56)	Akkun	nezi	kuyukuyu	tite,	konoko	syaberu	(259)
Akkun	screw	turn-around	doing	this-one	talk
"When Akkun (/I) will wind this one around, it will talk.'
At this point, he typically used onomatopoeic or mimetic expressions in place of
the actual verb. Thus, kuyukuyu in (56), which corresponds to kurukuru in adult
speech, is a mimetic word that describes things turning around. His acquisition of
actual verbs, however, started early and proceeded step by step. Utterances such as
(57)	and (58) were observed before he turned three years old.
THE ACQUISITION OF JAPANESE SYNTAX 2/Z
(57)	Dango-ga uta	pakan	tite, dango-ga	atta	(2；9)
dumpling-NOM lid	onomatopoeia	doing dumpling-NOM	there-be
'There was a dumpling (when I) opened the lid of the dumpling (box).'
(58)	Kinnou	Akkun	akatyan	toki,	papa-ni koe	ageta	(2；io)
yesterday	Akkun	baby	when	Daddy-to this	gave
'Akkun gave this to Daddy when he was a baby yesterday (— in the
past).'
The italicized verb in (57) is an unaccusative, and that in (58) is a ditransitive.
At the same time, Akkun showed interesting and consistent "errors" as he
acquired the actual verbs. Note first that, in adult English, a transitive verb and an
unaccusative verb often take the same phonetic form. Thus, we have alternations as
in(59).
(59)	a. John passed the ring to Mary.
b. The ring passed to Mary.
If the argument structures of these sentences are realized as in (60), then vis a "zero
morpheme" without phonetic content whether it is [+cause] as in the case of (59a)
or [-cause] as in the case of (59b).
(60)

(John)
v VP
[±cause]
NP
the ring
V'
V PP
I
pass to Mary
Consequently, v [+cause] + pass' and (v [-cause] + pass' are both realized as
'pass'.
In adult Japanese, in contrast, transitivity and unaccusativity are often marked
by distinct suffixes, as illustrated in (61).
(61)	Transitive	Unaccusative
a.	mi-se-ru (— show-PREs) / mi-e-ru (— see-PREs)
b.	utu-s-(r)u (— copy-PREs) / utu-r-(r)u (— be copied-PREs)
c.	todok-e-ru (— deliver-PREs) / todok-(r)u (— be delivered-PREs)
d.	os-ie-ru (— teach-PREs) / os-owar-(r)u (— be taught)
These examples show that the forms of the suffixes are idiosyncratic and proba-
bly have to be learned individually. These suffixes plausibly occupy the v position. For
example, [+cause] v is realized as -s and [-cause] v as -r, in the case of (61b).
In the process of acquiring these lexical items that stand for V-v combinations,
Akkun often produced transitive sentences with unaccusative verbs:
274 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(62)	Nee,	ati-o	hirogat-te	(z；7)
INT	legS-ACC	Spread(UNACC)-REQUEST
'Please spread your legs.'
(63)	Kore,	az-toku	kara	saa	(455)
this	open(UNACC)-keep	as	int
'(I will) open this and keep it open.'
(64)	Toコok-ok-ka, ano hito-ni todok-oo todok-oo (4；8)
arrive-shall we that person-to arrive-let's arrive-let's
'Shall we send (it)? Let's send (it) to that person.'
In each of these examples, Akkun used the unaccusative form of the verb in place of
the transitive. What he intended in (62), for example, was hirog-e-te 'spread-
request' (transitive) and not hirog-at-te 'spread-REQUEST' (unaccusative). In
adult Japanese, (63) and (64) mean 'I will remain open' and 'Let's be delivered to
that person', respectively.
Fuji (2006) and Murasugi, Hashimoto, and Fuji (2007) examined a longitudinal
corpus (Noji 1973-1977) from the CHILDES database (MacWhinney 2000) and
observed that the subject, Sumihare, went through exactly the same stages as Akkun
in the acquisition process of Japanese verbs. And interestingly, whereas Akkun
consistently used unaccusatives for transitives, Sumihare sometimes used transitives
for unaccusatives as well.25 One of the examples is shown in (65).
(65)	Koko-kara hi-ga	das-u	nze	(2；6)
here-from sun-NOM take out part
'The sun comes out from here.'
These studies suggest that children initially assume that the pronounced verbs are
Vs and that [±cause] v is phonetically empty. Accordingly, to them, unaccusatives
and their transitive counterparts should be homophonous, as in English. They only
later realize that the surface forms of the verbs are derived by suffixing v to the
verbal root. As the actual realization of [icause] v is idiosyncratic and sometimes
even null, the acquisition of verbs requires complex morphological analysis. It is,
then, not surprising at all that it requires some time.
Japanese has a well-known causative verbal suffix, -sase, and syntactically it
takes a sentential (vP) complement. Thus, the subject-oriented reflexive pronoun,
ziburiy can take the causer as well as the causee as its antecedent in a causative
sentence.
(66)	Hanako-ga Taroo-ni zibun-no heya-o	katazuke-sase-ta.
Hanako-NOM Taroo-DAT self^GEN room-ACC clean-CAUSE-PAST
'Hanako made Taroo clean up her/his room.'
This shows that causative sentences contain two subjects and, hence, an embedded
clause. The causative -sase, then, is not a realization of [+cause] v but is itself a V
(or a V-v combination).
THE ACQUISITION OF JAPANESE SYNTAX 2/Z
Akkun started uttering causative sentences quite productively around the age
of five years.26 But sporadic uses of -sase were observed much earlier, at age three. A
typical example is shown in (67).
(67)	Akkun-ni tabe-sase-tee (z;6)
Akkun-DAT eat-CAUSE-REQUEST
"Please feed Akkun?
Interestingly, in all of those examples, the causee is not agentive. Thus, (67) was
intended to mean "Please feed me' rather than "Please let me eat'. As this coincided
with the period when Akkun was struggling with the idiosyncratic realization of
[icause] v, one can conjecture that he was using -sase as one possible form of
[+cause] v. The acquisition of the causative construction with the full verb -sase
took place more than a year later, as witnessed by the following example, where the
causee is clearly agentive:27
(68)	Name-tee, name-tee, name-sase-te. (4:9)
lick-want lick-want lick-CAUSE-REQUEST
"I want to lick (the candy). Let me lick it.'
The discussion in Murasugi and Hashimoto 2004b indicates that children are
equipped with the 卩-VP frame from the early stage of acquisition, but they re-
quire some time to discover the morphological makeup of the actual verbs, which
are formed by combining V and v. The causative suffixal verb -sase is initially
assumed to be a realization of [+cause] v and is only later acquired as a full verb
that takes a sentential (vP) complement. Lexical items typically correspond to
syntactic heads, but they are sometimes formed by combining two or more distinct
morphemes that project phrases of their own. Children must perform morpho-
logical analysis to acquire those complex lexical items. We would then expect
this analysis to take time in some cases, and this is exactly what we have seen in
the acquisition of verbs in Japanese. (See Murasugi, Hashimoto, and Fuji 2007 for a
detailed study.)
10.4	Concluding Remarks
In this chapter, we have reviewed studies on the acquisition of Japanese that
directly bear on the construction of a theory of language acquisition. Specifically,
we have summarized studies that attempt to answer the two principal questions
listed in (3), repeated here in (69).
(69)	Principal questions
a.	When and how do principles of UG emerge in the child grammar?
b.	What factors explain the gradual, noninstantaneous nature of actual
language development?
2/6 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
As for the first question, we have presented evidence from child Japanese that
various principles of UG constrain the course of acquisition from the very begin-
ning. These findings in turn argue for the innateness of these principles. With respect
to the second question, we have seen evidence from child Japanese that parameter
setting, maturation ofUG properties, and lexical acquisition play important roles in
explaining why language acquisition is not instantaneous but proceeds gradually. As
mentioned at the outset, Japanese has various syntactic characteristics that are not
observed in Germanic or Romance languages, and hence the investigation of its
acquisition process can be especially valuable for acquisition theory. We hope that
this chapter has succeeded in demonstrating this point in a convincing way.
Descriptive and explanatory adequacies have to be met in acquisition research.
Acquisition studies that explicitly make a contribution from child Japanese to the
analysis of adult Japanese syntax are very much needed, as are acquisition studies
that draw directly on proposed syntactic analyses of adult Japanese. Theory-based
and theory-inspiring hypotheses that make use of solid data and theoretical
analysis are much sought after in Japanese acquisition research.
To achieve these objectives, however, acquisition researchers need a keen eye
for theoretically significant data. Empirical research is guided by theoretical ideas.
For this reason exactly, a simple empirical discovery can have a profound effect on
the foundations of linguistic theory. Recall the findings of Jane Goodall, who
discovered that chimpanzees make and use tools. This finding revolutionized the
understanding not only of chimps but also of human behavior itself. In Jane
GoodalVs Wild Chimpanzees, the discovery is recorded as follows:
I [Jane Goodall] was walking through the forest, when I spotted a hunched figure
through the vegetation. He [a chimpanzee] had his back to me, but I could see
him stripping the leaves off a small twig.
Then busying himself around the top of a termite mound, I could see him
pushing the twig into a hole in the mound. I had no idea what he was up to.
But then he pulled out the twig and expertly picked a few termites off it with
his lips. I was mesmerized. I knew that what he had just done was considered
to be outright impossible. A mere nonhuman had just fabricated a clever and
effective tool right before my very eyes. 28
When Jane first described termite-fishing, the ability to make and use tools was
considered one of the defining features that set humans apart from the rest of the
animal kingdom. We were known as "Man the Tool Maker.
In what has become a famous quote, Dr. Louis Leakey wrote to Jane, "Now we
have to redefine tool, redefine man, or accept chimpanzees as humans.” Jane
replied, "I [Jane Goodall] have since discovered that all Gombe chimpanzees know
how to termite-fish."
In the course of long and constant longitudinal study, a piece of important
empirical data happened to appear in front of the researcher, and a fundamental
assumption regarding human versus nonhuman behavior had to be reconsidered
because of the observation. This discovery was made during Jane Goodall's forty
years of research at Gombe.
THE ACQUISITION OF JAPANESE SYNTAX 277
We conclude this chapter by expressing our hope that the connection between
acquisitional investigations and theoretical studies of the Japanese language will
be further tightened in the future. This will undoubtedly inspire the discovery of
more acquisition data of theoretical significance and the pursuit of a more accurate
description of child Japanese. And more important, it will make the theoretical
significance of empirical acquisition research more apparent. Child language offers
a wealth of information for the construction of the theory of UG, and it is one of
the important tasks of acquisitionists to make use of this information to contribute
to linguistic theorizing.
NOTES FOR CHAPTER 10
We would like to thank Shigeru Miyagawa, Mamoru Saito, William Snyder, and the
audience of the Workshop on Linguistic Theory and the Japanese Language for valuable
comments and suggestions. Any remaining errors are, of course, our own. This research
was supported in part by the Nanzan University Pache Research Grant I-A, JSPS Grant-in-
Aid (C) (#17520282) to Nanzan University (Murasugi), and JSPS Grant-in-Aid (B)
(#17320062; Project Leader: Seiki Ayano) to Mie University (Sugisaki).
1.	This dialogue was collected by Keiko Murasugi.
2.	There are also cases where adults attempt to correct children's "errors." In spite of
these efforts, children typically ignore these corrections. The following dialogue with a
child age 2；2 illustrates such a case (Suzuki 1987:172, trans. KM and KS).
(i)	Child: Papa	fuusen	fukurande
daddy	balloon	blow
(Intended meaning) 'Daddy, please blow up the balloon?
Father: Fukurande	zyanai desyo,	fukuramasite desyo
blow	not	isn't it	blow up	isn't it
"You should not say "fukurande" (blow). It should be "fukuramasite"
(blow up).'
Child: Fukurande.
blow
(Intended meaning) 'Blow up (the balloon).'
Father: Fukuramasite.
blow up
"(You should say) blow up (the balloon).'
Child: Fukurande.	Fukurande.
blow	blow
(Intended meaning) 'Blow up (the balloon)! Blow up (the balloon)!'
In his utterances, the father gives the child direct negative evidence by prompting for the
correct lexical causative form fukuramasite "blow up', but it never works. The child keeps
producing the erroneous intransitive imperative form fukurande 'blow', instead.
3.	For a survey of Japanese acquisition from a (slightly) different perspective, see
Clancy 1985 and Otsu 1999. For a detailed description of Japanese acquisition based on
naturalistic observation, see, for example, Okubo 1967 and Murata 1984.
2/8 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
4.	See Otsu 1981 and Crain and Thornton 1998, among many others.
5.	See Legate 2003 for evidence that Warlpiri is also a configurational language.
6.	Yet, because judgments on the CMD phenomenon show significant individual and
dialectal variation, different types of evidence are needed to further confirm the config-
urationality of early child Japanese.
7.	See Morikawa 1997 and Matsuoka 1998 for detailed discussion of the acquisition of
Case particles in Japanese.
8.	Murasugi and Hashimoto (2004a) also reported that the possessive NP Case-
marked by no, as in (ii), is acquired earlier than the modifier NP associated by no, as in (iii).
Even at the age of 2；6, the Japanese-speaking child Akkun did not mark the modifier NP
with no as in (iii), yet he never dropped the genitive Case marker for the possessive NP at
that age. See Murasugi and Hashimoto 2004a for the detailed analysis.
(ii)	a. Akkunー〃〇 otya	(2；6)
Akkun-GEN tea
'Akkun's tea'
b. ziityan-no mikan	(2；6)
grandfather-GEN orange
"Grandfather's orange (— the orange that Grandfather gave me)'
(iii)	Mama, dobotto (—robotto) [0] outa.(2；6)
mommy robot	song
'Mommy, (please sing) the robot's song.'
9.	Another developmental factor (not discussed in detail here) is the delayed devel-
opment of "pragmatic" knowledge. One fundamental assumption in generative grammar
is that linguistic knowledge (or more broadly, human knowledge in general) has a mod-
ular nature. For example, sentence grammar and pragmatic knowledge are assumed to
constitute independent knowledge modules. This assumption allows the possibility that
those modules of linguistic knowledge develop independently, taking different periods of
time to reach their steady states. Studies on the acquisition of English suggest that this
developmental difference among modules is the source of children's difficulty in under-
standing sentences involving condition B of the binding theory. See Chien and Wexler
1990, Grodzinsky and Reinhart 1993, and Thornton and Wexler 1999, among many others.
However, see Elbourne 2005 for an alternative interpretation of the evidence.
10.	Example (15a) is from Nagano 1960 and (15b,c) are from Murasugi 1991.The
examples are all ungrammatical with no in adult Japanese.
11.	Similar patterns are found in the Kumamoto dialect (Murasugi 1998) and in Ko-
rean (Kim 1987, Lee 1991)as well.
12.	See Murasugi 2000a,b for further discussion on the syntax of Japanese relative
clauses.
13.	This account may not cover all cases of overgeneration of no/ga by Japanese-
speaking children. Nagano (1960) and Yokoyama (1990) reported the overgeneration with
much younger children (around age two years). Nagano observed that those children had
not frilly acquired tense and Case marking (including genitive Case), and Yokoyama noted
that the overgeneration occurred only with a limited number of adjectives (those indi-
cating color or size).
Murasugi and Hashimoto (2004a), on the other hand, conducted a six-year longitu-
dinal study with a subject, Akkun, and reported that he overgenerated no in two distinct
periods. In the first period, starting at age 2；4, he showed exactly those patterns noted by
THE ACQUISITION OF JAPANESE SYNTAX 2/9
Nagano and Yokoyama. Then, after the overgeneration ceased at 2；6, it "reemerged" at age
27.	This coincides with the period when degree-i embedding, tense, and nominative Case-
marking started to show up in his spontaneous production (see also note 16). The over-
generation of no/ga that is analyzed in the text is from this second stage. See Murasugi and
Hashimoto 2004a for details.
14.	See Snyder 2001,2002 and Sugisaki 2003 for a detailed discussion of how evidence
from child language acquisition can help in evaluating the UG parameters proposed in the
syntactic literature.
15.	See Gleitman 1981 for a related discussion.
16.	Murasugi and Hashimoto (2004a) reported that the overt marking of tense al-
ternations/ inflectional systems on verbal categories, the production of the nominative Case
marker, and production of relative clauses with the overgenerated complementizer ap-
peared in Akkun's corpus simultaneously. Such facts indicate that the child achieved
command of the sentential functional categories that are necessary to project an IP and CP
around the same time. At around 2；/, Akkun started to produce adjectives and verbs in the
past tense as in (iv) and (v), respectively.
(iv)	Mama, koe atyukatta yo	(2；7)
mommy this hot-was
"Mommy, this was hot.'
(v)	a. Akkun, ima, zingo tyukuyu (tyukuyu — tukuru) (2；6)
Akkun now signal make
"Akkun(/ I) will make the signal now.'
b. Mama, okkii no, tyukutta (tyukutta — tukutta) (2；7)
mommy big-is one made
'Mommy made a big one.'
The employment of tense in (iv) and (v) coincided with the consistent use of the
nominative Case marker, as illustrated in (vi).
(vi)	a. Akkun-ga tyatyatyatya tiyu (tiyu — suru) (2；7)
Akkun-NOM onomatopoeia do
£Akkun(/ I) will sprinkle (the salt).'
b.	mama-gn	oyoui	tiyu	(oyoui — ryouri) (257)
mommy-NOM cooking	do
'Mommy is cooking.'
c.	anyo-ga itai	(anyo — asi) (2；7)
legs-NOM hurt
'(My) legs hurt.'
This provides further confirmation for the development of the functional system in
sentences.
17.	For discussion of why the child grammar permits nonfinite verbs in matrix con-
texts, see Hoekstra and Hyams 1998; Phillips 1996; Rizzi 1993/1994； Sano 2002; and Wexler
1994,1996,1998, among many others.
18.	See Babyonyshev et al.2001 for further evidence and discussion of A-movement of
the subject NP from a VP-internal position to Spec,IP. Wexler (2004) proposed a re-
formulation of the A-chain maturation hypothesis within the current minimalist frame-
work. For counterarguments to Borer and Wexler 1987, see Demuth 1989; Fox and
Grodzinsky 1998; Snyder, Hyams, and Crisma 1995; and Thornton 2001,among others.
280 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
19.	As the qualification "in many cases" suggests, there are adjectival passives that are
compatible with a 奶-phrase. The following example was suggested to Koji Sugisaki by
Howard Lasnik (pers. comm.):
(vii)	Antarctica is uninhabited by humans.
2〇• See Kuroda 1979, Washio 1989/1990, Kubo 1990, Hoshi 1994, and references cited
therein for detailed discussion of Japanese passives.
21.	Kuroda (1979) and Hoshi (1994) observed that the surface subject is interpreted as
an affectee when the "semantic subject" shows up with the postposition -ni. rFhus, an
inanimate subject is incompatible with the が-phrase.
(viii)	Sono tou-wa kigenzen zooo-nen-goro-ni (*kodai eziputozin-ni)
that tower-top b.c. 3000-year-about-in ancient Egyptians-by
tate-rare-ta.
build-PASS-PAST
"That tower was built by the ancient Egyptians around 3000 b.c.'
The use of -ni-yotte 'by' instead of -ni would create a more neutral direct passive
sentence, but we do not discuss it here because it is not colloquial and hence not part of a
child's lexicon.
22.	See Otsu 2000 for different experimental results.
23.	See Miyagawa 1997 and Miyagawa and Tsujioka 2004 for different approaches to
ditranstives in Japanese.
24.	Kuroda (1979) was the first to point out the 0-role-assigning property of -rare in
direct passives.
25.	Morikawa (1997) analyzed the data of Sumihare in CHILDES, and she reported
some examples where intransitive forms were erroneously used instead of transitive forms.
For example, Sumihare, asking his parents to open the door, used the intransitive verb aku
'be open' instead of the transitive verb akeru 'open'. Morikawa also reported that Sumihare
sometimes overextended transitive verbs and used them as intransitives as well, although
the latter type of error was less frequent than the former.
26.	Lexical causatives are acquired earlier than syntactic causatives. The order of the
acquisition of the two kinds of causatives is reported in Murasugi, Hashimoto, and Kato
2004 based on Akkun's data, and in Fuji 2006 based on an experimental study.
27.	Matsumoto (2000) argued that -sase need not be a full verb but can be a lexical
suffix in adult Japanese when the causee is not agentive. Our conjecture supports this
hypothesis. Once a child assumes that the morpheme is a possible realization of [+cause] v,
negative evidence would be required to deny this, even after the usage of the same mor-
pheme as a full verb is acquired. Given this learnability consideration, one would expect the
assumption to be retained in adult Japanese.
28.	From the DVD Jane GoodalVs Wild Chimpanzees (2003, Sling Shot Studios).
REFERENCES
Babyonyshev, Maria, Jennifer Ganger, David Pesetsky, and Kenneth Wexler. 2001.The
maturation of grammatical principles: Evidence from Russian unaccusatives. Lin-
guistic Inquiry 32:1-44.
THE ACQUISITION OF JAPANESE SYNTAX 281
Baker, Carl L., and John McCarthy, eds.1981.The logical problem of language acquisition.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Baker, Mark. 2001.The atoms of language. New York: Basic Books.
Bloom, Paul.199〇. Subjectless sentences in child language. Linguistic Inquiry 21:491-504.
Borer, Hagit, and Kenneth Wexler.1987. The maturation of syntax. In Parameter setting,
ed. Tom Roeper and Edwin Williams, 123-172. Dordrecht: ReideL
Chien, Yu-Chin, and Kenneth Wexler.199〇• Children's knowledge of locality conditions in
binding as evidence for the modularity of syntax and pragmatics. Language Acquisition
1:225-295.
Chomsky, Noam.1981.Lectures on government and binding. Dordrecht: Foris.
Chomsky, Noam.1986. Knowledge of language: Its nature, origin, and use. New York:
Praeger.
Chomsky, Noam.1995. The Minimalist Program. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Clancy, Patricia M.1985. The acquisition of Japanese. In The crosslinguistic study of lan-
guage acquisition: Vol.1,ed. Dan I. Slobin, 373-524. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Crain, Stephen, and Cecile McKee.1986. The acquisition of structural restrictions on
anaphora. In Proceedings of NELS 16, ed. Stephen Berman, lae-Woong Choe, and loyce
McDonough, 94-11〇. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA Publications.
Crain, Stephen, and Rosalind Thornton.1998. Investigations in Universal Grammar:
A guide to experiments on the acquisition of syntax and semantics. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Demuth, Katherine.1989. Maturation and acquisition of Sesotho passive. Lingua 65:56-81.
Elbourne, Paul.2005. On the acquisition of principle B. Linguistic Inquiry 36:333-365.
Fox, Danny, and Yosef Grodzinsky.1998. Children's passives: A view from the by-phrase.
Linguistic Inquiry 29:311-332.
Fuji, Chisato. 2006. Two types of causatives in Japanese and Japanese Sign Language: A
study in syntax and acquisition. Master's thesis, Nanzan University, Nagoya, Japan.
Fukui, Naoki.1993. Parameters and optionality. Linguistic Inquiry 24:399-42〇.
Gleitman, Lila R.1981.Maturational determinants of language growth. Cognition 10:103-
114.
Goro,'Takuya, and Sachie Akiba. 2004. Japanese disjunction and the acquisition of positive
polarity. In Proceedings of the 5th Tokyo Conference on Psycholinguistics^ ed. Yukio
Otsu, 137-161. Tokyo: Hituzi Syobo.
Grodzinsky, Yosef, and Tanya Reinhart.1993. The innateness of binding and coreference.
Linguistic Inquiry 24:69-101.
Guasti, Maria Teresa. 2003. How parameters are set and the order of setting. In
Proceedings of the 4 th Conference on Psycholinguistics, ed. Yukio Otsu, 23-58. Tokyo:
Hituzi Syobo.
Hale, Kenneth.198〇. Remarks on Japanese phrase structure: Comments on the papers on
Japanese syntax. In MITWPL 2: Theoretical issues in Japanese linguistics, ed. Yukio
Otsu and Ann Farmer, 185-203. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working Papers in Lin-
guistics.
Harada, Kazuko 1.1972. Constraints on WH-Q binding. Studies in Descriptive and Applied
Linguistics 5:180-206.
Hayashibe, Hideo.1975. Word order and particles: A developmental study in Japanese.
Descriptive and Applied Linguistics 8:1-18.
Hoekstra, Teun, and Nina Hyams.1998. Aspects of root infinitives. Lingua 106:81-112.
Hoji, Hajime.1985. Logical Form constraints and configurational structures in Japanese.
Doctoral dissertation, University of Washington, Seattle.
282 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Hornstein, Norbert, and David Lightfoot, eds.1981.Explanations in linguistics: The logical
problem of language acquisition. London: Longman.
Hoshi, Hiroto.1994. Passive, causative, and light verbs: A study on theta role assignment.
Doctoral dissertation, University of Connecticut, Storrs.
Huang, C.-T. James.1982. Logical relations in Chinese and the theory of grammar. Doc-
toral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Hyams, Nina.1986. Language acquisition and the theory of parameters. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Hyams, Nina, and Ken Wexler.1993. On the grammatical basis of null subjects in child
language. Linguistic Inquiry 24:421-459.
Iwabuchi, Etsutaro, and Shozo Muraishi.1968. Kotoba no syuutoku [Acquisition of lan-
guage] .In Kotoba no tanjoo: Ubugoe kara go sai made [The birth of speech: From
newborn babies to five-year-olds], ed. E. Iwabuchi, K. Hatano, J. Naito, I. Kirikae, T.
Tokizane, M. Sawashima, S. Muraishi, and T. Takizawa, 109-177. Tokyo: Nihon
Hoosoo Syuppan Kyookai.
Kabuto, Yoshie. 2007. The acquisition of the mechanism of unselective binding, LF-
movement, and constraints on movement. Paper presented at the Connecticut-Siena-
Nanzan Joint Workshop on Linguistic Theory and Language Acquisition, Nanzan
University, Nagoya, Japan, February.
Kim, Young-Joo.1987. The acquisition of relative clauses in English and Korean: Devel-
opment in spontaneous production. Doctoral dissertation, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Mass.
Kubo, Miori.199〇• Japanese passives. Ms., MIT, Cambridge, Mass..
Kuno, Susumu.1973. The structure of the Japanese language. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Kuroda, Shige-Yuki.1979. On Japanese passives. In Explorations in linguistics: Papers in
honor of Kazuko Inoue, ed. George Bedell, Eichi Kobayashi, and Masatake Muraki,
305-347- Tokyo: Kaitakusha.
Lasnik, Howard.1976. Remarks on coreference. Linguistic Analysis 2:1-22.
Lasnik, Howard.1991.On the necessity of binding conditions. In Principles and parame-
ters in comparative grammar, ed. Robert Freidin, 7-28. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
Lee, Kwee-Ock.1991.On the first language acquisition of relative clauses in Korean:
The universal structure of Comp. Doctoral dissertation, Cornell University, Ithaca,
N.Y.
Legate, Julie Anne. 2003. Warlpiri: rtheoretical implications. Doctoral dissertation, MIT,
Cambridge, Mass.
Lillo-Martin, Diane.1991.Universal Grammar and American Sign Language: Setting the null
argument parameters. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
MacWhinney, Brian. 200〇• The CHILDES Project: Tools for analyzing talk. Mahwah, N.J.:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Maratsos, Michael, Dana Fox, Judith Becker, and Mary Anne Charlkley.1985. Semantic
restrictions on children's passives. Cognition 19:167-191.
Matsumoto, Yo. 200〇• On the crosslinguistic parameterization of causative predicates:
Implications from Japanese and other languages. In Argument realization, ed. Miriam
Butt and Tracy Holloway King, 135-169. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI Publications.
Matsuoka, Kazumi.1998. The acquisition of Japanese Case particles and the theory of Case
checking. Doctoral dissertation, University of Connecticut, Storrs.
Minai, Utako. 200〇. The acquisition of Japanese passives. In Japanese/Korean Linguistics 9,
ed. Mineharu Nakayama and Charles J. Quinn, Jr., 339-35〇. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI
Publications.
THE ACQUISITION OF JAPANESE SYNTAX 28)
Miyagawa, Shigeru.1989. Structure and Case marking in Japanese. San Diego, Calif.: Aca-
demic Press.
Miyagawa, Shigeru.1997. Against optional scrambling. Linguistic Inquiry 28:1-25.
Miyagawa, Shigeru, and Takae Tsujioka. 2004. Argument structure and ditransitive verbs
in Japanese. Journal of East Asian Linguistics 13:1-38.
Miyamoto, Edson T., Kenneth Wexler, Takako Aikawa, and Shigeru Miyagawa.1999. Case-
dropping and unaccusatives in Japanese acquisition. In Proceedings of the 23rd annual
Boston University Conference on Language Development^ ed. Annabel Greenhill, Hea-
ther Littlefield, and Cheryl Tano, 443-452. Somerville, Mass.: Cascadilla Press.
Miyata, Susanne. 2004a. Japanese: Aki corpus. Pittsburgh, Penn.: TalkBank. 1-59642-055-3.
Miyata, Susanne. 2004b. Japanese: Ryo corpus. Pittsburgh, Penn.: TalkBank. 1-59642-056-1.
Morikawa, Hiromi.1997. Acquisition of Case marking and argument structure in Japanese.
Tokyo: Kurosio.
Murasugi, Keiko.1988. The acquisition of structural and pragmatic constraints on pro-
nominal references. In UConn Working Papers in Linguistics 2, ed. Javier Ormazabal
and Jaya Sarma, 40-68. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working Papers in Linguistics.
Murasugi, Keiko.1991.Noun phrases in Japanese and English: A study in syntax, learn-
ability, and acquisition. Doctoral dissertation, University of Connecticut, Storrs.
Murasugi, Keiko.1998. Gengo (kakutoku) riron to hougen kenkyu [Theory of language
(acquisition) and the dialectal studies]. Academia 65:227-259.
Murasugi, Keiko. 2000a. An antisymmetry analysis of Japanese relative clauses. In The
syntax of relative clauses, ed. Artemis Alexiadou, Paul Law, Andre Meinunger, and
Chris Wilder, 231-263. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Murasugi, Keiko. 2000b. Japanese complex noun phrases and the antisymmetry theory.
In Step by step: Essays on minimalist syntax in honor of Howard Lasnik, ed. Roger
Martin, David Michaels, and Juan Uriagereka, 211-234. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
Murasugi, Keiko, and Tomoko Hashimoto. 2004a. Two different types of overgeneration
of "no" in Japanese noun phrases. In Proceedings of the 4 th Asian GLOW in Seoul, ed.
Hang-jin Yoon, 327-349. Seoul: Hankook.
Murasugi, Keiko, and Tomoko Hashimoto. 2004b. Three pieces of acquisition evidence for
the v-VP frame. Nanzan Linguistics 1:1-19.
Murasugi, Keiko, Tomoko Hashimoto, and Chisato Fuji. 2007. VP-shell analysis for the
acquisition of Japanese intransitive verbs, transitive verbs, and causatives. Linguistics
43:615-651.
Murasugi, Keiko, Tomoko Hashimoto, and Sachiko Kato. 2004. On the acquisition of
causatives in Japanese. In BUCLD 28 Proceedings Online Supplement, ed. Alejna
Brugos, Linnea Micciulla, and Christine E. Smith, http://www.bu.edu/linguistics/
APPLIED/BUCLD/supp.html.
Murasugi, Keiko, and Tomoko Kawamura. 2005. On the acquisition of scrambling in
Japanese. In The free word order phenomenon: Its syntactic sources and diversity, ed.
Joachim Sabel and Mamoru Saito, 221-242. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Murata, Koji.1984. Youji no gengo hattatsu [Language development of children]. Tokyo:
Baifiikan.
Nagano, Satoshi.196〇• Youji no gengo hattatu: Tokuni josi "no" no syuutokukatei nituite
[Language development: A case study of Japanese "no”]. In Kansai daigaku kokubun
gakkai: Shimada kyooju koki kinen kokubungaku ronsyuu [Papers on Japanese literature
in honor of Professor Shimada on the occasion of his 70th birthday], ed. Kansai
Daigaku Kokubun Gakkai, 405-418. Osaka: Kansai University.
284 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Nakayama, Mineharu.1996. Acquisition of Japanese empty categories. Tokyo: Kurosio.
Nemoto, Naoko.1993. Chains and case positions: A study from scrambling in Japanese.
Doctoral dissertation, University of Connecticut, Storrs.
Noji. Junya. 1973-1977. Youji no gengoseikatu no jittai I-IV [A longitudinal study of Jap-
anese language acquisition]. Tokyo: Bunka Hyoron Shuppan.
Okubo, Ai.1967. Youji gengo no hattatsu [The development of child Language]. Tokyo:
Tokyodo Shuppan.
Otsu, Yukio.1981.Universal Grammar and syntactic development in children: Toward a
theory of syntactic development. Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Otsu, Yukio. 1994a. Case-marking particles and phrase structure in early Japanese. In
Syntactic theory and first language acquisition: Cross-linguistic perspectives: Vol.1,ed.
Barbara Lust, Margarita Suner, and John Whitman, 159-169. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Otsu, Yukio. 1994b. Early acquisition of scrambling in Japanese. In Language acquisition
studies in generative grammar^ ed. Teun Hoekstra and Bonnie D. Schwartz, 253-264.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Otsu, Yukio.1999. First language acquisition. In The handbook of Japanese linguistics^ ed.
Natsuko Tsujimura, 378-397. Oxford: Blackwell.
Otsu, Yukio. 200〇. A preliminary report on the independence of sentence grammar and
pragmatic knowledge: The case of the Japanese passive: A developmental perspective.
Keio Studies in Theoretical Linguistics 2:161-17〇.
Phillips, Colin.1996. Root infinitives are finite. In Proceedings of the 20th annual Boston
University Conference on Language Development, ed. Andy Stringfellow, Dalia Cahana-
Amitay, Elizabeth Hughes, and Andrea Zukowski, 588-599. Somerville, Mass.: Cas-
cadilla Press.
Pierce, Amy E.1992. Language acquisition and syntactic theory: A comparative analysis of
French and English grammars. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Poeppel, David, and Ken Wexler.1993. The full competence hypothesis of clause structure
in early German. Language 69:1-33.
Radford, Andrew.199〇. Syntactic theory and the acquisition of English syntax. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Reinhart, Tanya.1976. The syntactic domain of anaphora. Doctoral dissertation, MIT,
Cambridge, Mass.
Rizzi, Luigi. 1993/1994. Some notes on linguistic theory and language development: The
case of root infinitives. Language Acquisition 3:371-394.
Rizzi, Luigi. 2004. On the grammatical basis of language development: A case study. In The
handbook of comparative syntax, ed. Guglielmo Cinque and Richard Kayne, 70-109.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Saito, Mamoru.1985. Some asymmetries in Japanese and their theoretical implications.
Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Saito, Mamoru.1989. Scrambling as semantically vacuous A'-movement. In Alternative
conceptions of phrase structure, ed. Mark R. Baltin and Anthony S. Kroch, 182-20〇,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Saito, Mamoru, and Naoki Fukui.1998. Order in phrase structure and movement. Lin-
guistic Inquiry 29:439-474.
Saito, Mamoru, and Hajime Hoji.1983. Weak crossover and move a in Japanese. Natural
Language & Linguistic Theory 1:245-259.
Sano, Keiko.1977. An experimental study on the acquisition of Japanese simple sentences
and cleft sentences. Descriptive and Applied Linguistics 10:213-233.
THE ACQUISITION OF JAPANESE SYNTAX 285
Sano, Tetsuya. 200〇, Issues on unaccusatives and passives in the acquisition of Japanese. In
Proceedings of the 1st Tokyo Conference on Psycholinguistics, ed. Yukio Otsu, 1-22.
Tokyo: Hituzi Syobo.
Sano, Tetsuya. 2002. Roots in language acquisition: A comparative study of Japanese and
European languages. Tokyo: Hituzi Syobo.
Sano, Tetsuya, Mika Endo, and Kyoko Yamakoshi. 2001.Developmental issues in the
acquisition of Japanese unaccusatives and passives. In Proceedings of the 25th annual
Boston University Conference on Language Development, ed. Anna H.-J. Do, Laura
Dominguez, and Aimee lohansen, 668-683. Somerville, Mass.: Cascadilla Press.
Snyder, William.1995. Language acquisition and language variation: The role of mor-
phology. Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Snyder, William. 2001.On the nature of syntactic variation: Evidence from complex
predicates and complex word-formation. Language 77:324-342.
Snyder, William. 2002. Parameters: The view from child language. In Proceedings of the 3rd
Tokyo Conference on Psycholinguistics, ed. Yukio Otsu, 27-44. Tokyo: Hituzi Syobo.
Snyder, William, Nina Hyams, and Paola Crisma.1995. Romance auxiliary selection with
reflexive clitics: Evidence for early knowledge of unaccusativity. In Proceedings of the
26th annual Child Language Research Forum, ed. Eve Clark, 127-136. Stanford, Calif.:
CSLI Publications.
Stowell, Timothy.1981.Origins of phrase structure. Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cam-
bridge, Mass.
Sugisaki, Koji.1999. Japanese passives in acquisition. In Cranberry Linguistics: UConnWPL
10, ed. Dave Braze, Kazuko Hiramatsu, and Yutaka Kudo, 145-156. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Working Papers in Linguistics.
Sugisaki, Koji. 200〇. LF w/i-movement in child Japanese: A preliminary study. In
UConnWPL 11:The syntax-semantics interface, ed. Cedric Boeckx, Luisa Marti, and
Douglas Wharram. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working Papers in Linguistics.
Sugisaki, Koji. 2003. Innate constraints on language variation: Evidence from child lan-
guage. Doctoral dissertation, University of Connecticut, Storrs.
Sugisaki, Koji. 2005. Early acquisition of basic word order: New evidence from Japanese. In
Proceedings of the 29th annual Boston University Conference on Language Development,
ed. Alejna Brugos, Manuella R. Clark-Cotton, and Seungwan Ha, 582-591. Somerville,
Mass.: Cascadilla Press.
Sugisaki, Koji, and Miwa Isode. 200〇• Resultatives result from the compounding param-
eter: On the acquisitional correlation between resultatives and N-N compounds in
Japanese. In Proceedings of the 19th West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics, ed.
Roger Billerey and Brook Danielle Lillehaugen, 493-506. Somerville, Mass.: Cascadilla
Press.
Sugisaki, Koji, and Miwa Isobe. 2001.What can child Japanese tell us about the syntax of
scrambling? In Proceedings of the 20th West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics, ed.
Karine Megerdoomian and Leora A. Bar-el, 538-551. Somerville, Mass.: Cascadilla
Press.
Suzuki, Seiichi 1987. Youji no bunpo nouryoku [Childen's grammatical competence]. In
Kodomo nogengo shinri [Language and psychology in children], ed. S. Fukuzawa,141-
18〇. Tokyo: Dainihon Tosho.
Tada, Hiroaki.1993. A/A' partition in derivation. Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge,
Mass.
Takezawa, Koichi.1987. A configurational approach to Case marking in Japanese. Doctoral
dissertation, University of Washington, Seattle.
286 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Tanaka, Hidekazu. 2001.Right-dislocation as scrambling. Journal of Linguistics 37：55】ー579・
Thornton, Rosalind. 2001.A-movement in early English. In Proceedings of the 2nd Tokyo
Conference on Psycholinguistics^ ed. Yukio Otsu, 227-25〇. Tokyo: Hituzi Syobo.
Thornton, Rosalind, and Kenneth Wexler.1999. Principle B, VP ellipsis, and interpretation
in child grammar. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Vainikka, Anne.1993/1994. Case in the development of English syntax, Language Acquisition
3:257-325.
Valian, Virginia.1991.Syntactic subjects in the early speech of American and Italian
children. Cognition 40:21-81.
Washio, Ryuichi. 1989/199〇. The Japanese passive. Linguistic Review 6:227-263.
Wexler, Kenneth.1994. Optional infinitives, head movement, and the economy of deri-
vations. In Verb movement, ed. David Lightfoot and Norbert Hornstein, 3〇5-35〇・
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wexler, Kenneth.1996. The development of inflection in a biologically based theory of
language acquisition. In Toward a genetics of language, ed. Mabel.L. Rice, 113-144.
Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Wexler, Kenneth.1998. Very early parameter setting and the unique checking constraint: A
new explanation of the optional infinitive stage. Lingua 106:23-79.
Wexler, Kenneth. 2004. Theory of phasal development: Perfection in child grammar. In
MITWPL 48: Papers on language acquisition, ed. Aniko Csirmaz, Andrea Gualmini,
and Andrew Nevins, 159-209. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working Papers in Linguistics.
Yokoyama, Masayuki.199〇• Youji no rentai syuusyoku hatuwa ni okeru josi no" no goyoo
[Errors of particle "no" of young Japanese children in adjective-noun constructions].
Hattatu Sinrigaku Kenkyuu 1:2-9.
CHAPTER 11
THE SYNTAX AND
SEMANTICS OF
FLOATING NUMERAL
QUANTIFIERS
KIMIKO NAKANISHI
11.1	Introduction
It is well known that a numeral quantifier in Japanese can appear in various
locations, as illustrated in (i).1,2
(i)
a.	Kinoo	[san-nin-no	kasyu]-ga	utat-ta.
	yesterday	[three-CL-GEN	singer]-nom	sing-PAST
	'Three singers sang yesterday.'			
b.	Kinoo	[kasyu	san-nin] -ga	utat-ta.
	yesterday	[singer	three-CL]-NOM	sing-PAST
c.	Kasyu-^a	kinoo	san-nin	utat-ta.
	singer-NOM	yesterday	three-CL	sing-PAST
Over the past few decades, this paradigm has attracted a great deal of attention.
Especially important among various issues discussed in the literature, and at the
same time controversial, is the following question: how is the configuration in (ic)
syntactically derived? ' Although researchers agree that the numeral and the host
NP kasyu 'singer' are in the same nominal projection in (la) and (ib), opinions
vary as to the status of (ic), where the numeral appears away from its host NP.4
288 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
There are at least two competing views addressing this question. One view holds
that the numeral and host NP in (ic) are adjacent in the underlying structure and
that the host NP moves somewhere higher in the structure, stranding the numeral.
Under this view, the numeral in (ic) is "floated" in that it is left behind after the
movement of the host NP, hence it has traditionally been called a floating numeral
quantifier (FNQ). Another view holds that the numeral in (ic) is base generated
as an adjunct to a verbal projection, just like an adverb. Under the second view,
the numeral in (ic) is not floated, but rather it is base generated in situ. I refer
to the family of proposals related to the first view as the "stranding view" and ones
related to the second view as the "adverb view." Furthermore, I use the term
"FNQ" simply to refer to the numeral in (ic) without implicating the stranding
view. One of the main goals of this chapter is to shed light on some theoretical
implications that emerge from the studies on FNQs by examining how the two
competing theories fare with some characteristic syntactic and semantic properties
of FNQs.
One core set of data comes from the well-known word-order restriction on
FNQs: the subject and its FNQ need to be adjacent, as in (2a,a'), whereas the object
and its FNQ need not, as in (2b) (Haig 1980, Kuroda 1980).
a.	^Gakusei-ga	hon-o	san-nin	kat-ta.
	student-NOM	book-ACC	three-CL	buy-past
	"Three students bought a		book/books/	
at	Gakusei-ga	san-nin	hon-o	kat-ta.
	student-NOM	three-CL	book-ACC	buy-PAST
b.	Hon-o	gakusei-ga	san-satu	kat-ta.
	book-ACC	student-NOM three-CL		buy-PAST
'A student/Students bought three books?
Ever since it was first noted in the literature, many researchers have attempted to
account for the nature of this restriction. One of the most influential attempts can
be found in Miyagawa's (1989) stranding analysis, which has been successful in
accounting for various distributional restrictions on FNQs, including (2). How-
ever, this view has been challenged by alternative theories一most notably, the
adverb view. The adverb view is supported by the existence of numerous coun-
terexamples to distributional restrictions on FNQs, including counterexamples
to (2). Another piece of evidence for the adverb view comes from the observation
that FNQs are subject to some semantic restrictions that can be straightforwardly
explained if the FNQs are VP- (or V'-) adjoined adverbs. In the following, I discuss
these issues in more detail and examine the two views in light of various empirical
data.
SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS OF FLOATING NUMERICAL QUANTIFIERS 289
11.2	The Stranding View and
Its Syntactic Implications
We have seen that, although Japanese FNQs need not be adjacent to their host NP
in the surface, as in (ic) and (2b), it is not the case that FNQs can appear anywhere
in a sentence, as in (2a). Indeed, it has been argued that, besides (2a), there are
more distributional restrictions on FNQs, which are discussed shortly. The ques-
tion then is what the source of such distributional restrictions is. Miyagawa (1989)
answers this question by claiming that the distribution of FNQs is principled by
some structural conditions一namely, c-command requirements. He first observes
that the FNQ is unacceptable when it does not c-command its host NP. This
observation is based on data such as in (3), where the difference in grammaticality
is accounted for by the difference in structures.
(3)	a. Tomodati-ga. huta-ri Sinzyuku-de at-ta.
friend-NOM two-CL Sinzyuku-in meet-PAST
"Two friends met in Sinzyuku?
b.	^Tomodati-^a. Sinzyuku-de huta-ri at-ta.
friend-NOM Sinzyuku-in two-CL meet-PAST (Miyagawa 1989:28)
Miyagawa suggests that the FNQ is a secondary predicate that does not form
a constituent with the host NP (see also Ueda 1986, Miyamoto 1994), admitting
ternary-branching structures (but see shortly below for a modification). Then,
assuming that subjects are generated outside of the VP and that Sinzyuku-de is VP-
internal, Miyagawa obtains (4a) as the structure for (za), where the host NP, the
FNQ, and the VP are sisters. In this structure, the FNQ c-commands its host NP
(and vice versa). In contrast, in (3b), if Sinzyuku-de is VP-internal, the FNQ must
also be VP-internal, yielding the structure in (4b). Because the FNQ in this
structure does not c-command the host NP, (zb) is ungrammatical.
(4)	a. [s Tomodati-ga. huta-ri	[yp Sinzyuku-de at-ta]]
b. [s 1 Tomodati-ga. [VP Sinzyuku-de	huta-ri at-ta]]
Note that, unlike (3b), examples such as (ic) are grammatical. The contrast nat-
urally follows from the assumption that temporal adverbs such as kinoo 'yesterday'
are VP-external. Then, in (ic), the host NP, the temporal adverb, the FNQ, and the
VP are considered to be sisters. In this structure, the FNQ c-commands its host
NP (and vice versa), just as in (4a).
Miyagawa further observes that the c-commanding in the other direction must
hold—that is, the host NP must c-command the FNQ, based on data such as
(5)	(and (8) below). In (5), the classifier -nin in the FNQ semantically agrees with
tomodati "friend1 but not with kuruma 'car'. Under the intended interpretation,
the host NP tomodati 'friend', being embedded, cannot c-command the FNQ,
although the FNQ c-commands the host NP.
29〇 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(5)	^[Tomodati-no kuruma]-ga san-nin kosyoosi-ta.
[friend-GEN car]-NOM three-CL break down-past
"Three friends5 car(s) broke down.'	(Miyagawa 1989:29)
Based on these observations, Miyagawa argues that, for FNQs to be well
formed, they must satisfy the mutual c-command requirement in (6).5
(6)	Mutual c-command requirement: The NP or its trace and the numeral or its
trace must c-command each other.	(Miyagawa 1989:30)
Miyagawa further shows that the mutual c-command requirement is capable of
accounting for the well-known observation that an FNQ can be associated with an
argument but not an adjunct (Okutsu 1969, Harada 1976, Shibatani 1977, Inoue
1978, Kuno 1978b). More specifically, whereas subjects, objects, and what Inoue
(1978) calls "quasi-objects" (such as the dative object in (7c)) are possible ante-
cedents of the FNQ, as in (7), PPs cannot host the FNQ, as in (8).
(7)	a.	Gakusei-ga.	san-nin	hon-o	kat-ta.
student-NOM	three-CL	book-ACC	buy-PAST
'Three students bought the book?	(Miyagawa 1989:24)
b.	Hanako-ga	pen-o	san-bon	kat-ta.
Hanako-NOM	pen-ACC	three-CL	buy-PAST
"Hanako bought three pens?	(Miyagawa 1989:24)
c.	Boku-wa	yuumeina gakusya-m san-nin	at-ta.
I-top	famous	scholar-DAT three-CL meet-PAST
‘I met three famous scholars?	(Miyagawa 1989:35)
(8)	a.	*Gakuseitati-wa kuruma-de	ni-dai	ki-ta.
students-TOP car-in	two-CL	come-PAST
'Students came in two cars?	(Miyagawa 1989:31)
b.	*Kyonen, Hanako-wa	paatii-ni	mit-tu	ki-ta.
last year Hanako-TOP	party-to	three-CL	come-PAST
'Last year, Hanako came to three parties?	(Miyagawa 1989:36)
Miyagawa claims that there is a structural difference between arguments and ad-
juncts; the particles in (7) are cliticized onto the NP, whereas the particles in (8)
have their own projection. With these structures, the difference in grammaticality
between (7) and (8) naturally follows from the mutual c-command requirement. In
(7), the NP, FNQ, and VP are sisters, and so the mutual c-command requirement
is met. In (8), however, assuming that the host NP is embedded in the PP whose
head is -de 'in' or -ni 'to', the host NP cannot c-command the FNQ.
Most significantly, by applying the mutual c-command requirement to sub-
sequent empirical data on FNQs, Miyagawa argues that the FNQs give evidence for
NP trace (see Sportiche 1988 for the same line of argument based on English and
French data; see also McCloskey 2000). The crucial examples are presented in (9),
where an FNQ can be associated with the subject of a passive verb (in (9a)) or an
unaccusative verb (in (9b)) but not with the subject of an unergative verb (in (9c)).
SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS OF FLOATING NUMERICAL QUANTIFIERS 291
(9) a.	Kuruma-ga.	doroboo-ni ni-dai	nusum-are-ta.
	car-NOM	thief^by two-CL	steal-PASS-PAST
	"Two cars were stolen by a thief.'		(Miyagawa 1989:38)
b.	Gakusei-ga.	ofisu-ni huta-ri	ki-ta.
	student-NOM	office-to two-CL	come-PAST
	"Two students	came to the office.'	(Miyagawa 1989:43)
c.	^Kodomo-ga.	geragerato huta-ri	warat-ta.
	children-NOM	loudly	two-CL	laugh-PAST
	'Two children laughed loudly.'		(Miyagawa 1989:44)
The key to Miyagawa's analysis comes from the well-known hypothesis that the
subject of a passive verb and that of an unaccusative verb differ from the subject of
an unergative verb in that they are base generated as the object of the verb (Perl-
mutter 1978, among others). Miyagawa points out that, if we adopt this hypothesis,
the contrast in (9) naturally follows. In (9), the PPs and the adverb (i.e., doroboo-ni,
ofisu-ni, and geragerato) are assumed to be in the VP, which indicates that the FNQs
are also in the VP. Suppose that the subjects in (9a,b) are base generated in the object
position—that is, the position adjacent to the FNQ in the VP一and that they move
out of the VP, stranding the FNQ, as schematized in (10a). In this case, positing
the existence of the NP trace on the left of the FNQ, the mutual c-command
requirement is met; the trace of the host NP and the FNQ c-command each other.
In contrast, the subject of the unergative verb in (9c) originates at a VP-external
position, as in (10b). In this structure, the FNQ cannot c-command its host NP,
hence the mutual c-command requirement is violated.
(10)	a. NP】[VP PP/Adv t】FNQ V]
b. NP [yp PP/Adv FNQ V]
Miyagawa's analysis is further supported by the fact that the subject of a
transitive verb cannot be associated with an FNQ when a VP-internal PP or adverb
intervenes, as in (11). Just like in the case of unergative verbs, there is no trace of the
subject adjacent to the FNQ, hence the mutual c-command requirement cannot be
satisfied.
(11)	?*Kodomo-ga kono kagi-de huta-ri doa-o	ake-ta.
child-NOM this key-with two-CL door-ACC open-PAST
"Two children opened a door with this key.'	(Miyagawa 1989:44)
In sum, by positing an NP trace, Miyagawa's analysis of FNQs explains why the
subjects of unaccusative or passive verbs, but not the subjects of unergative or
transitive verbs, can be associated with a VP-internal FNQ.6 The subjects in the
first group, being VP-internal arguments, originate in the object position, and so
the trace of the subject and the FNQ can c-command each other. In contrast, the
subjects in the second group, being VP-external arguments, do not originate as
objects, thus failing to satisfy the mutual c-command requirement.
Although ternary-branching structures were permitted at the time of Miya-
gawa' s (1989) proposal, all structures are considered to be binary in recent syntactic
292 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
theories, assuming that structures are built by an operation called Merge
(Chomsky 1995). To accommodate this, Miyagawa and Arikawa (2007) modify
Miyagawa's (1989) original proposal and assume that the FNQ and its host NP
form a nominal constituent (such as a Num[ber] phrase), following some previous
work (Kamio 1977,1983; Terada 1990; Kawashima 1998; Watanabe 2006, among
others). This modification makes it possible to maintain the mutual c-command
analysis even without ternary-branching structures. In (12), which is a modifica-
tion of (10a), the trace of the host NP and the FNQ c-command each other.7
Furthermore, in (ic), assuming that temporal adverbs such as kinoo 'yesterday are
adjoined somewhere higher in the structure (say, to vP), we can posit a structure in
(13). In this structure, the trace of the subject and the FNQ c-command each other.
In the following, adopting this modification, I assume that the FNQ and its host
NP are in the same nominal projection under Miyagawa's stranding analysis.
(12)	NP】[vp PP/Adv [vp [NumP t】FNQ] V]]
(13)	NP】[vP Adv [vP [NumP t] FNQ] [vpOV]]]
Let us now go back to the word-order restriction in (2), which is repeated in
(14)	, and see whether the mutual c-command requirement is capable of explaining
this restriction.
(14)	a. ^Gakusei-ga. hon-o san-nin kat-ta.
student-NOM book-ACC three-CL buy-PAST
"Three students bought a book/books?
b. Hon-o gakusei-ga san-satu kat-ta.
book-ACC student-NOM three-CL buy-PAST
'A student/Student(s) bought three books?
We could argue that (14a) is ungrammatical because there is no subject trace to the
right of the object, as in (15a). In contrast, in (14b), the object is base generated
within the VP and has undergone scrambling, leaving the trace to the right of the
subject, as in (15b).
(15)	& S [VP 〇 FNQ V]
b. 〇! S [vp [NumP ん FNQ] V]]
However, there is a potential problem for the analysis of (14a) given in (15a).
Presumably, (14a) can be derived if both the subject and object scramble, as in (16).
The mutual c-command requirement is met in (16), which predicts (14a) to be
grammatical.
(16)	Si O2 [[NumP ん FNQ] [vp ち V]]
To exclude this unwanted derivation, Saito (1985) claims that subjects in Japanese
cannot undergo scrambling.8,9 As Miyagawa and Arikawa put it, this claim is an
economy statement banning string-vacuous movement. Clause-internal subject
scrambling is often string vacuous, and thus it is difficult to provide a solid ar-
gument for such scrambling.
SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS OF FLOATING NUMERICAL QUANTIFIERS 293
Summing up the discussion so far, Miyagawa (1989) observes that there is a
certain syntactic locality constraint on the dependency between an FNQ and its
host NP and further claims that the locality constraint can be formulated as the
structural requirement of mutual c-command in (6). His claim is based on two
kinds of distributional restrictions一one that is considered as a purely structural
restriction, and the other that serves as a piece of evidence for an NP trace, as
summarized in (17).
(17)	Distributional restrictions on FNQs
Structural restrictions
a.	^Embedded NP as the host NP; (5)
b.	*NP within PP as the host NP; (8)
Locality restrictions
c.	^External argument as the host NP with a VP-internal adverb/PP; (3),
(9), (n)
d.	*S「O-FNQi； (2)
As for the first kind, we have seen that an NP embedded within another NP
cannot be associated with an FNQ in the main clause (e.g., (5)), and that the host
NP must be an argument but not an adjunct (e.g., (7), (8)). As for the second kind,
we have seen that the distributional restrictions on FNQs in (2), (3), (9), and (11)
can be explained by positing the existence of an NP trace within the VP. More
precisely, Miyagawa's analysis accounts for why internal arguments, but not ex-
ternal ones, can host an FNQ when a VP-internal modifier intervenes between the
host NP and its FNQ (e.g., (3), (9),(11)).The analysis is also capable of explain-
ing why the object cannot intervene between the subject and its FNQ (henceforth
*S,-O-FNQj, where the index i indicates that S and FNQ are associated with each
other), whereas the subject can intervene between the object and its FNQ (e.g., (2)).
If Miyagawa's analysis is on the right track, it makes a strong prediction about
where FNQs appear in a sentence: FNQs should be observed only at positions from
(or through) which the host NP has moved (see also Sportiche 1988, McCloskey
2000). This approach to Japanese FNQs has come to be widely accepted, and FNQs
are considered as one of the most significant diagnostics to investigate phrase
structure and syntactic movement in the Japanese language. For instance, in the
literature on Japanese syntax, FNQs have been used to examine where a certain NP
originates in the structure (see, e.g., Takano, this volume). Moreover, FNQs can
play a role in determining whether a certain NP is an internal or an external
argument, as shown in (9) and (11).
II.z Controversies
In the previous section, we have seen that under the stranding view, a number of
distributional restrictions on FNQs fall under a syntactic locality constraint on the
d叩endency between an FNQ and its host NP. Thus, FNQs serve as a powerful tool
294 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
for investigating Japanese syntax. This section reveals that the stranding view,
powerful as it may be, is not without problems. First, I show in section 11.3.1 that
the distributional restrictions on FNQs presented in section 11.2 are challenged by
numerous counterexamples. Section 11.3.2 summarizes some attempts to cope with
the counterexamples under the stranding view. Section 11.3.3 presents some se-
mantic restrictions on FNQs that may be problematic to the analyses presented in
section 11.3.2. Then, in section 11.3.4,1 explore an alternative analysis一namely, the
adverb view. In section 11.3.5,1 briefly discuss examples where FNQs have different
properties depending on prosody.
11.3.1	Counterexamples to the Stranding View
As shown in section 11.2, the stranding view is supported by the observation that the
distribution of FNQs is syntactically restricted. However, a number of linguists
object to the empirical generalization in (17) (Fukushima 1991;Katagiri 1991;
Kikuchi 1994; Hamano 1997; Mihara 1998; Takami 1998, 2001;Gunji and Hashida
1998; Ishii 1999; Nishigauchi and Ishii 2003). First, (18) and (19) are grammatical
even though the mutual c-command requirement is violated. In particular, in (18),
contra (5), the host NP is within another NP, and so it cannot c-command the
FNQ.10 In (19), contra (8), the host NP is within a PP, thus it cannot c-command
the FNQ.
(18)	a. Yamada Sensei-ga [gakusei-no kami]-o san-nin kit-ta.
Yamada Professor-NOM [student-GEN hair]-ACC three-CL cut-PAST
"Prof. Yamada cut three students' hair.'	(Takami 2001:137)
b. Ano isya-wa [zidoo-no me]・〇 sanzyuu-nin sirabe-ta.
that doctor-TOP [pupil-GEN eye]-ACC thirty-CL examine-past
"That doctor examined thirty pupils' eyes.'	(Kikuchi 1994:82)
(19)	a.	Gantan-ni	osiego-kara	go-nin	nengazyoo-o morat-ta.
New Year's Day-on my student-from five-CL	card-ACC receive-past
'(I) received a card from five students of mine on New Years Day?
b.	Gakusei-kara	nizyuu-mei-izyoo	okane-o	atume-nakerebanaranai.
student-from	twenty-CL-or more	money-ACC collect-must
'(We) must collect money from twenty students or more.'
(Takami 2001:128-129)
Second, there are examples where the FNQ is licensed even when there is
no NP trace adjacent to the FNQ. In (20), unlike in (9c) and (11), the subject
of an unergative verb or a transitive verb hosts the FNQ, even with a VP-
internal modifier intervening between the subject and the FNQ. The structure of
these sentences is given in (21). The stranding view would predict these examples
to be ungrammatical because the FNQ does not c-command the host NP in (21).
(20)	a. Koコomo-ga butai-de zyuu-nin odot-ta.
child-NOM stage-at ten-CL dance-PAST
"Ten children danced at the stage.'	(Takami 2001:129)
SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS OF FLOATING NUMERICAL QUANTIFIERS 295
b.	Gakusei-§a tosyokan-de go-nin benkyoosi-tei-ta.
student-NOM library-at five-CL study-PROG-PAST
'Five students were studying at the library.1	(Mihara 1998:89)
c.	Gakusei-^a naihu-de koremadeni huta-ri te-o	kegasi-ta.
student-NOM knife-with so-kar	five-CL hand-ACC injure-past
'So far two students injured their hands with the knife?
(Fukushima 1991:52)
(21)NP [yp PP/Adv [ypFNQ (〇) V]]
The examples in (22) serve as counterexamples to the observation in (2) that
the object cannot intervene between the subject and its FNQ.
(22)	a. A: Kono sinkan zassi
uretemasu-ka?
this new magazine is selling-Q
'Is this new magazine selling well?'
B: Ee, kesa-mo	gakuseisan-ga sore-o go-nin
Yes this morning-also student-NOM it-ACC five-CL
katteikimasitayo.
bought
'Yes, five students bought it this morning.'
b. Boku-wa
I-TOP
saikin
recently
apaato
apartment
dooryoo-^a.
colleague-NOM
zumai-dakedo,
living-although
ie-o si, go-nin
house-Acc four, five-CL
tugitugito	tate-ta.
one-after-another build-CL
'Although I live in an apartment, four or five colleagues built
a house one after another recently.'
c. Gakusei-ga repooto-o san-nin-dake teisyutusi-ta.
student-NOM report-ACC three-CL-only hand in-PAST
'Only three students handed in a report.' (Takami 2001:125-126)
Crucially, the object appears between the subject and its FNQ in these examples.
This order is predicted to be unacceptable under the stranding view because there
is no trace of the subject adjacent to the FNQ (see (15a)), hence the violation of the
mutual c-command requirement.
These counterexamples challenge the validity of the stranding view. Especially
important are the examples in (20) and (22) that cast doubt on the locality re-
striction between the FNQ and its host NP, which further leads us to the question of
whether FNQs provide a solid diagnostic to investigate phrase structures, as has
been assumed under the stranding view. In the case of (20), we may be able to say
that the adverbs in these examples are adjoined not to VP but somewhere higher in
the structure in the same way as temporal adverbs, as in (13) (although this is
inconsistent with (4b)). If we were to adopt the structure in (13) as a structure of the
sentences in (20), then the mutual c-command requirement would be met in (20).
However, in (22), there does not seem to be any obvious way of saving the stranding
296 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
view without any major modification to the theory, and thus the fact that the 8j-O-
FNQi order is (at least sometimes) acceptable remains a problem for the stranding
view. The researchers who present the counterexamples in (22) argue that an FNQ
and its host NP need not observe strict locality, and they advocate alternative
analyses to the stranding view. The most prominent would be the adverb view
where the FNQ is considered as a VP- (or a V'-) adverb that does not necessarily
have a locality dependency with its host NP.11 Clearly, the stranding and adverb
views make different predictions about locality: the stranding view predicts that
the FNQ and its host NP show certain locality restrictions (hence *Sj-O-FNQi),
whereas the adverb view predicts that they need not show any locality restrictions
(hence Sj-O-FNQi is acceptable). On empirical grounds, however, S「O-FNQi is
sometimes acceptable, as in (2), and sometimes not, as in (22). Then, whichever
view we adopt, we are faced with the questions in (23).
(23)	a. Under the stranding view: why is Sj-O-FNQi sometimes acceptable?
b. Under the adverb view: why is 8j-O-FNQj sometimes unacceptable?
Along the way, I examine a possibility of maintaining both views that may elim-
inate the questions in (23) all together. I also review how different approaches cope
with the counterexamples to the stranding view other than (22) (namely, (18), (19),
and (20)).
11.3.2	Reconsideration of Locality
As briefly sketched above, the researchers who offered the counterexamples in (22),
where S「O-FNQi is acceptable, conclude that no locality is required between the
FNQ and its host NP and thus reject the stranding view on the basis of such
examples. In contrast, some researchers argue that the examples in (22) need not be
considered as counterexamples to the stranding view. In other words, it is possible
to maintain the stranding view even with the existence of examples such as (22). In
section 11.3.2.1,1 first review Miyagawa and Arikawa's (2007) claim that locality is
preserved even in (22). Then, in section 11.3.2.2, I turn to Ishii's (1999) claim that
the FNQs in (22) are different in nature from FNQs that obey locality.
11.3.2.1	The stranding view
Miyagawa and Arikawa (2007) acknowledge the examples in (22), but they claim
that these examples are not counterexamples to locality. More precisely, they argue
that the sentences in (22) are associated with a different structure from the
structure of the ungrammatical Sj-O-FNQi sentence and that syntactic locality is
preserved in (22), maintaining the stranding view advanced by Miyagawa (1989).
Let us illustrate their point by examining the examples in (24).
(24)	a. *Gq知sei-ga sake-o san-nin non-da.
student-NOM sake-ACC three-CL drink-PAST
"Three students drank sake.'	(Gunji and Hashida 1998:47)
SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS OF FLOATING NUMERICAL QUANTIFIERS 297
b. ?G"如5を-ga sake-o imamadeni san-nin non-da.
student-NOM sake-ACC so far	three-CL drink-past
"Three students drank sake so far? (Gunji and Hashida 1998:57)
Example (24a) is a case of Haig/Kuroda's "standard" paradigm where the S「O-
FNQi order is ungrammatical, whereas (24b) is a case of the "nonstandard" par-
adigm. Miyagawa and Arikawa argue that the two are structurally different and
that the difference is marked by prosody. In (24a), in the neutral intonational
contour, the FNQ and the preceding object are pronounced in the same intonation
phrase. This pattern would wrongly lead us to the interpretation where the FNQ is
associated with the object rather than with the subject. In contrast, in (24b), the
stress is on the adverb imamadeni1 so tar', which marks the FNQ to be phrasally
separate from the object, unlike in (24a).
Then the question is: what structure is (24b) associated with? Instead of ar-
guing that (24b) is insensitive to locality, Miyagawa and Arikawa argue that the
strict locality holds in this case. In particular, they claim that the subject in Japanese
may scramble (following Ko 2005 but contra Saito 1985) and provide a derivation
in (25) for (24b) (as well as for (22)). They present various arguments showing that,
whenever the Sj-O-FNQ； order is acceptable, the object has moved outside of the
vP and the subject has undergone ^-scrambling (but see Hoji and Ishii 2004 for
arguments against this claim).12 Crucially, the mutual c-command requirement is
met in this derivation一that is, there is no locality violation in (24b) and (22).
Thus, under this analysis, the examples in (24b) and (22) are not considered as
counterexamples to the stranding view.
(25)	[tP Si〔TP 〇2 [vP 4 [NumP h FNQ] [vP ち V]]]]
Miyagawa and Arikawa's analysis would then predict that the Sj-O-FNQj order is
grammatical whenever prosody signals the object and the FNQ to be in a separate
intonation phrase, just as in (24b). This prediction does not seem to be borne out, as
shown in (26). In (26), the stress seems to naturally fall on the adverb huunnimo
'unfortunately', yielding the same prosodic pattern as (24b).13 However, (26) is
much more degraded than (24b), according to my informants' and my own judg-
ments. In this way, prosodic patterns with grammatical and ungrammatical Sj-O-
FNQj examples are not as clear-cut as Miyagawa and Arikawa describe.
(26)	??Gnk以sei-ga sake-o	huunnimo	san-nin non-da.
student-NOM sake-Acc unfortunately three-CL drink-PAST
'Unfortunately, three students drank sake.'
11.3.2.2 The "hybrid” view
A different approach has been proposed by Ishii (1999). Ishii argues that the mixed
acceptability of S「O-FNQi is due to the existence of two types of FNQs. When Sj-O-
FNQj is unacceptable, the sentence involves a stranding of the FNQ, which then
predicts that the FNQ obeys a locality constraint (hence *Sj-O-FNQj). In contrast,
when Sj-O-FNQj is acceptable, the FNQ is an adverb, which predicts that we do not
298 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
necessarily observe a locality constraint (hence S「O-FNQi is acceptable). In the fol-
lowing, I refer to Ishii's approach as the "hybrid” view. The hybrid view is motivated
by semantic considerations of FNQs. What plays a crucial role here is a distinction
between distributive and nondistributive interpretations proposed by Kitagawa and
Kuroda (1992): "the distributive construal necessarily implies the occurrence of
multiple events while the non-distributive construal implies the occurrence of only a
single event" (pages 88-89). In (27), these two interpretations are forced by the
temporal expressions kono issyuukan-no aida-ni "during this week' ((27a); distributive
only) and sono toki totuzen 'then suddenly' ((27b); nondistributive only).
(27)	a. Kono issyuukan-no aida-ni syuuzin-^a	san-nin nigedasi-ta.
this week	during prisoner-NOM three-CL escape-PAST
'There have been three jailbreaks during the past week.'
b. Sono toki totuzen syuuzin-^a	san-nin abaredasi-ta.
then suddenly prisoner-NOM three-CL start-to-act-violently-PAST
'Then, a group of three prisoners suddenly started acting violently.'
(Kitagawa and Kuroda 1992:89)
Ishii claims that the counterexamples to the mutual c-command requirement
permit a distributive reading but not a nondistributive reading. Let us go back to
example (22a). According to Ishii, this sentence can mean that each of the five
students bought a copy of the new magazine separately (distributive) but cannot
mean that the five students together bought a single copy (nondistributive).14
Similarly, in (22b), the distributive reading is enforced by tugitugito 'one after
another'. Moreover, (22c) lacks the nondistributive reading where three students
handed in a single paper. Ishii's claim is further supported by (28), where ubaiau
'to fight over' forces a nondistributive reading.
(28)	A: Kono zassi ninki arimasu-ka?
this magazine is-popular-Q
'Is this magazine popular?'
B: *Ee,	sakki-mo	sokode gakuseisan-^ saisin-goo-o
Yes	a-while-ago-also there student-NOM recent-issue-ACC
go-nin ubaiatteimasitayo.
five-CL were-fighting-over
'Yes. In fact, five students were fighting over the most recent issue
over there just a while ago.'
B': Ee, sakki-mo sokode gakuseisan-ga go-nin saisin-goo-o
ubaiatteimasitayo.
(Nishigauchi and Ishii 2003:78)
As in (28B), the sentence is unacceptable when the mutual c-command require-
ment is violated (due to the Sj-O-FNQi order), whereas it is acceptable, as in (28B'),
when there is no locality violation. The observation here leads Ishii to claim that
there are two types of FNQs一the stranding type and the adverb type. The
stranding type is not sensitive to any semantic restriction, but it must obey the
SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS OF FLOATING NUMERICAL QUANTIFIERS 299
mutual c-command requirement. The adverb type is identified by the semantic
restriction of having only a distributive interpretation. FNQs of this type, being
adverbs, need not satisfy the mutual c-command requirement.
Ishii further argues that the other counterexamples to the stranding view
presented above also involve the adverb-type FNQ. In (18), we have seen that
sentences can be acceptable even when the host NP, being embedded in another
NP, does not c-command the FNQ. The examples in (29) show that such examples
only have a distributive interpretation.
(29)	a. ?*Hora, ima soko-deisya-ga [zidoo-no me]・〇 sanzyuu-nin
see now there doctor-NOM [pupil-GEN eye]-ACC thirty-CL
sirabete-imasuyo.
examine-PROG
'See, the doctor is examining thirty pupils' eyes over there now?
b. Ano isya-wa	kono ni-zikan-de	[zidoo-no me]・〇
that doctor-TOP this	two-hour-in [pupil-GEN eye]-acc
sanzyuu-ninsirabeta.
thirty-CL examined
"That doctor examined thirty pupils' eyes during the last two hours.'
(Ishii 1999:247)
Example (18b) is unacceptable when a nondistributive reading is forced, as in (29a),
although it is acceptable when a distributive reading is forced, as in (29b). In the same
vein, examples such as (19)一namely, the examples where the host NP is within the
PP一are unacceptable under a nondistributive interpretation, as in (30).
(30)	*Itido-ni gakusei-kara.	nizyuu-mei-izyoo	okane-o
at once	student-from	twenty-CL-or	more money-ACC
atumeru-no-wa muri-desu.
collect-NL-TOP impossible-cop
'It is impossible to collect money from twenty students or more at once.'
(Ishii 1999:245)
Let us summarize what we have seen so far in terms of locality. Recall
that, under the stranding view, there needs to be a strict locality restriction on
the dependency between an FNQ and its host NP, which predicts Sj-O-FNQj to
be unacceptable. Counterexamples such as (22) are problematic, as pointed out
in (23a), and thus some modification needs to be made on the original stranding
view (e.g., Miyagawa and Arikawa's [2007] proposal discussed above). In contrast,
under the hybrid view, the questions in (23) do not arise in the first place. When
Si-O-FNQj is disallowed, the FNQ is derived by stranding, hence there is a local-
ity constraint. In contrast, when Sj-O-FNQj is possible, the FNQ is an adverb,
hence there is no locality constraint. In this sense, the examples in (22) are not
really counterexamples to locality, but they simply involve a different type of
FNQ, namely, the adverb type. The hybrid view keeps the stranding analysis intact in
that FNQs of the stranding type are analyzed by the original stranding view.
zoo THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
11.3.3	Semantic Restrictions on FNQs
Recall that Ishii's (1999) motivation for advocating the two types of FNQs
comes from the semantic restriction on FNQs that only a distributive reading is
available when the mutual c-command requirement is violated. However, it has
been observed in the literature that FNQs in general are subject to a semantic
restriction of the kind discussed by Ishii (Terada 1990; Nakanishi 2004, 2007a,
2007b). For instance, the examples in (31) have a distributive but not a collective
reading.15,16
(31)	a.	Otokonoko-ga	kinoo	san-nin	omotya-no booto-o	tukut-ta.
boy-NOM	yesterday	three-CL	toy-GEN boat-ACC	make-PAST
"Three boys made a toy boat/toy boats yesterday?
b.	Tomodati-^a	kinoo	huta-ri	kekkonsi-ta.
friend-NOM	yesterday	two-CL	marry-past
"Two friends got married yesterday/	(Nakanishi 2004:75)
Example (31a) means that each of the three boys made a toy boat (or toy boats),
but it does not mean that the three boys together made a toy boat (or toy boats).
In the same vein, (31b) can involve two friends, each of whom got married to
someone (i.e., there are two couples), but it cannot mean that two friends married
each other, which involves only one couple. Note that, under the stranding
view, the mutual c-command requirement is satisfied in (31), unlike in (22) (see
(ic) and its derivation in (13)). Then, the examples in (31) seem to indicate
that there is no strict correlation between the locality requirement and the se-
mantic restriction, contra Ishii (1999). It is true that, whenever Sj-O-FNQj is ac-
ceptable, only the distributive reading is available. However, as shown in (31), this
semantic restriction seems to be more widespread. The seeming generalization
is that the semantic restriction is observed whenever FNQs appear away from
their host NP on the surface, regardless of whether the mutual c-command re-
quirement is satisfied.17 Then it seems inappropriate to argue for the hybrid view
simply on the basis of the semantic restriction on distributivity discussed in Ishii
(1999).
Interestingly, unlike in (31a), both distributive and collective readings are
available in (32).
(32)	a.	[San-nin-no	otokonoko]-^.	kinoo	omotya-no	booto-o	tukut-ta.
[three-CL-GEN boy]-NOM	yesterday	toy-GEN	boat-ACC	make-PAST
b.	[Otokonoko	san-nin]-ga	kinoo	omotya-no	booto-o	tukut-ta.
[boy	three-CL]-nom	yesterday	toy-GEN	boat-ACC	make-PAST
As briefly mentioned in section 11.1, the researchers agree that the numerals in (32)
(or the ones in (ia,b)) quantify over the nominal predicate. Then the fact that FNQs
are semantically different from numerals that apparently quantify over nominal
predicates may suggest that FNQs quantify over something else. More specifically,
it has been argued that a range of semantic restrictions on FNQs indicates some
SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS OF FLOATING NUMERICAL QUANTIFIERS Z01
semantic dependency between FNQs and verbal predicates (Fukushima 1991;Fujita
1994; Gunji and Hashida 1998; Nakanishi 2004, 2007a, 2007b, among others). Be-
sides the data on distributivity discussed above, it has been observed that FNQs, but
not numerals in a nominal projection, have a restriction on what kind of verbal
predicates they can occur with. In particular, as shown in (33), FNQs are incom-
patible with verbal predicates denoting an event that can occur only once, although
numerals in a nominal projection do not have such a restriction, as in (34)
(Nakanishi 2004, 2007a, 2007b). This can be straightforwardly explained if FNQs
involve quantification over events denoted by a verbal predicate. In (33b), the FNQ
expresses that there are three events of killing Peter. However, such a situation is
impossible in a natural context, hence (33b) is unacceptable. In contrast, the nu-
merals in (34) quantify over individuals denoted by the host NP, thus they are
insensitive to the properties of verbal predicates.
(33)	a.	Gakusei-ga	kinoo	san-nin	Peter-o	tatai-ta.
student-NOM	yesterday	three-CL	Peter-Acc	hit-PAST
"Three students hit Peter yesterday/
b.	^Gakusei-ga.	kinoo	san-nin	Peter-o	korosi-ta.
student-NOM	yesterday	three-CL	Peter-Acc	kill-PAST
"Three students killed Peter yesterday?	(Nakanishi 2004:67)
(34)	a.	[San-nin-no gakusei]-^ kinoo	Peter-o	tatai-ta/korosi-ta.
[three-CL-GEN student]-nom yesterday Peter-Acc	hit-PAST/kill-PAST
b.	[Gakusei san-nin]-ga	kinoo	Peter-o	tatai-ta/korosi-ta.
[student three-CL]-nom	yesterday	Peter-Acc	hit-PAST/kill-PAST
Another piece of evidence for event quantification comes from the observation
that FNQs cannot occur with verbal predicates that express more or less permanent
states (i.e., individual-level predicates) (Harada 1976, Ohki 1987, Fukushima 1991,
Nishigauchi and Uchibori 1991,Mihara 1998). In (35), for instance, although the
FNQ is compatible with the predicate genki-da 'be healthy' that expresses a tem-
poral state, it is incompatible with osu-da 'be male> that expresses a permanent
state. No such restriction can be found with numerals in a nominal projection, as
in (36). It has been independently argued that, unlike predicates expressing tem-
poral states, predicates expressing permanent states lack event arguments in their
denotation (Kratzer 1995). If we take this view, the contrast in (35) naturally
follows: (35b) is unacceptable because there is no event that the FNQ quantifies
over. In contrast, the numerals in (36) have nothing to do with event quantifica-
tion, thus any predicate can be used with them.18
(35)	a. Uti-no doobutuen-de-wa kaba-^a.	mada san-too genki-da.
my	zoo-at-TOP	hippo-NOM still three-CL healthy
Tn my zoo, three hippos are still healthy.5
b. *Uti-no doobutuen-de-wa kaba-^a.	zannennakotoni san-too osu-da.
my	zoo-at-TOP	hippo-NOM unfortunately three-CL male
'In my zoo, unfortunately, three hippos are male? (Mihara 1998:110-111)
3〇2 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(36)	a.	Uti-no	doobutuen-de-wa	[san-too-no 灿如-ga	genki-da /osu-da.
my	zoo-at-TOP	[three-CL-GEN hippo]-nom healthy/male
b.	Uti-no	doobutuen-de-wa	[kaba san-too]-ga	genki-da /osu-da.
my	zoo-at-TOP	[hippo three-CL]-NOM	healthy /male
Note that FNQs quantify not just over verbal predicates but also somehow over
nominal predicates as well. Recall that FNQs contain a classifier that semantically
agrees with the host NP. For example, in (33a), -nin agrees with gakusei "student^
indicating that the cardinality of the students is three. Moreover, (33a) is seman-
tically different from (37), where three times is simply counting a number of events
without being associated with the number of students. In particular, whereas (33a)
means that three students hit Peter for unknown number of times, (37) means that a
student or students whose cardinality is unspecified hit Peter three times.
(37)	Gakusei-ga kinoo	san-kai	Peter-o	tatai-ta.
student-NOM yesterday three-time Peter-Acc hit-PAST
'A student/students hit Peter three times yesterday? (Nakanishi 2004:85)
Thus, if we were to argue that an FNQ is an adverb, it cannot be an adverb that simply
modifies a verbal predicate; rather, it must be a special kind of adverb that modifies
a verbal predicate as well as a nominal predicate (which may be somewhat similar
to so-called subject-oriented adverbs such as reluctantly in John reluctantly hit
Peter). Indeed, Fujita (1994) argues that an FNQ modifies its host NP via modi-
fication of the verbal predicate. Similarly, Nakanishi (2004, 2007a, 2007b) presents
a semantic mechanism where an FNQ quantifies over events denoted by the verbal
predicate as well as over individuals denoted by the host NP.
Note that semantic properties of FNQs per se do not rule out the stranding
view. Indeed, we might expect to observe some semantic differences as a result of
transformations involved in the stranding view. For example, Watanabe (2006, this
volume) discusses another semantic difference between the FNQ and the numerals
in a nominal projection—namely, partitivity (the FNQ, but not the numerals in a
nominal projection, evokes a partitive interpretation: see Inoue 1978, Fujita 1994,
Hamano 1997; see also section 11.3.5)一and argues that this semantic difference can
be captured under the stranding view. The task for the stranding view then is to
explain why FNQs have different semantic properties from numerals that appar-
ently quantify over nominal predicates, as discussed in this section. In other words,
the stranding view needs to show that movement can be the source of the semantic
differences discussed here.
11.3.4	The Adverb View
To sum up the discussion so far, the stranding view advocated by Miyagawa (1989)
confines the distribution of FNQs to environments where locality constraint is met,
and by doing so, it successfully accounts for some distributional restrictions on
SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS OF FLOATING NUMERICAL QUANTIFIERS ZOZ
FNQs presented in section 11.2. However, the counterexamples to locality challenge
the validity of such a constrained analysis. Some attempts have been made to deal
with the counterexamples under the stranding view, as we have seen in Miyagawa
and Arikawa's (2007) recent work. An alternative analysis is presented by Ishii
(1999), who argues that there are two types of FNQs一a stranding type and an
adverb type. Under this analysis, the counterexamples to locality involve the ad-
verb-type FNQs, which are distinct from the stranding-type FNQs in that they are
not sensitive to locality. Thus, these examples do not pose a problem for the
stranding view. Although Ishii's analysis offers an attractive possibility of elimi-
nating the questions in (23), we saw in (31) that there does not seem to be a strict
correlation between locality and the semantic restriction on distributivity. More-
over, further semantic restrictions on FNQs in(33)-(36) seem to indicate that FNQs
quantify over events denoted by verbal predicates. Together with the counterex-
amples to locality (e.g., (22) where Sj-O-FNQi is acceptable), the semantic data
above led some researchers to advocate the adverb view.19 The substance of this
view is that FNQs can occur in positions that cannot be straightforwardly associ-
ated with an NP trace, which indicates that locality does not play a crucial role for
the distribution of FNQs (for cross-linguistic data on this point, see Bobaljik 1995,
Fitzpatrick 2006, among others). Then the question that we need to address is the
following: why is Sj-O-FNQi sometimes unacceptable (see (23b))? I review here two
analyses that directly address this question一namely, Takami's (1998, 2001)prag-
matic approach and Mihara's (1998) semantic approach. Along the way, I also
discuss how these approaches account for the distributional restriction on FNQs
other than Sj-O-FNQi, which is summarized in (17).
11.3.4.1	Pragmatic consideration
Takami (1998,2001)rejects Miyagawa's (1989) stranding analysis on the basis of the
counterexamples to locality presented in section 11.3.1. The upshot of his analysis is
that the distribution of FNQs does not depend on syntactic factors, as claimed in
the stranding view, but rather on pragmatic factors. It has been independently
claimed that, in Japanese, the most important information (or new information)
must appear in an immediately preverbal position (Kuno 1978a). Takami argues
that FNQs must obey this information structure. Let us illustrate his point by
examining the contrast in (38), where both sentences are in the Sj-O-FNQj order.
(38)	a. ?*Gafcusez-ga hon-o yo-nin kat-ta.
student-NOM book-ACC four-CL buy-past
"Four students bought a book/books?
b. Gakusei-ga.	{sore	/sono hon}-o	yo-nin	kat-ta.
student-NOM	{it	/that book}-ACC	four-CL	buy-PAST
"Four students bought it/that book?	(Takami 2001:139)
In (38a,b), the FNQ is interpreted as the most important information, being in a
preverbal position. The difference in acceptability between the two comes from the
3〇4 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
information status of the object. In (z8a)> the object is an indefinite NP, which is
interpreted to convey new information. Thus, there is a conflict between the object
and the FNQ as to which one should be the focus of the sentence. In contrast, in
(38b) (also in (22a)), the object is a definite NP, which conveys less-important
information, thus the ideal information structure is preserved.
Furthermore, Takami observes that the Sj-O-FNQj order is always acceptable
when the FNQ is followed by an emphatic particle such as -dake 'only' and -tomo
'all', as shown in (22c) (repeated in (39)). This also follows from the pragmatic
condition: emphatic particles signal that the FNQ conveys the most important
information, thus the sentence realizes the ideal information structure.
(39)	Gakusei-ga. repooto-o san-nin-dake teisyutusi-ta.
student-NOM report-ACC three-CL-only hand-in-PAST
'Only three students handed in a report.'	(—(22c))
In the case of (22b) (repeated in (40)), the context that 'I live in an apartment5
evokes the contrast with 'my friends build a house', so the object ie 'house' merely
conveys predictable information. Thus, it does not need to be placed in a preverbal
position, just as in (38b).
(40) Boku-wa	apaato	zumai-dakedo,
I-TOP	apartment	living-although
saikin	dooryoo-^a.	ie-o	si> go-nin	tugitugito house-ACC	four, five-cl one after another
recently	colleague-NOM	
tate-ta.		
build-CL		
'Although I live in an apartment, four or five colleagues built a house one		
after another recently.'		(=(22b))
Takami further argues that his analysis is able to account for the contrast in
(41), where both verbs are unergative and a VP-internal adverb intervenes between
the subject and its FNQ. In (41a), geragerato 'loudly' conveys important new in-
formation, hence it needs to be placed in a preverbal position. In contrast, a
locative adverb such as butai-de 'at the stage' or a temporal adverb such as kinoo
'yesterday' serves as a "scene-setter," and so they do not convey important in-
formation, which allows the FNQ to sit in a preverbal position.20
(41) a.	^Kodomo-^	geragerato huta-ri	warat-ta.
children-NOM loudly	two-CL	laugh-PAST
'Two children laughed loudly.'	(— (9c))
b.	Kodomo-^a.	butai-de	zyuu-nin	odot-ta.
child-NOM	stage-at	ten-CL	dance-PAST
'Ten children danced at the stage.'	(—(2oa))
In this way, Takami's analysis appeals to pragmatic considerations to account
for the mixed judgments on the S「O-FNQi order and on the external argument
hosting the FNQ. There seem to be some examples, however, where the pragmatic
SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS OF FLOATING NUMERICAL QUANTIFIERS ZOZ
analysis does not go through. Consider (42), which is slightly modified from (20c).
Under Takami's analysis, naihu-de 'with the knife, conveys important new infor-
mation, just like geragerato 'loudly' in (41a). Nevertheless, (41a) and (42) differ in
their acceptability. Moreover, determining "appropriate" information structure
is not always straightforward. In all the examples discussed in this section, the
FNQ conveys new information. At the same time, some examples involve other
elements expressing new information. Then, the question is how to decide which
one conveys more important information that has to be placed in a preverbal
position.
(42)	Gakusei-gs.	naihu-de koremadeni huta-ri kegasi-ta.
student-NOM knife-with so-far	five-CL injure-PAST
'So far two students injured (themselves) with a knife.'	(cf. (20c))
11.3.4.2	Aspectual consideration
Like Takami (1998, 2001),Mihara (1998) considers Miyagawa's (1989) mutual
c-command requirement inadequate based on numerous counterexamples. He
also claims that Takami's pragmatic condition is not sufficient and argues that,
besides the pragmatic condition, FNQs require an aspectual delimitedness. In
particular, the sentence with an FNQ must express a completed situation and the
FNQ must be tied to the enumeration resulting from the situation.21 Let us il-
lustrate his analysis by examining the data on the S「O-FNQi order. Regarding
(22a,b), he points out that the sentences sound worse without the temporal adverbs
kesa-mo 'also this morning' and saikin 'recently', respectively. These adverbs signal
that the relevant counting under a described situation has been completed.
The examples in (43) seem to further support the validity of Mihara's claim
that the resultant state of counting (often signaled by temporal adverbs) con-
tributes to a well-formedness of FNQs.
(43)	a. Gaikokuzin kankookyaku-^ kyonen Tokushima-o	gosen-nin
foreign	tourist-NOM	last year Tokushima-Acc 5,000-CL
otozure-ta.
visit-PAST
'Five thousand foreign tourists visited Tokushima last year.'
b. Gaikokuzin kankookyaku-^ kyonen gosen-nin Tokushima-o
foreign	tourist-NOM	last year 5,000-CL Tokushima-Acc
otozure-ta.
visit-PAST
Under Mihara's analysis, the sentence with an FNQ is grammatical as long as it
is aspectually delimited, regardless of where the FNQ appears in the sentence.
Example (43) provides us with a context where the enumeration is salient. In
such a case, the 8；-O-FNQj order in (43a) is as acceptable as the Sj-FNQi-O order
in (43b).
Z06 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Regarding (22c) (repeated in (39)), Mihara argues that emphatic particles such
as -dake 'only' and -tomo 'all' signal that the counting of events described by the
sentence is ended. In other words, in (22c), with the presence of the emphatic
particle, the sentence is aspectually delimited, hence the Sj-O-FNQi order is ac-
ceptable. His analysis further accounts for why FNQs are incompatible with pred-
icates that express a permanent state (osu-da 'be male'), as in (35b). These predicates
are not aspectually delimited. Interestingly, FNQs are compatible with such pred-
icates when they are followed by emphatic adverbs, as in (44). This is because
emphatic adverbs indicate that the speaker finished counting, thus (44) does not
describe permanent states, unlike (35b).
(44)	Uti-no doobutuen-de-wa kaba-ga zannennakotoni
our zoo-at-TOP hippo-NOM unfortunately
san-too{-dake/-tomo} osu-da.
three-CL{-only/-all} male
'In our zoo, unfortunately, {only/all} three hippos are male.'
Mihara's analysis further extends to the contrast between unaccusatives and
unergatives. Mihara argues that unaccusative verbs always express a completion—
that is, they are inherently aspectually delimited. Thus, his analysis predicts FNQs
to be always compatible with unaccusative verbs. As discussed in section 11.2, we
know that this prediction is empirically correct (see (9b)). Unlike unaccusative
verbs, unergative verbs are not semantically restricted. Thus, when they occur with
FNQs, there needs to be an expression that aspectually delimits the relevant sen-
tence. For instance, (45a) is unacceptable just as (9c) is, but it is acceptable in a
context that provides an aspectual delimitation, as in (45b).22
(45)	a. ^Gakusei-ga. tosyokan-de sanzyuu-nin benkyoosi-ta.
student-NOM library-at thirty-CL study-past
'Thirty students studied at the library.'	(Mihara 1998:106)
b. Heikan-magiwa-made gakusei-ga tosyokan-de sanzyuu-nin
closing-close to-until student-NOM library-at thirty-CL
benkyoosi-ta.
study-PAST
'Until the closing time, thirty students studied at the library.'
(Mihara 1998:106)
As shown in (20b), (45a) is acceptable when the verb is in a progressive form.
Mihara argues that this is because progressives express limited duration一that is,
progressives are inherently aspectually delimited.
Mihara's analysis is also able to account for the contrast in (46) regarding the
Sj-O-FNQj order.
(46)	a. ^Gakusei-ga sake-o san-nin non-da.
student-NOM sake-ACC three-CL drink-past
'Three students drank sake.'	(— (24a))
SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS OF FLOATING NUMERICAL QUANTIFIERS ZO/
b. Gakusei-ga. sono botoru-no sake-o	san-nin non-da.
student-NOM that bottle-GEN sake-ACC three-CL drink-PAST
'Three students drank the sake in that bottle?
(Gunji and Hashida 1998:50)
Gunji and Hashida (1998) observe that the NP intervening between the subject
and its FNQ must express an entity whose quantity is determinate. It is indepen-
dently known that aspectual properties of a verbal predicate can be influenced
by internal arguments (Krifka 1992)among many others). For instance, John drank
wine is atelic (or aspectually nondelimited), whereas John drank a glass of
wine is telic (or aspectually delimited). The difference can be shown by adding
temporal modifiers; the former is compatible with for ten minutes and not with
in ten minutes, and the opposite holds for the latter (Dowty 1979). Then, in (46), we
can argue that only (46b) is felicitous because (46b), but not (46a), is aspectually
delimited.
Although Mihara's analysis opens a new venue of research on FNQs, there
seem to be examples where their acceptability does not depend on an aspectual
consideration. For instance, consider the examples of the S「O-FNQi order in (41b)
(=(20a)) and (45a), where only the former is reported to be acceptable. These
examples do not seem to differ in terms of aspectuality; the VP dance at the stage
and the VP study at the library are both atelic in that they are compatible with for
one hour but not with in one hour. Thus, Mihara's analysis would predict (41b) to
be infelicitous, just as (45a) is.
Summing up section 11.3.4, we have seen that a range of counterexamples
to locality led some researchers to advocate an alternative view of the stranding
analysis一namely, the adverb view. The adverb view is further supported by some
data suggesting that FNQs quantify over something other than nominal predicates一
in particular, verbal predicates. Under the adverb view, we do not expect to observe
any locality constraints (but see note 11), hence the SpO-FNQi order is predicted to
be always acceptable. To account for why this order is sometimes unacceptable, we
need to appeal to semantic/pragmatic considerations such as Takami s (1998, 2001)
and Mihara's (1998). However, as we have seen above, these semantic/pragmatic
analyses are not without problems.
11.3.5	Some Notes on Prosodic Effects
Before concluding the chapter, I would like to briefly discuss the status of an FNQ
that is adjacent to its host NP in the surface. Kitagawa and Kuroda (1992), followed
by Fujita (1994), claim that when a numeral quantifier immediately follows its host
NP, it can be structurally ambiguous between [NP-case Q] and [NP-case] [Q]
(the brackets indicate constituency). Their claim is supported by the data on
cardinal/partitive readings. Although only a cardinal reading holds when the nu-
meral and its host NP form a constituent, as in (47a), only a partitive reading holds
3〇8 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
when they are apart, as in (47b). Kitagawa and Kuroda observe that, when the
numeral and its host NP are adjacent to each other, as in (47c), the sentence has
both cardinal and partitive readings. They further claim that the two readings in
(47c) can be teased apart by different prosodic patterns. In particular, with a
prosodic boundary or a pause between the host NP and the numeral (indicated by
//), (47c) has a partitive reading only, which implies that the host NP and the
numeral are not in the same nominal projection, just as in (47b). In contrast,
without any pause between them, (47c) only allows a cardinal reading, which
indicates that the host NP and the numeral form a nominal constituent, just as
in (47a).
(47)	a. [Sokoni iawase-ta go-nin-no otoko]-ga tero-ni
[there	be-PAST Avc-cl-gen man]-NOM terrorism-by
makikom-are-ta.
involve-PASS-PAST
"Five (and only five) men who were there got involved in terrorism?
b.	Sokoni iawase-ta ofoko-ga tero-ni	go-nin makikom-are-ta.
there be-PAST	man-NOM terrorism-by five-CL involve-PASS-PAST
'Five of the men who were there got involved in terrorism?
(Fujita 199435-36)
c.	Sokoni iawase-ta ofoko-ga (//) go-nin tero-ni makikom-are-ta.
Similarly, in (48), the presence of a prosodic boundary seems to influence the
interpretation of the sentence. The sentence is ambiguous between distributive and
collective readings without a boundary, whereas it only allows a distributive
reading with a boundary.
(48)	Gakusei-ga. (//) go-nin tukue-o motiage-ta.
student-NOM five-CL desk-ACC lift-PAST (c£ (31))
Throughout the chapter, to avoid this complication, I have focused on cases
where some element intervenes between an FNQ and its host NP. However, it is
important to question what implication the prosodic pattern has to the theory of
FNQs (see Miyagawa and Arikawa 2007).
11.4	Implications for the
General Theory
In this short overview, I have examined previous studies on Japanese FNQs by
dividing them into two groups一namely, the stranding view and the adverb view.
Among the numerous important issues that arise from the investigation of the
phenomenon, I have focused on issues of locality. The stranding view advanced by
SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS OF FLOATING NUMERICAL QUANTIFIERS Z09
Miyagawa (1989) observes that there are certain locality restrictions on the de-
pendency between an FNQ and its host NP, as summarized in (49).
(49)	Distributional restrictions on FNQs (also in (17))
Structural restrictions
a.	キEmbedded NP as the host NP; (5) (counterexamples in (18))
b.	*NP within PP as the host NP; (8) (counterexamples in (19))
Locality restrictions
c.	^External argument as the host NP with a VP-internal adverb/PP; (3),
(9), (11) (counterexamples in (20))
d.	*Sj-O-FNQi； (2) (counterexamples in (22))
Under this view, FNQs have served as a powerful tool for the investigation of
Japanese syntax. However, close scrutiny reveals that there are a number of
counterexamples to locality, as indicated in (49), which led some researchers to the
adverb view. Further support for the adverb view comes from a range of semantic
properties of FNQs, summarized in (50).
(50)	Semantic restrictions on FNQs
a.	^Collective readings; (31)
b.	^Single-occurrence events; (33)
c.	^Predicates describing a permanent state; (35)'
Table 11.1 summarizes how the two views fare with the properties of FNQs. I
would like to emphasize that, whatever theory of FNQs we may choose (the
stranding view, the adverb view, the hybrid view, or something else), we need
to make sure that the theory is capable of accounting for the range of proper-
ties of FNQs discussed here and of making further predictions about other
properties of FNQs, such as scrambled FNQs (c£ note 2) and the scope property
(see below)..
The syntactic and semantic considerations of FNQs lead us to the larger
question of how the syntactic and semantic components of grammar interact:
when accounting for FNQs, is it possible to maintain the compositionality of
grammar? That is, do semantic rules apply in accord with syntactic rules? In (ia,b),
when the numeral combines with the host NP in syntax, a corresponding semantic
Table 11.1 Comparison of the stranding and adverb views
Properties of FNQs	Stranding view	Adverb view
Distributional restrictions	ノ (Locality restriction)	Not necessarily expected
in (49)	(but see section 11.3.4)
Counterexamples to the	Not necessarily	expected	/(No locality restriction)
restrictions	(but see section 11.3.2)
Semantic restrictions in (50)	Not necessarily	expected	/(Result of quantification
(but see section 11.3.2)	over verbal predicates)
310 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
rule makes the numeral express the number of relevant students. Does the FNQ in
(ic) quantify over the host NP just as the numerals in (ia,b) do? The answer is
affirmative for the stranding view. The FNQ, being in the same nominal projection
as its host NP, should quantify over the host NP in the same way as the numerals
in (ia,b). However, examples such as (31), (33), and (35) suggest that the FNQ has
something to do with quantification over a verbal predicate. Then the challenge for
the stranding view is to provide a mechanism of the FNQ having an effect on a
verbal predicate. In contrast, under the adverb view, the FNQ syntactically com-
bines with, and correspondingly semantically quantifies over, a verbal predicate.
Then the challenge would be to account for the apparent connection between the
FNQ and its host NP. As pointed out in section 11.3.3, the FNQ includes a classifier
that semantically agrees with the host NP, and thus the relation between the FNQ
and its host NP cannot be ignored.
I conclude this chapter with a discussion of some cross-linguistic issues. It is
well known that floating quantifiers (FQs) exist in many other languages and that,
just as in the case of Japanese, there are competing theories in cross-linguistic
studies一namely, the stranding view (Sportiche 1988, Shlonsky 1991,Merchant
1996, McCloskey 2000), the adverb view (Dowty and Brodie 1984, Bobaljik 1995,
Junker 1995, Hoeksema 1996, Doetjes 1997), and the hybrid view (Fitzpatrick 2006).
Furthermore, various arguments used to argue for or against the competing
views in the cross-linguistic literature largely overlap with the arguments used in
Japanese一that is, the arguments based on distributional and semantic restric-
tions on FQs. Regardless of this fact, Japanese FQs and cross-linguistic FQs are
strikingly different in that, whereas any quantifier can float in Japanese, quantifiers
are often restricted to universal ones in other languages (e.g., in English, only ally
each, and both are able to float). Indeed, the focus of this chapter is on floating
numeral quantifiers. Although it is not entirely clear what the source of this dif-
ference is, I would like to make two remarks regarding this question. First, it has
been pointed out that Japanese FQs may be more closely related to so-called split
quantifiers than to FQs in other languages (Bobaljik 2003). Some languages are
known to have a construction called Split rFopicalization, where some part of a
noun phrase gets topicalized to the sentence-initial position and, as a result, the
noun phrase gets "split up." For instance, in the German example in (51a), the
NP Bekannte "acquaintances' is separated from the numeral zwei 1 two' by Topi-
calization.
(51)	a. Bekannte	haben gestern zwei geheiratet.
acquaintances have yesterday two married
"Two acquaintances married yesterday.'
b. [Zwei Bekannte]	haben gestern geheiratet.
[two acquaintances] have yesterday married
(Nakanishi 2004:75)
It is independently argued that split quantifiers as well as Japanese FQs are confined
to narrow scope interpretations (for instance, van Geenhoven 1998 for German;
SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS OF FLOATING NUMERICAL QUANTIFIERS ZI1
Hasegawa 1993, Yamashita 2001 for Japanese). Moreover, it has been pointed out
that Split Topicalization in German is subject to the same semantic restrictions as
Japanese FQs summarized in (50) (Nakanishi 2004, 2007a). For instance, although
(51b) permits both distributive and collective readings, (51a) has a distributive
reading only, just like (31b). It is interesting to explore why the two seemingly
unrelated constructions, Split Topicalization and FQ constructions, share various
semantic properties.
Second, there is another instance that may have a close connection to Japanese
FQs一namely, so-called adverbs of quantification in English, such as mostly or for
the most part. It has been argued that these expressions can quantify over a nominal
predicate (Berman 1991).For example, the sentence For the most part, John likes his
friends has the possible interpretation John likes most of his friends'. Similarly,
(52)	has the reading "most of the boys built a model boat'. It has been claimed that,
under this reading, (52) can be understood distributively (most of the boys built a
model boat separately) but not collectively (most of the boys together built a model
boat) (Nakanishi and Romero 2004).
(52)	For the most part, the boys built a model boat.
The same restriction seems to obtain with the Japanese example in (53). As one of
the possible interpretations, (53) could mean that most of the boys built a model
boat and, under this interpretation, (53) is distributive, not collective.24 Crucially,
this is exactly the restriction we have observed with Japanese FNQs (see (31)).
(53)	(?)Ofofamoko-ga kinoo	hotondo	omotya-no booto-o tukut-ta.
boy-NOM	yesterday most/mostly toy-gen	boat-ACC make-PAST
'For the most part, boys made a toy boat yesterday?
The cross-linguistic data discussed above seem to suggest that we should compare
Japanese FNQs not just with FQs in other languages but also with extended cross-
linguistic phenomena (e.g., SplitrFopicalization, adverbs of quantification).
The research on Japanese FNQs has been advanced a great deal over the past
few decades, although many questions still remain unanswered. It is hoped that
this chapter serves as a partial overview of what has been done and sheds light on
some of the issues that require further investigations.
NOTES FOR CHAPTER 11
I would like to thank Jonathan Bobaljik, Heidi Harley, Nobuko Hasegawa, Heejeong Ko,
Martha McGinnis, Shigeru Miyagawa, Norvin Richards, Mamoru Saito, Andrew Simpson,
Koichi Takezawa, Satoshi Tomioka, and Akira Watanabe for discussions and valuable
comments.
1.Nouns in Japanese lack obligatory grammatical markings of definiteness and of
plurality, and bare nouns can be used freely as arguments, as in (i).
312 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(i)	Kasyu-ga	sinkyoku-o	utat-ta.
singer-NOM	new song-ACC sing-past
'A singer/Singers/The singer(s) sang a new song/new songs/the new song(s)?
When these bare nouns occur with a numeral, the numeral must be followed by a
classifier—a morpheme that indicates the semantic class of the host noun in terms of
shape, size, animacy, and so forth (see Downing 1996 for details). For instance, in (1), with
kasyu 'singer', the classifier -nin needs to be used, which carries some semantic information
about kasyu.
2.	When a numeral and its host NP are apart, as in (ic), the numeral can precede its
host NP, as in (ii) and (iii). Although I do not have space for discussion on this type,
readers are directed to previous literature such as Takano 1984; Miyagawa 1989; Terada
1990; Yatabe 1990; Fukushima 1991;Gunji and Hashida 1998; Kawashima 1998; Takami
1998, 2001;Ishii 1999; and Watanabe 2006, among others.
(ii)	Kinoo	san-nin	kasyu-^a	utat-ta.
yesterday	three-CL	singer-NOM	sing-PAST
(iii)	San-nin	kinoo	kasyu-^a	utat-ta.
three-CL	yesterday	singer-NOM	sing-PAST
3.	In this chapter, I do not discuss another important question regarding the paradigm
in (1): is there any transformational relation among the forms in (1)? This question is dealt
with by Watanabe (this volume).
4.	In the following, I refer to the noun phrase that the numeral is associated with as the
host NP (e.g., kasyu ' singer' in (1)).I put aside the question of whether the relevant noun
phrase is an NP or a DP (see Watanabe, this volume, for this issue).
5.	Miyagawa (1989)later makes a revision and argues that the requirement applies
throughout the derivation of the sentence. This is to accommodate data involving a
scrambled host NP, such as (ii) and (iii) in note 2. Because these cases are not discussed in
this chapter, the definition in (6) may suffice here.
6.	Another piece of evidence for Miyagawa's analysis comes from the fact that
the subject of a so-called indirect passive cannot host an FNQ, as in (iv). Crucially, it has
been argued that this type of passive, unlike (9a), does not involve movement of the subject,
and thus there is no NP trace that satisfies the mutual c-command requirement.
(iv)	^Kodomo-^a ame-ni huta-ri hur-are-ta.
child-NOM rain-dat two-CL fall-PASS-PAST
"Two children were rained on.'	(Miyagawa 1989:41)
7.	Strictly speaking, an assumption that the FNQ and its host NP are within the same
nominal projection does not guarantee that the mutual c-command requirement will be
necessarily satisfied. For instance, if we were to adopt the structure in (v), based on Li's
(1999) proposal for Chinese noun phrases, the host NP does not c-command the numeral.
Thus, to maintain the mutual c-command requirement, we need to assume a structure
such as (vi) (Kawashima 1998). Although I put aside this question here, readers are referred
to Watanabe, this volume.
(v)	[NumP three [Cip -cl student]]
(vi)	[NumP student [Num/ three-CL]]
8.	Saito's (1985) account here needs to be reconsidered if we adopt the VP- (or vP-)
internal subject hypothesis (Kitagawa 1986, Kuroda 1988, among others). The derivations
SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS OF FLOATING NUMERICAL QUANTIFIERS Z1Z
in (vii) and (viii) are plausible under this hypothesis: the object first adjoins to VP or vP,
and the subject undergoes Case-driven movement to Spec,TP.
(vii) [tp S] I VP 〇2 I VP〔NumP 上 FNQ ]ら V]]]
(viii) [tp [vp 〇2 IvP【NumP ら FNQ ] [vp ち V]]]]
Then (14b) is predicted to be grammatical. Indeed, I show in section 11.3.1 that the word
order in (14a) is not always unacceptable. Presumably, we could appeal to the derivations
in (vii) and (viii) to account for grammatical examples. However, Miyagawa and Arikawa
(2007) reject the derivation in (viii) (hence (vii) as well) and argue for an alternative
derivation. See section 11.3.2.1 for a brief discussion.
9.	Although it is not impossible to argue that (13) is an instance of subject scrambling,
a more straightforward account is to say that the subject undergoes Case-driven movement
(hence not scrambling) to Spec,TP, as in (ix) (c£ note 8; see also Miyagawa and Arikawa
2007). Then we can maintain Saito's (1985) claim that subjects do not scramble.
(ix)	[tp NPi [vp Adv [vp 【NumP ん FNQ] [vp 〇 V]]]]
10.	Regarding the examples of the kind presented in (18) (i.e., inalienable possessions),
my informants' and my own judgments vary depending on which example we are look-
ing at; while the judgments vary from "acceptable" to "a little awkward" for the exam-
ples in (18) and (x), the speakers agree that (xi) is much worse. It seems to be the case
that the examples improve whenever a one-to-one correspondence between the possessor
and his/her body part is clear from the context. For instance, in (x), each child has one
stomach being stabbed, whereas, in (xi), it is not clear how many fingers were broken per
child.
(x)	John-ga	[kodomotati-no	hara] -0 zyuu-nin sasi-ta.
John-NOM	[children-GEN	stomach]-acc ten-CL	stab-PAST
"John stabbed ten children's stomachs.'
(xi)	John-ga	[kodomotati-no	yubi]-o	zyuu-nin	ot-ta.
John-NOM	[children-GEN	finger]-acc	ten-CL	break-past
'John broke ten children's fingers.'	(Kikuchi 1994:82)
11.Some researchers implement a certain locality restriction under the adverb view.
For example, Doetjes (1997) argues that FQs in Dutch and French are adverbs and that they
must c-command a trace of the host NP (see also Fitzpatrick 2006). The adverbial analyses
on Japanese FNQs summarized here do not take such a view (but see Nakanishi 2004,
20073, 2007b), and so it suffices to say here that, under the adverb view, FNQs are in-
sensitive to locality.
12.	More precisely, Miyagawa and Arikawa argue that, when the S「O-FNQi order is
acceptable, the object first moves to the edge of vP, then moves to Spec,TP to meet the EPP
requirement of T. Then the subject undergoes Az-scrambling to a higher position (to a
higher Spec,TP, as in (25), or to Spec,CP). They argue for this derivation rather than the
alternative derivation in (xii). For various empirical examples supporting their analysis, see
Miyagawa and Arikawa 2007：section 5.
(xii)	[TP & レ 〇2 [vP [NuniP ち FNQ] [vp ら V]]]] (= (viii) in note 8)
13.	It is not the case that any unacceptable example of the S「O-Adverb-FNQi order
can serve as a counterexample to Miyagawa and Arikawa's analysis. In particular, it is
crucial to use a "high" rather than "low" adverb. Recall that adverbs such as kinoo
314 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
'yesterday' are considered to be high in the structure (see (ic) and (13)), whereas adverbs
such as geragerato 'loudly' (see (9c) and (10b)) are considered to be low. The high adverbs,
but not the low ones, can intervene between the subject and its FNQ. The fact that (xiii) is
acceptable indicates that imamadeni 'so far' (used in (24b)) and huunnimo 'unfortunately'
(used in (26)) are high adverbs.
(xiii)	Gakusei-^a {imamadeni /huunnimo}	san-nin sake-o
student-NOM {so far	/unfortunately} three-CL sake-ACC
non-da.
drink-PAST
Consider now (xiv), which is unacceptable just like (26) is.
(xiv)	??Giん以sei-ga sake-o	ikkini	san-nin non-da.
student-NOM sake-ACC in-one-breath three-CL drink-PAST
However, unlike huunnimo 'unfortunately' in (26), ikkini 'in one breath' in (xiv) is a
low adverb; as shown in (xv), ikkini cannot intervene between the subject and its FNQ.
Thus, the unacceptability of (xiv) has nothing to do with the unacceptability of the S「O-
FNQi order. In other words, (xiv) is unacceptable not because of the intervening object but
because of the intervening low adverb. I thank Shigeru Miyagawa for clarifying this point.
(xv)	??Gn如sei-ga	ikkini	san-nin sake-o	non-da.
student-NOM in-one-breath three-CL sake-ACC drink-PAST
14.	We can imagine another scenario where each of the five students bought a copy of
the new magazine at the same time, which amounts to a nondistributive reading under
Kitagawa and Kuroda's (1992) definition. This nondistributive reading seems to be
available in (22a), contra Ishii's generalization that sentences such as (22a) only allow
distributive readings. The semantic notion relevant here seems to be the distinction be-
tween distributive and collective readings (Dowty 1987, among others): a distributive
reading holds when each member expressed as the subject serves as an agent, and a
collective reading holds when the subject as a group serves as an agent. Example (22a)
permits a distributive reading where each of the five students bought a copy, but it lacks a
collective reading where the five students as a group bought a single copy. Crucially, under
the distributive-collective distinction, the situation where each of the five students bought
a copy at the same time falls under a distributive reading, correctly predicting that such a
situation is compatible with (22a). See section 11.3.3 for more examples.
15.	See note 14 on why the distributive/collective distinction matters, rather than
Kitagawa and Kuroda's (1992) distributive/nondistributive distinction. See also Nakanishi
2007a for further discussions.
16.	When so-called collectivizing adverbs such as together co-occur with FNQs, as in
(xvi), only collective readings are available. Nakanishi (2004, 2007a, 2007b) proposes that
these adverbs serve to form a group, yielding the interpretation 'one group consisting of
three boys'. It follows that (xvi) has the same semantic status as (xvii), where there is no
ambiguity between distributive and collective readings in the first place. This is because the
distributive/collective distinction is defined in terms of plural individuals; the boys made a
toy boat can be ambiguous, as opposed to the boy made a toy boat, which does not have any
ambiguity.
(xvi)	Otokonoko-ga kinoo san-nin {issyoni /(hito-kumi)-de}
boy-NOM yesterday three-CL {together /(one-group)-cop}
SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS OF FLOATING NUMERICAL QUANTIFIERS Z1Z
omotya-no	booto-o	tukutta.
toy-GEN	boat-ACC	made
"Three boys made a toy boat {together / as a group} yesterday?
(xvii)	Otokonoko-ga	kinoo	hito-ri	omotya-no booto-o	tukutta.
boy-NOM	yesterday	one-CL	toy-GEN	boat-Acc	made
'One boy made a toy boat yesterday?
17.	I do not examine here the cases where the FNQ and its host NP are adjacent, as in
(xviii). This is because the interpretation of the sentence changes depending on the pro-
sodic pattern (see section 11.3.5; see also Nakanishi 2007a).
(xviii) Otokonoko-^a. san-nin omotya-no booto-o tukut-ta.
boy-NOM	three-CL toy-GEN	boat-Acc make-past
18.	Fukushima (1991)presents another set of data to show a semantic difference be-
tween FNQs and numerals in a nominal projection. In (xix), we obtain two completely
different interpretations depending on where the numeral is: whereas the numeral in (xixa)
expresses the number of cells in the beaker, the FNQ in (xixb) expresses the number of cells
obtained by a proliferation. However, the numeral in (xixb) is different in nature from
FNQs discussed in this chapter. More specifically, the numeral in (xixb) should be treated
as a differential in comparative constructions (e.g., two in John read two more books than
Mary) (see Nakanishi 2004, 2007a for details).
(xix)	a. [Hito-tu-no saiboo]-^ biikaa-nonakade hue-ta.
[one-CL-GEN cell]-NOM beaker-inside increase-past
"One cell proliferated/increased in the beaker?
b. Saiboo-ga biikaa-nonakade hito-tu hue-ta.
cell-NOM beaker-inside one-CL increase-past
"The number of cells increased by one in the beaker? (Fukushima 1991:77)
19.	Note that, under this view, as long as a close connection between FNQs and verbal
predicates is captured, it may not matter so much whether FNQs are categorized as
"adverbs” (Nakanishi 2004). Indeed, the approaches that I discuss in detail later in the
ch叩ter—namely, Mihara (1998) and Takami (1998, 2001)一do not explicitly state that
FNQs are adverbs. Nonetheless, I include their approaches in the adverb view in that,
under their analyses, there are no locality restrictions on the dependency between an FNQ
and its host NP. Furthermore, their analyses assume a close relation between an FNQ and a
verbal predicate.
2〇. Takami (1998, 2001)proposes another pragmatic condition in (xx), which accounts
for the data on structural restrictions in (17a,b)—namely, the data on an embedded NP as the
host NP and on the NP within PP as the host NP. For instance, gakusei "student5 in (xxia) can
betopicalized but not the one in (xxib). That is, gakusei serves as a Theme in (xxia) but not in
(xxib). For lack of space, I do not discuss this pragmatic condition further here.
(xx)	An NP can host an FNQ only when it can serve as a Theme of the sentence.
(xxi)	a.	Yamada	Sensei-ga	[gakusei-no	kami]-o san-nin kit-ta.
Yamada	Professor-NOM	[student-GEN	hair]-ACC three-CL clip-PAST
"Prof. Yamada cut three students' hair?	(—(18a))
b.	* Yamada	Sensei-ga	[gakusei-no	tukue]-o san-nin ket-ta.
Yamada	Professor-NOM	[student-GEN	desk] -ACCthree-CL kick-PAST
'Prof. Yamada kicked three students' desks?	(Takami 2001:137)
316 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
21.	Mihara (1998) argues that FNQs are subject to different aspectual conditions de-
pending on whether they are associated with an external or internal argument. In par-
ticular, the aspectual delimitedness of FNQs associated with an external argument must
come from contexts, whereas that of FNQs associated with an internal argument must
come from a lexical conceptual structure of verbs. For lack of space, I only discuss the
former case here.
22.	Mihara (1998) briefly notes that his analysis is able to account for why the NP
within PP is generally not a suitable host NP, as in (8). He claims that the NPs kuruma 'car'
and paatii 'party' in (8) do not come to exist as a result of a described situation, and so the
FNQs in these examples do not express the result of counting.
23.	This property may be considered as a syntactic restriction rather than a semantic
one, if we adopt a view such as Diesing's (1992) that the syntax of predicates describing a
permanent state differs from the syntax of predicates describing a temporal state.
24.	Hotondo is lexically ambiguous between being a quantifier, as in (xxii), or an
adverb, as in (xxiii). Crucially, unlike (53), (xxii) has both distributive and collective
readings.
(xxii)	[Hotondo-no otokonoko] -ga kinoo	omotya-no booto-o tukut-ta.
[most-GEN	boy]-NOM	yesterday toy-GEN	boat-ACC make-PAST
'Most of the boys made a toy boat yesterday.'
(xxiii) John-ga hotondo ne-tei-ta.
John-NOM mostly sleep-PROG-PART
'Most of the time, John was sleeping.'
REFERENCES
Berman, Stephen.1991.On the semantics and Logical Form of wh-clauses. Doctoral dis-
sertation, University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Bobaljik, Jonathan D.1995. Morphosyntax: The syntax of verbal inflection. Doctoral dis-
sertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Bobaljik, Jonathan D. 2003. Floating quantifiers: Handle with care. In The second Glot
International state-of-the-article book: The latest in linguistics, ed. Lisa L.-S. Cheng and
Rint Sybesma, 107-148. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Chomsky, Noam.1995. The Minimalist Program. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Diesing, Molly.1992. Indefinites. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Doetjes, Jenny.1997. Quantifiers and selection: On the distribution of quantifying expressions
in French, Dutch, and English. The Hague: Holland Institute of Generative Linguistics.
Downing, Pamela.1996. Numeral classifier systems: The case of Japanese. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Dowty, David.1979. Word meaning and Montague Grammar: The semantics of verbs and
times in generative semantics and Montague's PTQ. Dordrecht: ReideL
Dowty, David.1987. Collective predicates, distributive predicates, and all. In Proceedings of
ESCOL '86, ed. Fred Marshall, Ann Miller, and Zheng-sheng Zhang, 97-115. Colum-
bus: Ohio State University.
SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS OF FLOATING NUMERICAL QUANTIFIERS )1/
Dowty, David, and Belinda Brodie.1984. The semantics of "floated” quantifiers in a trans-
fbrmationless grammar. In Proceedings of WCCFL 3, ed. Mark Cobler, Susannah Mac-
Kaye and Michael T. Wescoat, 75-9〇. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Linguistics Association.
Fitzpatrick, Justin. 2006. The syntactic and semantic roots of floating quantification.
Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Fujita, Naoya.1994. On the nature of modification: A study of floating quantifiers and
related constructions. Doctoral dissertation, University of Rochester, Rochester, N.Y.
Fukushima, Kazuhiko.1991.Generalized floating quantifiers. Doctoral dissertation, Uni-
versity of Arizona, Tucson.
Geenhoven, Veerle van.1998. Semantic incorporation and indefinite descriptions: Semantic
and syntactic aspects of noun incorporation in West Greenlandic. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI
Publications.
Gunji, Takao, and Koichi Hashida.1998. Measurement and quantification. In Topics in
constraint-based grammar of Japanese, ed. Takao Gunji and Koichi Hashida, 39-79.
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Haig, John.198〇• Some observations on quantifier floating in Japanese. Linguistics 18:
1065-1083.
Hamano, Shoko.1997. On Japanese quantifier floating. In Directions in Functional Lin-
guistics, ed. Akio Kamio, 173-197. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Harada, Shin-Ichi.1976. Quantifier float as a relational rule. Metropolitan Linguistics
i：44-49.
Hasegawa, Nobuko.1993. Floating quantifiers and bare NP expressions. In Japanese syntax
in comparative grammar, ed. Nobuko Hasegawa, 115-145. Tokyo: Kuroshio.
Hoeksema, Jacob.1996. Floating quantifiers, partitives, and distributivity. In Partitives:
Studies on the syntax and semantics of partitive and related constructions, ed. Jacob
Hoeksema, 57-106. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Hoji, Hajime, and Yasuo Ishii. 2004. What gets mapped to the tripartite structure of
quantification in Japanese. In Proceedings of WCCFL 23, ed. Vineeta Chand, Ann
Kelleher, Angelo J. Rodriguez, and Benjamin Schmeiser, 101-114. Somerville, Mass.:
Cascadilla Press.
Inoue, Kazuko.1978. Nihongo-no bunpoo kisoku [Grammar rules in Japanese]. Tokyo:
Taisyukan.
Ishii, Yasuo.1999. A note on floating quantifiers in Japanese. In Linguistics: In search of the
human mind, A festschrift for Kazuko Inoue, ed. Masatake Muraki and Enoch Iwamoto,
236-267. Tokyo: Kaitakusha.
Junker, Marie-Odile.1995. Syntax et semantique des quantifiers flottants tous et chacun:
Distributivite en semantique conceptuelle. Geneva: Librarie Droz.
Kamio, Akio.1977. Syuuryousi-no sintakkusu: Nihongo-no henkei-o meguru giron-eno iti
siryou [Syntax of numeral quantifiers: A piece of data for debates on transformation in
Japanese]. Gengo [Language] 6(8):83-91.
Kamio, Akio.1983. Meishiku-no koozoo [The structure of noun phrases]. In Nihongo-no
kihon koozoo [The basic structure of Japanese], ed. Kazuko Inoue, 77-126. Tokyo:
Sanseido.
Katagiri, Masumi.1991.Review article of Miyagawa (1989). Studies in Language 15:399-414.
Kawashima, Ruriko.1998. The structure of extended nominal phrases: The scrambling of
numerals, approximate numerals, and quantifiers in Japanese. Journal of East Asian
Linguistics 7:1-26.
Kikuchi, Akira.1994. Extraction from NP in Japanese. In Current topics in English and
Japanese, ed. Masaru Nakamura, 79-104. Tokyo: Hituzi Syobo.
318 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Kitagawa, Yoshihisa.1986. Subject in Japanese and English. Doctoral dissertation, Uni-
versity of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Kitagawa, Yoshihisa, and S.-Y. Kuroda.1992. Passive in Japanese. Ms., University of
Rochester and University of California, San Diego.
Ko, Heejeong. 2005. Syntax of w/zy-in-situ: Merge into [Spec,CP] in the overt syntax.
Natural Language & Linguistic Theory 23:867-916.
Kratzer, Angelika.1995. Stage-level predicates and individual-level predicates. In The
generic book, ed. Gregory N. Carlson and Francis Jeffry Pelletier, 125-175. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Krifka, Manfred.1992. Thematic relations as links between nominal reference and temporal
constitution. In Lexical matters, ed. Ivan A. Sag and Anna Szabolcsi, 29-53. Stanford,
Calif.: CSLI Publications.
Kuno, Susumu. 1978a. Danwa-no bunpoo [Discourse grammar]. Tokyo: Taishukan.
Kuno, Susumu. 1978b. Theoretical perspectives on Japanese linguistics. In Problems in
Japanese syntax and semantics, ed. John Hinds and Irwin Howard, 213-285. Tokyo:
Kaitakusha.
Kuroda, S.-Y.198〇. Bunkoozoo-no hikaku [A comparative study of the structure of sen-
tences]. In Nitieigo hikaku kooza 2: Bunpoo [Lectures on a comparative study of
Japanese and English 2: Grammar], ed. Tetsuya Kunihiro, 23-61. Tokyo: Taishukan.
Kuroda, S.-Y.1988. Whether we agree or not: A comparative syntax of English and Jap-
anese. Lingvisticae Investigationes 12:1-47.
Li, fen-Hui Audrey.1999. Plurality in a classifier language. Journal of East Asian Linguistics
8：75-99.
McCloskey, James. 200〇. Quantifier float and wh-movement in an Irish English. Linguistic
Inquiry 31:57-84.
Merchant, Jason.1996. Object scrambling and quantifier float in German. In Proceedings of
NELS 26, ed. Kiyomi Kusumoto, 179-193. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA Publications.
Mihara, Ken-Ichi.1998. Suuryoosi renketu koobun-to 'kekka'-no gan'i [Quantifier linking
construction and the implication of'resultative']. Gengo [Language] 6:86-95,
7:94-102, 8:104-113.
Miyagawa, Shigeru.1989. Structure and Case marking in Japanese. San Diego, Calif: Aca-
demic Press.
Miyagawa, Shigeru, and Koji Arikawa. 2007. Locality in syntax and floated numeral
quantifiers. Linguistic Inquiry 38:645-67〇.
Miyamoto, Yoichi.1994. Secondary predicates and tense. Doctoral dissertation, University
of Connecticut, Storrs.
Nakanishi, Kimiko. 2004. Domains of measurement: Formal properties of non-split/
split quantifier constructions. Doctoral dissertation, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia.
Nakanishi, Kimiko. 2007a. Formal properties of measurement constructions. Berlin: Mouton
de Gruyter.
Nakanishi, Kimiko. 2007b. Measurement in the nominal and verbal domains. Linguistics
and Philosophy 30:235-276.
Nakanishi, Kimiko, and Maribel Romero. 2004. Two constructions with most and their
semantic properties. In Proceedings of NELS 34, ed. Keir Moulton and Matthew Wol£
453-467. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA Publications.
Nishigauchi, Taisuke, and Yasuo Ishii. 2003. Eigo-kara nihongo-o miru [Looking at Japa-
nese from English]. Tokyo: Kenkyusya.
SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS OF FLOATING NUMERICAL QUANTIFIERS Z19
Nishigauchi, Taisuke, and Asako Uchibori.1991.Japanese bare NPs and syntax-semantics
correspondences in quantification. Ms., Osaka University and University of Con-
necticut, Storrs.
Ohki, Mitsuru.1987. Nihongo-no yuuri suuryoosi-no danwa kinoo-ni tuite [On discourse
functions of floating quantifiers in Japanese]. Sityookaku Gaikokugokyooiku Kenkyuu
[Research in audio-visual education of foreign languages] 10:37-68.
Okutsu, Keiichiro.1969. Suuryooteki-hyoogen-no bumpoo [The grammar of quantifica-
tional expressions]. Nihongo Kyooiku [Japanese Language Education]14:2-6〇.
Perlmutter, David.1978. Impersonal passives and the unaccusative hypothesis. In Pro-
ceedings of the Berkeley Linguistics Society 4, ed. A. C. Woodbury, F. Ackerman, C.
Chiarelo, 〇, D. Gensler, J. J. Jaeger, J. Kingston, E. E. Sweetser, H. T. Thompson, and
W. Whistler, 157-189. Berkeley, Calif.: Berkeley Linguistics Society.
Saito, Mamoru.1985. Some asymmetries in Japanese and their theoretical implications.
Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Shibatani, Masayoshi.1977. Grammatical relations and surface cases. Language 53:789一
809.
Shlonsky, Ur.1991.Quantifiers as functional heads: A study of quantifier float in Hebrew.
Lingua 84:159-18〇.
Sportiche, Dominique.1988. A theory of floating quantifiers and its corollaries for con-
stituent structure. Linguistic Inquiry 19(3):425-449.
Takami, Ken-Ichi.1998. Nihongo-no suuryoosi yuuri-ni tuite [On quantifier float in
Japanese]. Gengo [Language] 1(3):86-95, 98-107.
Takami, Ken-Ichi. 2001.Nitieigo-no kinooteki koobun bunseki [A functional analysis of
English and Japanese constructions]. Tokyo: Hoo Syoboo.
Takano, Yasukuni.1984. The lexical nature of quantifiers in Japanese. Linguistic Analysis
14:289-311.
Terada, Michiko.199〇. Incorporation and argument structure in Japanese. Doctoral dis-
sertation, University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Ueda, Masanobu.1986. On quantifier float in Japanese. In UMOP n, ed. Nobuko Hasegawa
and Yoshihisa Kitagawa, 203-238. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA Publications.
Watanabe, Akira. 2006. Functional projections of nominals in Japanese: Syntax of classi-
fiers. Natural Language & Linguistics Theory 24:241-306.
Yamashita, Hideaki. 2001."FNQ-scrambling^ in Japanese. In Second report of mini-
malization of each module in generative grammar, 221-252. Nagoya, Japan: Nagoya
University.
Yatabe, Shuichi.199〇• Quantifier floating in Japanese and the 0-hierarchy. In Papers from
CLS 26, ed. Michael Ziolkowski, Manuela Noske, and Karen Deaton, 437-451- Chi-
cago: Chicago Linguistic Society.
CHAPTER 1 2
v-v COMPOUNDS
KUNIO NISHIYAMA
12.1	Introduction
Ever since Chomsky 1970, the place of morphology in linguistic theory has been a
matter of debate. Before that, transformation in the syntax was the only mechanism
for word formation, but Chomsky (1970) proposed the lexicalist hypothesis. De-
spite Chomsky's original intention to the contrary (see Marantz 1997), the article
inspired "lexicalism," an approach for word formation in the lexicon, and lex-
icalism was the main trend until the mid-1980s, both within Chomskian frame-
works and others (such as Lexical Functional Grammar [LFG]). Baker 1988 was a
turning point in this history. It resurrected the syntactic approach to word for-
mation in restricted and thus principled ways, and this move has been strengthened
with the advent of Distributed Morphology (Halle and Marantz 1993). Lexicalism,
however, is also still active, not only within LFG but also in works with assumptions
more or less along the lines of the main Chomskian framework (e.g., Li 2005,
Reinhart and Siloni 2005). Such coexistence of the two approaches has yielded
vigorous discussions on many constructions in various languages, such as noun
incorporation.
The agglutinating nature of Japanese complex predicates also has been given
a variety of treatments in the history of generative grammar. In fact, the history of
the treatment of Japanese predicates goes hand in hand with the development of
linguistic theory outlined above. Therefore, analyses of Japanese predicates have
provided key insights at each stage of the development of the theory. In the
earliest research, Kuroda (1965) and Kuno (1973) analyzed Japanese predicates in
syntactic (i.e., transformational) terms. This analysis was reformulated as In-
corporation (i.e., head movement) by Baker (1988). In the interim, there appeared
lexical accounts of Japanese predicates, initiated by Miyagawa (1980,1989), Farmer
V-V COMPOUNDS
321
(1980,1984), and Kitagawa (1986). Their assumptions regarding the clause struc-
ture of Japanese are by no means uniform, but what they have in common is that
they form Japanese predicates in the lexicon (i.e., presyntactically). This lexicalist
view of Japanese predicates is also put forward by Sells (1995). Kageyama
(1989,1993), however, proposes a modular view of morphology, where predi-
cates are formed in both the lexicon and syntax. Applications of Distributed
Morphology to Japanese predicates are found in Nishiyama 1998b,1999 and Volpe
2005.
In terms of constructions, the center of the lexicon-versus-syntax debates has
been the causative construction (see Harley, this volume). By contrast, this chapter
discusses V-V compounds as yet another construction that has inspired the debate
on the place of morphology in grammar.1 As I present in this chapter, V-V
compounds contain complexities (and thus challenges) not observed in other
constructions. Mainly owing to such complexities, many works on V-V com-
pounds characterize and analyze them in lexical (and also often semantic) terms, as
in Kageyama 1989,1993; Li 1993; Matsumoto 1996,1998; Ito and Sugioka 2002;
Gamerschlag 2002; Fukushima 2005; and Yumoto 2005. On the other hand, syn-
tactic approaches to V-V compounds include Nishiyama 1998a, 1998b; Hasegawa
1998, 2000; Furukawa 1999; and Saito 2001.This chapter reviews three lexical
analyses (Kageyama 1993, Li 1993, and Fukushima 2005) and one syntactic analy-
sis (Nishiyama 1998a). I show that each analysis has its own mechanisms and
constraints that are motivated by certain aspects of V-V compounds. However,
when faced with other aspects, the analyses often have difficulties, which may, in
the worst case, remain counterexamples or perhaps be solved by additional stip-
ulations.
The first issue of V-V compounds is the scope of the analysis and, if one aspect
is excluded, how that is justified. Next, we must consider what kinds of mecha-
nisms are utilized for the analysis and, crucially, whether the mechanisms are
independently motivated on principled grounds. The final issue is, when diffi-
culties arise, how they are solved一that is, whether the stipulations are again
independently motivated.
This chapter is organized as follows. Section 12.2 presents the core data. Section
12.3, the main section, first introduces preliminaries and then reviews the major
lexical and syntactic analyses. I then discuss some complex cases as illustrations of
the recalcitrant aspects of V-V compounds. Section 12.4 concludes the chapter by
eliciting theoretical implications from the discussion on V-V compounds.
12.2 Core Data
The following sentences represent core patterns of V-V compounds that I focus on
in this chapter:
322 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(i)a.	John-ga	kimono-o	ki-kuzusi-ta.
John-NOM	kimono-ACC	wear-make.out.of.shape-PAST
'John wore the kimono and made it out of shape?
b.	リohn-ga	kimono-o	ki-kuzure-ta.
John-NOM	kimono-ACC	wear-get.out.ofshape-PAST
'John wore the kimono and it got out of shape.J
c.	Kimono-ga	ki-kuzure-ta.
kimono-NOM wear-get.out.ofshape-PAST
'The kimono was worn and got out of shape?
d.	John-wa itumo kaban-o moti-aruk-u
John-Top always bag-ACC hold-walk-PRES
'John always carries the bag around?
Example (la) is a combination of transitive-transitive, and this pattern is very
common. When the second verb (henceforth V2) is intransitive, as in (ib), the
compound cannot take an object. But the combination in (ib) itself is not ruled
out. As shown in (ic), when the whole compound functions as an intransitive, the
sentence is grammatical. What is striking about (ic) is that the agent of the first
verb (henceforth VJ, which is transitive, is not realized in the sentence. Example
(id) is another kind of transitive-intransitive combination with a different pattern,
where both arguments of V】are realized.
Additionally, there are more complicated patterns in V-V compounds, as de-
scribed in detail by Tagashira (1978), Tagashira and Hoff (1986), Kageyama (1993),
Matsumoto (1996), Himeno (1999), and Yumoto (2005), among others. I have
chosen the patterns in (1)among diverse patterns because they are systematic, and
the options in accounting for them reveal the strength and weakness of competing
analyses, thus providing implications for linguistic theory. I briefly discuss other
patterns (some systematic, some less systematic) in later sections.
12.3	Issues and Controversies
This section presents issues and controversies surrounding V-V compounds. After
the preliminaries in section 12.3.1, sections 12.3.2 and 12.3.3 overview lexical and syn-
tactic approaches to the issues. In those two subsections, the examples discussed are
rather systematic. Some complex and unexpected cases are discussed in section 12.3.4.
12.3.1	Preliminaries
This subsection overviews issues that constitute the basis for considering several
analyses of V-V compounds一aspectual and psychological compounds and
headedness.
V-V COMPOUNDS
323
12.3.1.1	Aspectual and psychological compounds
Many researchers use the term "lexical" V-V compounds for the compounds in (1).
The term implies that there are other types of compounds一namely, "syntactic" V-
V compounds. Exact analyses aside, such a distinction is largely due to Kageyama's
(1989,1993) pioneering observation on the issue. Consider the following:
(2)	a. John-ga Bill-o	osi-taosi-ta.
John-NOM Bill-Acc	push-toppleTR-PAST
"John pushed and toppled Bill?
b.	John-ga hasiri-hazime-ta.
John-NOM run-begin-PAST
'John began to run?
c.	John-ga hon-o yomi-aki-ta.
John-NOM book-ACC read-get.bored-PAST
'John got bored of reading a book?
Example (2a) is a "lexical" compound as in (1), and (2b,c) are what Kageyama
claims to be "syntactic" compounds. Note that V2 is either aspectual or psycho-
logical in (2b,c), and it is plausible that these examples involve a biclausal structure,
just like the English counterparts John began [PRO to run] and John got bored of
[PRO reading a book]. But the same structure does not seem to hold in (2a).
Kageyama notes some differences between (2a) and (2b,c) to confirm such an
intuition. For example, soo su- ' so do' can substitute V】in (2b) but not in (2a):
(3)	a. John-ga hasiri-hazime-te, Bill-mo [soo si]-hazime-ta.
John-NOM run-begin-and Bill-also so do-begin-PAST
'John began to run and Bill began to do so, too?
b.	*Mary-ga	Susan-o	osi-taosi-te,	John-mo Bill-o
Mary-NOM Susan-Acc push-topple-and John-also Bill-Acc
[soo si]-taosi-ta.
so do-topple-PAST
'Mary toppled Susan by pushing her, and John toppled Bill by doing so,
too?
Another difference comes from honorification:
(4)	a. o-hasiri-ni nari-hazimeru b. o-hasiri-hazime-ni naru
run.HON-begin	[run-begin] .hon
c.	*o-osi-ni nari-taosu	d. o-osi-taosi-ni naru
push.HON-topple	[push-topple] .hon
Honorification is a process of surrounding the verb with 〇- and -ni naru,
deriving o-V-ni naru. Examples (4a,b) show that with aspectual compounds, it
is possible to honorify only VT or the whole compound. In (4c,d), however,
one cannot honorify only V】and the honorification must be on the whole com-
pound.
324 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Based on these and other differences, Kageyama (1989,1993) proposes
that, whereas the compounds in (2b,c) are formed in the syntax, that in (2a) is
formed in the lexicon. Kageyama's analysis for "syntactic" V-V compounds seems
to be widely accepted.2 It is the analysis of "lexical" V-V compounds——that is,
whether they are formed in the lexicon or in the syntax—that distinguishes between
researchers. In the remainder of this chapter, I do not discuss aspectual and psy-
chological compounds. See Nishiyama 1998a and Saito 2001 for ways to account for
the contrast in (3) and (4) on the assumption that both types of compounds are
formed in the syntax. I also refrain from using the terminology "lexical" com-
pounds, for it presupposes the analysis.
12.3.1.2	Headedness
There is a general agreement among researchers that V2 is the head in V-V com-
pounds in Japanese, which is initially motivated by the universality of right-
headedness in morphology (see Williams 1981a). Additional evidence comes from
the case frame (see Kageyama 1993 and Nishiyama 1998a):
(5)	John-ga	Mary-ni/*o	oi-tui-ta.
John-NOM	Mary-DAT/Acc	chase-attach-PAST
"John chased and attached to (i.e., caught up with) Mary?
By itself, oi- 'chase' takes an accusative object, and tui- 'attach' a dative object.
When they combine to form a compound, the object takes a dative marker, which
shows the precedence of V2 in the case frame. Which part is the head is an im-
portant issue in the analysis ofV-V compounds. In addition to case, transitivity and
argument realization of the compound are heavily influenced by those of the head.
Although there are cases where the right-headedness ofV-V compounds becomes
obscure (e.g., dvandva (28) and noncompositional cases (30), discussed briefly
later), this feature seems to be quite persistent in V-V compounds and is assumed
by most researchers.
Li (1993) is exceptional among researchers regarding the position of the head.
He assumes that in Japanese V-V compounds, both V、and V2 are heads,3 arguing
that this assumption derives several differences between V-V compounds in Jap-
anese and V-V compounds in Chinese. I return to Li's analysis shortly.
12.3.2	Lexical Approaches
This subsection reviews three lexical accounts: Kageyama 1993, Li 1993, and Fu-
kushima 2005. Because the first two share common features, they are discussed
together. Although Matsumoto 1996 is another comprehensive work on V-V
compounds in lexical terms (i.e., within the LFG framework), it is not discussed
here because, although rich in data, the analysis focuses on semantic character-
izations ofV-V compounds with constraints whose status is not clear in Universal
V-V COMPOUNDS
3芍
Grammar (UG). See Fukushima 2005 for a review of Matsumoto 1996 and its
limitations.
12.3.2.1	Kageyama 1993 and Li 1993
Kageyama 1993 and Li 1993 propose aargument structure composition” as a lexical
process4 to produce the compound as follows:
(6)	a. John-ga Bill-o	osi-taosi-ta.	—(2a)
John-NOM Bill-Acc push-toppleTR-PAST
"John pushed and toppled Bill.'
b.	identified
'push' (0J (agent), 02 (theme)) + 'topple' (0】(agent), 02 (theme))
identified
=> 'push-topple' (0j (agent), 02 (theme))
This is an extension of Grimshaw's (1990) theory of Argument Structure. In this
process of composition, the more prominent 0-roles of the two verbs are identified,
as well as the less prominent 0-roles. The result is one complex verb with two 0-
roles. Thus, as far as the syntax is concerned, there is no difference between
compounds and ordinary simplex verbs.
Let us next see the combination of transitive-intransitive ((ib,c) are repeated
here).
(1)b. *John-ga kimono-o ki-kuzure-ta.
John-NOM kimono-ACC wear-get.out.of.shape-PAST
'John wore the kimono and it got out of shape.'
c.	Kimono-ga ki-kuzure-ta.
kimono-NOM wear-get.out.of.shape-PAST
'The kimono was worn and got out of shape.'
Kageyama (1993) rules out (ib) by a constraint that prohibits a combination of a
transitive and an unaccusative. To rule in (ic), Kageyama assumes that it is derived
by back-formation from the transitive-transitive counterpart in (1a). That is, (ic) is
not derived by compounding a transitive and an unaccusative directly but by
detransitivizing the transitive-transitive counterpart.
However, there are problems with back-formation. Consider this example:
(7)	Kouzyou-ga osui-o	tare-nagas-u.
factory-NOM polluted.water-ACC	dripINTR-pourTR-PRES
'The factory drains polluted water.'	(Hasegawa 1998)
Example (7) involves a combination of unaccusative-transitive. Therefore, Ka-
geyama (1993) would derive it by back-formation. However, as pointed out by
326 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Hasegawa (1998), (7) cannot be derived by back-formation, for there is no "original”
combination of transitive-transitive or unaccusative-unaccusative for the com-
pound in (7); ^tare-nagare(ru) <dripINTR-pourINTR, and ^tarasi-nagas(u) 'dripTR-
pourm'do not exist. The same problem is also pointed out by Matsumoto (1996:230).
Li (1993) rules out (ib) by a constraint that says that the most prominent
argument of a head (both V】and V2 for Japanese V-V compounds in his analysis)
must remain the most prominent in the compound as well. Because the most
prominent argument of the unaccusative V2 (head) in (ib), which is the theme
(trivially), is assigned to the object of the compound, (ib) violates this constraint.
In the transitive-transitive pair as in (1a), in contrast, the most prominent argu-
ment ofV2, the agent, is assigned to the subject of the compound, thus obeying this
constraint. However, Li does not discuss how (ic) can be ruled in. As for the
headedness, the reason why Li assumes that V】is a head in Japanese V-V com-
pounds is the following:
(8)	*John-ga Mary-o odori-aki-ta.
John-NOM Mary-Acc dance-bored-PAST
"Mary danced and John got bored?	(Li 1993:(12))
On the assumption that V】is a head in Japanese V-V compounds, Li rules out (8)
by the prominence constraint, because the most prominent argument of V】is
assigned to the object of the sentence.
We saw in section 12.2 that there is another pattern with the combination of
transitive-intransitive. I repeat example (id) as (9a) with an additional one:
(9)	a.	John-wa	itumo	kaban-o	moti-aruk-u.	=(id)
John-Top	always	bag-ACC	hold-walk-PRES
"John always carries the bag around/
b.	John-ga	kodomo-o	ture-sat-ta.
John-NOM	child-ACC	take-leave-past
"John took the child away.'
One special character of (9) is that the object of the compound is originally the
object of only Vn given that V2 is intransitive and does not take an object. In other
words, there is no object sharing一a requirement often observed in serial verb
constructions (see Baker 1989).
According to Kageyama (1993), the compounds in (9a) are formed as
follows:
(10)	Vi <agent, theme> + V2 <agent> => V-V <agent, theme>
Here, the agent roles of both VT and V2 are identified, and are inherited by the entire
compound. As for the theme, although argument inheritance usually takes place
from the head V2, V2 in (10) contains no theme. Therefore, the theme argument
of Vi can be inherited by the compound. However, the compound in (9b) cannot be
formed by argument structure composition. This is because, i£ as assumed
V-V COMPOUNDS 327
by Kageyama, V2 sat- ((sar-1) leave' is an unaccusative and its sole argument is
the theme, argument structure composition would wrongly compose it with the
theme argument of V\ (kodomo 'child'). Given that the themes of V\ and V2 are
realized as distinct arguments, obviously no argument structure composition
should be happening. Another problem is that, according to Kageyama's constraint
that prohibits a combination of a transitive and an unaccusative, compounding in
(9b) should not be possible. Kageyama stipulates that the compound in (9b) is
formed not in Argument Structure but in Lexical Conceptual Structure. However,
as pointed out by Nishiyama (1998a), there seems to be no principled way to predict
whether a compound is formed in Argument Structure, by back-formation, or in
Lexical Conceptual Structure.
12.3.2.2 Fukushima 2005
Fukushima (2005) offers yet another lexical account for V-V compounds. His
analysis is like Kageyama's and Li's in that the locus of compounding is Argument
Structure located in the lexicon. Unlike Kageyama and Li, however, Fukushima
utilizes the notion '"matching" for argument sharing, because he adopts Dowty's
(1991)proposal to regard thematic roles as ""prototypes."5 But the actual outputs
of argument matching are not substantially different from those of 0-identification
outlined in the last subsection, and I do not review how Fukushima forms
transitive-transitive pairs. Let us see instead how Fukushima deals with transitive-
intransitive pairs:
(11)	a.りohn-ga	kimono-o	ki-kuzure-ta.	—(ib)
John-NOM	kimono-ACC	wear-get.out.of.shape-PAST
"John wore the kimono and it got out of shape.'
b.	Kimono-ga	ki-kuzure-ta.	—(ic)
kimono-NOM	wear-get.out.ofshape-PAST
"The kimono was worn and got out of shape.'
c.	John-ga	kodomo-o	ture-sat-ta.	— (9b)
John-NOM	take-leave-PAST
child-ACC
"John took the child away.'
The crucial operations and constraints that Fukushima postulates can be sum-
marized as follows:
(12)	a. Take the least oblique (i.e., most prominent) argument of each verb. If
those arguments do not match, dismiss the argument of the nonhead and
move to the next least oblique argument of the nonhead.
b.	If a match is found, move to the next arguments of the head and nonhead
and find a match.
c.	After the first match is found, do not dismiss any more arguments from
the nonhead.
328 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
The situation in (lib) is schematized as follows:
(13)	no matching
V] <x, y> + V2 <y> => V-V V(ヨx), y>
1 I I
dismissed matching
Here, x represents the proto-agent, and y the proto-patient. The least oblique
arguments一namely, x of V】and y ofV2一do not match. Thus, by (12a) the former
is dismissed. The dismissed argument cannot be realized syntactically, and this
rules out (11a). However, it is existentially quantified, as represented in the output
in (13), and I will return to this shortly. Also by (12a), the next search should be in
the nonhead (VJ, and we find a match between the two y's. The situation in (11c) is
as follows:
(14)	matching
V] <x, y> + V2 <x> V-V <x, y>
not dismissed
Here, the two x's match,6 and by (12c), y in Nゝ is not dismissed and is realized
syntactically, as kodomo-o in (11c).
The evaluation of Fukushima's analysis centers on the status, characteriza-
tion, and predictions of (12). First, the status of (12) in UG is not clear and raises
many questions. Why does dismissal happen in (13) but not (14)? Just like x in (13)
fails to match with the argument in V2, so does y in (14). Given that such a
mechanism is not proposed in other languages or in other constructions in Jap-
anese, it is desirable that (12) is derived from other independently motivated
principles.
Second, the characterization of the dismissed argument needs more elab-
oration. Dismissal here is different from the "suppression" that happens to the
agent in passivization, for (11b) does not license a 况-phrase (’皈-phrase'). In this
sense, dismissal of an argument is a novel operation in linguistic theory. This
aspect aside, existential quantification of the dismissed argument seems empirically
controversial. As discussed in the next subsection, Nishiyama (1998a) claims
that the agent is completely missing in (11b). This is motivated by the following
contrast:
(15)	a. Wazato kimono-ga ki-kuzus-are-ta.
deliberately kimono-NOM wear-make.out.of.shape-PASS-PAST
'The kimono was deliberately worn and made out of shape?
b. *Wazato kimono-ga ki-kuzure-ta.
deliberately kimono-NOM wear-get.out.of.shape-PAST
v-v COMPOUNDS
329
Example (15a) is a passive of the transitive-transitive pair, and it licenses the
agent-oriented adverb wazato "deliberately.,7 Example (15b) uses the intransi-
tive (unaccusative) counterpart of the transitive V2 in (15a), and it cannot license
wazato. According to Nishiyama, this is because the compound ki-kuzure- has no
agent. Fukushima objects to this conclusion, citing the following examples:
(16)	a. Dou site-mo kimono-ga ki-kuzure-ta.
how do-even kimono-NOM wear-get.out.ofshape-PAST
'The kimono lost its original shape due to (someone's) wearing it in
whatever the manner the wearer tried wearing it.'
b. Ukkari kimono-ga ki-kuzure-ta.
unwittingly kimono-NOM wear-get.out.of.shape-PAST
"(Due to someone's) unwittingly wearing (it), the kimono lost its
original shape.' (adapted from Fukushima 2005)
In the sentences in (16), apparently an agent-oriented adverb is licensed by
ki-kuzure-. Based on this, Fukushima claims that the agent is present semantically,
if not syntactically, in the compound.
However, it is not straightforward what to do with (16). As pointed out by a
referee for Fukushima 2005, doo site-mo can be analyzed as a full sentence involving
a light verb su- "do':
(17)	[s pro [Vp	doo site]-mo]
how do even
"No matter how one does ...'
Then (16a) is analogous to the following example and is irrelevant to the issue of
whether the compound involves the agent:
(18)	John-ga osi-tara door-ga ai-ta.
lohn-NOM push-when door-NOM open-PAST
"When John pushed (it), the door opened.'
In (18), there is no thematic relation between "John' and "open,' and the agentive
reading in the second sentence, if it ever exists, is implied contextually from the
first sentence. Example (16b) is cited by Fukushima to circumvent such a potential
problem of (16a). But ukkari can also be analyzed in the same way as doo site-mo, for it
can optionally take the light verb, as in ukkari-site. Apparently the existence and
treatment of the alleged agent in combinations like (11b) needs further research.
As for the empirical side, there is at least one combination for which Fu-
kushima's prediction is incorrect or unclear at best. Before discussing this example,
let us first consider the following analysis by Fukushima:
(19)	a. (Taroo-no) hoho-ga	naki-nure-ta	(Fukushima 2005:(2")
Taroo-GEN cheek-NOM cry-get.wet-PAST
"(Taroo's) cheeks got wet due to (his) crying.'
33〇 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
b. no matching
V、<x> + V2 <y> n V-V <(3x), y>	:
dismissed
Example (19a) is analyzed as in (19b). Given that x in V, and y in V2 do not match,
the former is dismissed.
Now consider the following example ((7) is repeated here), for which Fu-
kushima does not give an analysis:
(7) Kouzyou-ga osui-o	tare-nagas-u.
factory-NOM polluted.water-ACC dripINTR-pourTR-PRES
"The factory drains polluted water/
The problem here is that the prediction based on (12) is not borne out:
(20)	a. Prediction based on (12a)
no matching
V] <y> + V2 <x, y> V-V <x, (3?y)?>	|
i
dismissed
b. Actual situation
matching
V] <y> + V2 <x, y> => V-V <x, y>
not dismissed
According to (12a), because y of V】and x of V2 do not match, the former should
be dismissed, as in (20a), contrary to fact. Note that in (7), y in V】is realized as osui-
〇 "polluted water'. Note also that it cannot be the case that at least one argument of a
verb must survive, for the sole argument of V】is dismissed in (19b). The problem
stems from the fact that (12a) stipulates that the next move should be in the
nonhead, implying that when the nonhead is intransitive, the next move is im-
possible. For the matching between the two y's to happen as in (20b), the next move
must be in the head. But if (12a) is modified to the effect that the next move can be
in either the head or the nonhead, we would have a serious indeterminacy unless
some principle is found that determines in which domain the next move should
occur. Additionally, the fate of the nonmatching argument of the nonhead must be
stipulated so that it is dismissed when the next move is in the nonhead (as in (11b)
V-V COMPOUNDS
331
and (13)) or there is no second move (as in (19)) but survives when the next move is
in the head (as in (7) and (20b)).
Other types of compounds discussed by Fukushima (2005) include mirror
image compounds and compounds with flexible argument realization. I return to
them in section 12.3.4.
12.3.3	Syntactic Account: Nishiyama 1998a
In contrast to the lexical approaches reviewed so far, Nishiyama (1998a) proposes a
syntactic account of V-V compounds. The initial motivation for this is the par-
allelism between V-V compounds and serial verb constructions widely known
cross-linguistically:
(21)	a. Femi ti Akin subu.
push Akin fall
'Femi pushed Akin down?	(Yoruba; Baker 1989)
b. m-a da nu du.
I-fut cook thing eat
‘I will cook something and eat it.'	(Ewe; Collins 1997)
Extending the analysis of serial verb constructions by Collins (1997) to
V-V- compounds in Japanese, Nishiyama proposes that (22a) is analyzed as in
(22b).
(22)	a. John-ga Bill-o	osi-taosi-ta	—(2a)/(6a)
John-NOM Bill-Acc push-toppleTR-PAST
'John pushed and toppled Bill.'
b.
NP v'
I
John VP v
NP V
I
Lilli VP V
I
NP V taos 'topple5
PROi osi 'push'
Each verb assigns only the internal role (theme), and the external role (agent) is
assigned by another head v. (Nishiyama 1998a uses the label TrP for vP.) Argument
sharing of the internal role is implemented by control,9 and compounding is due to
head movement.
332 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
The combination of transitive-intransitive (unaccusative)10 is analyzed as
follows ((ib,c) are repeated here):
(1)b.りohn-ga kimono-o ki-kuzure-ta.
John-NOM kimono-ACC wear-get.out.ofshape-PAST
"John wore the kimono and it got out of shape.'
c. Kimono-ga ki-kuzure-ta.
kimono-NOM wear-get.out.of.shape-PAST
'The kimono was worn and got out of shape?
(23)	ブJ
VP v (inactive)
XX
NP V'
I	XX
kimonoj VP	V2
XX	I
NP Vi kuzure 'get out of shape*
PROi ki 'wear,
Here, v is inactive and does not introduce the external argument. There is a
selectional relation between v and VP: inactive v selects VP headed by an
unaccusative. (In (22b), in contrast, active v selects transitive VP.) The surface
subject is the underlying object of the unaccusative V2 and is generated in the
specifier of the matrix VP. Although V】is transitive, by hypothesis there is no
external argument in the embedded VP. Nishiyama (1998a) takes (ic) as strong
evidence that the external roles are not assigned by the verb but by v. Note that the
selectional relation holds only one way. Thus, although active v requires a transitive
verb, a transitive verb does not require active v. Given that (23) does not contain
active v, there is no way to license an external argument, ruling out (ib).
The example in (19a), repeated here, would be given a similar account.
(19) a. (Taroo-no) hoho-ga naki-nure-ta.
Taroo-GEN cheek-NOM cry-get.wet-PAST
'(Taroo's) cheeks got wet due to (his) crying?
The structure is like (23), except that embedded VP has no object. Because naki-
'cry' does not contain the agent as its argument, it can survive without the agent
when it is selected by a verb, as in (23).
As a mirror image of the transitive-unaccusative combinations, there are also
combinations of unaccusative-transitive. I provided one example in (7). The fol-
lowing is another example of such a combination:
(24)	John-ga soup-o	huki-kobosi-ta.	(Nishiyama 19982:(432))
John-NOM soup-ACC boil.overINTR-spillTR-PAST
'The soup boiled over and John spilled it.'
V-V COMPOUNDS
333
In the analysis of Nishiyama 1998a, (24) has a structure that is virtually identical
to the transitive-transitive combination as in (22b). In this system, although active
v selects transitive VP as V2, there is no requirement that a transitive V2 se-
lect transitive VP as V1? and a transitive V2 can freely select unaccusative VP as Vr
Japanese V-V compounds can involve ditransitive verbs, exemplified as follows:
(25)	a.	John-ga	Mary-ni	hon-o	nage-watasi-ta.
John-NOM	Mary-DAT	book-ACC	throw-pass-PAST
'John threw a book and passed it to Mary?
b.	John-ga	hon-o	Mary-ni	yuzuri-watasi-ta.
John-NOM	book-ACC	Mary-DAT	yield-pass-PAST
'John handed over the book to Mary by yielding it to her.'
((25b) adapted from Fukushima 2005)
Example (25a) contains a transitive verb as V、and a ditransitive as V2. In (25b),
both verbs are ditransitives. Such combinations can be treated rather straightfor-
wardly by lexical approaches. However, Nishiyama's control analysis of argument
sharing requires a specific treatment of ditransitives among several choices. For this
reason, I discuss ditransitive compounds in this subsection.
As pointed out by Fukushima (2005), if both the goal and theme are internal
arguments of ditransitive verbs and two controls are involved, we cannot obtain a
proper interpretation.
(26)	[goal theme [PRO PRO V] V]
Given that the closest c-commanding argument is the controller, the struc-
ture in (26) predicts that the theme is the controller for both PROs, which yields a
wrong interpretation. One might circumvent the problem by adopting the
movement analysis of control (see note 9). In this analysis, the PROs in (26)
are traces, and our task is to guarantee the correct landing site for each argument.
Another way out is as follows:
(27)
vP
NP
I
John ApplP v
np APPr
Mary VP
Appl
NP
V
bookj VP
V
NP
V watas 'pass'
PROi
yuzuri 'yield'
334 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Example (27) assumes that the goal is introduced by an independent head Appl
(for applicative) (see Marantz 1993 and Pylkkanen 2002, among others). In this
approach, there is a one-to-one relation between an argument and a head, and even
the ditransitive verb has only the theme as its core (original) argument. Just like the
agent is not included in the argument structure of the verb, the goal is not, either.11
Another potential challenge for Nishiyama's analysis is a dvandva:
(28) a. John-ga naki-saken-da.
John-NOM cry-scream-PAST
'John cried and screamed.'
b. [agent [VP VJ [vp V2] v]
Dvandva V-V compounds typically consist of two unergatives. They can be ana-
lyzed as involving a coordinate VP structure as in (28b).12
Let us next consider (9a), repeated here.
(9) a. John-wa itumo kaban-o moti-aruk-u.
John-Top always bag-ACC hold-walk-PRES
"John always carries the bag around.'
=(ld)
In this example, there is no object sharing, and the object of V\ is overtly realized.
Given that this overt object requires Case, by Burzio's Generalization there is an
external argument in the embedded clause. Nishiyama (1998a) stipulates that
motion verbs are specified to c-select vP as follows:
(29)
vP
NP
I ,
Johni VP
v (active)
vP	V
I
NP	v' aruk 'walk*
I ,
PROi VP
v (active)
NP
bag
V
I
moti 'hold'
Here, John is the agent introduced by active v. It controls PRO, which is the
external argument of the embedded clause. This analysis can basically be extended
to ture-sar- 'take-leave' in (9b). Given that 'leave' is a motion verb, it takes vP, as in
(29). If aruk- 'walk' and sar- 'leave' belong to the same verb class, the same structure
as in (29) holds for ture-sar- 'take-leave'. If, however, sar- is an unaccusative distinct
from aruk- 'walk', there is a slight difference. Unlike the structure for (9a) in (29))
where the subject is the agent introduced by active v, the subject is the underlying
object of the unaccusative V2.
V-V COMPOUNDS 335
As we have seen in (22b) and (23), VP-complementation is crucial for other
types of combination for Nishiyama's analysis. Therefore, the selection of vP as in
(29)	should be restricted somehow. For Nishiyama, this is obtained by stipulating
that only motion verbs c-select vP. Fukushima (2005:599) objects to this, claiming
that taore- 'fall' is as good a "motion" verb as sar- 'leave' but still cannot serve as V2
when V] is transitive. This is illustrated by the following:
(30)	a.	John-ga	Bill-o	osi-taosi-ta.	—(2a)/(6a)/(22a)
John-NOM	Bill-Acc	push-toppleTR-PAST
'John pushed and toppled Bill.'
b.りohn-ga	Mary-o	osi-taore-ta.
John-NOM	Mary-Acc	push-fall-PAST
'John pushed Mary and he fell.'
The compound in (30b) is transitive-unaccusative, and the sentence is un-
grammatical. The translation is meant to parallel the situation in (29). (Example
(30a) is cited for comparison.) Although one can say that including the no-
tion "change of location" into the definition of motion verbs excludes taore- 'fall'
as a motion verb, the proper treatment of the pattern in (9) awaits further
research.
12.3.4	Complex and Unexpected Cases
So far, we have seen cases where the combination of verbs and argument reali-
zations are more or less straightforward. Although each analysis reviewed
here resorts to its own specific mechanisms and stipulations, the data discussed
have been rather "systematic," and it seems somehow that the pattern should be
generated by grammar (either the syntax or the lexicon). This section is con-
cerned with more recalcitrant cases. In section 12.3.4.1, idiosyncratic character-
istics in compounding (i.e., noncompositionality and restriction in nominaliza-
tion) are discussed. It is generally believed that idiosyncrasies are the hallmarks of
the lexicon, so this subsection focuses on how syntactic approaches to mor-
phology can handle idiosyncrasies. In particular, I develop possible ways to treat
the idiosyncrasies of V-V compounds syntactically within principles of Dis-
tributed Morphology (Halle and Marantz 1993), building on Volpe 2005 and Arad
2003. In sections 12.3.4.2 and 12.3.4.3, accidental gaps and some peculiar combi-
nations are discussed.
12.3.4.1	Idiosyncrasies and Distributed Morphology
12.3.4.1.1	Noncompositionality
The following examples illustrate compounds whose meanings are not composi-
tional:
336 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(31)	a. oti-tuk(u)	fall-attachINTR	"get calm,
b.	sikari-tuker(u) scold-attachTR	"scold harshly>
c.	tori-simar(u) take-tightenINTR "crack down on'
In (31a), the original meaning of each verb is bleached and the compound as
a whole assumes a new meaning. In (31b), from Matsumoto 1996, although V,
sikar- "scold' retains its original meaning, the semantic contribution ofV2 seems to
be limited to modification.13 Such a drift proceeds further in (31c) (from Fu-
kushima 2005), which has a peculiar thematic relation in addition to the new
meaning. Thus, whereas V2 is originally intransitive (unaccusative), the whole
compound is transitive, in apparent violation of right-headedness in V-V
compounds.
For Fukushima (2005), noncompositional compounds as in (31) are outside
the scope of his analysis to generate systematic patterns in V-V compounds in the
lexicon. But if one adopts the view that the syntax always predicts regularity and
that the lexicon is a kind of ""trash box" that deals with all kinds of idiosyncrasies,
the only conclusion drawn from (31) is that V-V compounds are generated in the
lexicon. But nowadays not every researcher takes such a view of the lexicon. In fact,
Distributed Morphology abandons the lexicon altogether as a locus of word for-
mation. Below I discuss how and to what extent the idiosyncrasies in (31) can be
treated in Distributed Morphology.
Volpe (2005) proposes an analysis of AronofFs (1976) pioneering generative
insights into derivational morphology within the principles of Distributed Mor-
phology outlined by Marantz (1997) (see also Arad 2003, Embick 2004, and in
particular Embick and Marantz 2008). According to Marantz, roots are categori-
ally neutral and obtain categorial status by being selected by a functional head such as
v, 〃,or a. Volpe adopts this and proposes an account of the following adjectival
doublets:
(32)	a. comparable b. comparable
c. separatable d. separable
As noted by Aronoff (1976), comparable and separatable are transparent to the
meanings of the corresponding verbs compare and separate, but comparable and
separable bear some additional meanings. Thus, comparable is "capable of being
compared,' whereas comparable is the same as "equivalent.' Volpe proposes that
this is accounted for as follows:14
(33) a. comparable
b. comparable
a compare
-able
v	寸compar-
a Ncompar-
-able
In (33a), comparable contains the functional head レ,which explains why it is like
the verb compare in terms of meaning and stress. In (33b), in contrast, there is no
V-V COMPOUNDS
337
v node, which is why comparable bears a particular meaning. According to Volpe,
roots are uninterpretable by themselves, and their meanings are fixed when they are
selected by a functional head. In the case of (33a), the meaning of ^Jcompar- is fixed
when it is selected by v. Because this fixed meaning remains unchanged, comparable
carries the meaning of the verb compare throughout the derivation. The same
accounts hold fbr the doublets in (32c,d). Here, the root is ^Jsepar-, and -at- is an
overt realization of v.
Now, let us apply this concept of the so-called derivation to the idiosyncrasies
in V-V compounds in (30). Example (30a) is a straightforward case. With the
structure [vP [yp Vゝ V2] v], the meaning is fixed only after the merge of v. Thus,
regardless of the original meanings of the verbs, the new compound can bear a new
meaning. However, nothing prevents the newly produced compounds from having
compositional meanings, as we have been observing in regular cases.
Example (30b) is a little less straightforward, for the semantic drift is selective
and only the meaning of V】is inherited by the compound. But the situation may
well be the same as in (30a). The hard case is (30c). If we assume that, in addition
to meanings, the transitivity of each verb is flexible until v merges, we would lose
the account for compositional compounds. For example, (30c) is exactly parallel
with the ungrammatical (ib) in terms of transitivity. Thus, even if the exact
semantics is unspecified until v is merged, syntactic principles (transitivity se-
lection, in this case) must be at work within vP. This means that in (30c),
although V2 looks like an unaccusative, it is actually behaving like a transitive,
making the compound also a transitive. In this analysis, (30c) has no anomaly at
least in transitivity.
In short, although semantic noncompositionality can be accommodated into
the syntactic approaches to V-V compounds, noncompositionality of other kinds,
such as transitivity, must be handled with some kind of stipulations.
12.3.4.1.2	Nominalization
Fukushima (2005) notes an interesting property of V-V compounds from the
perspective of derivational morphology: there are combinations that can appear
only as nominalized forms:
(34)	a. tati-gui	b. osi-uri
stand-eat	push-sell
'eating while standing'	"selling things aggressively'
Although each morpheme can be a verb by itself, the above compounds lack verbal
counterparts; ^tati-gu(u) and ^osi-ur(u) do not exist. Fukushima claims that this is
a problem for a syntactic approach to V-V compounds, for there are no "original"
verbal counterparts for (34). But the notion of categories outlined in section
12.3.4.1.1	provides a way to handle (34) in syntactic terms. In fact, according to the
root-as-categorially-neutral view, there is no process of "nominalization" in the
lexicon,15 and there is no need for the so-called derived nominals to be verbs
ZZ8 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
originally. Let me elaborate on this by considering zero-related noun-verb pairs in
English. Kiparsky (1982) notes the following contrast:
(35)	a. He hammered the nail with a rock.
b. *She taped the picture to the wall with pushpins.
Whereas the verb hammer licenses an adjunct distinct from its nominal counter-'
part, the verb tape does not. Arad (2003) analyzes this contrast as follows:
(36)	a. v	b. n
v	寸hammer	n 寸hammer
(37)	a. v	b. n
ハ へ
v n	n Ntape
XX
n Ntape
In (36a), the verb hammer does not contain the noun hammer, and this licenses a
distinct adjunct (35a). In contrast, the verb tape contains the noun tape, as in (37a).
Because the functional head n fixes the meaning of the root, the verb tape entails the
existence of the noun tape. Thus, it cannot have a distinct adjunct, as shown by (35b).
The situation of nominal-only compounds in (34) is treated in a similar way.
According to the above analysis, ^/hammer can be selected either by v or n, but
yjtape is specified so that it is selected only by n. In the same way, tati-gu(w)- 'eat-
stand' is selected only by n. Given that V2 ku(w)- 'eat' by itself can be selected by v
([g] is due to rendaku [sequential voicing]), the analysis implies that the categorial
selectional property is determined after compounding at the point of the merger of
the functional head.16 The verbal-only compounds noted by Fukushima (2005:574)
can be given a similar account.
There are complications regarding nominal-only compounds, however. Note
first that (34b) contains some idiomatic meaning; the first root osi- 'push is used
metaphorically, as in 'pushy.' Consider also the following:
(38)	a. naguri-gaki b. oki-biki
beat-write	put-pull
"disorderly writing'	"stealing (a bag)'
These examples are nominal-only. Example (38a) is related to a verbal compound
kaki-nagur(u) "write-beat' "write in an disorderly manner.' This verbal counterpart
is discussed by Fukushima (2005) as a case where one of the two verbs has lost its
original meaning, but note that the order of the roots is reversed in the nominal
counterpart in (38a). In (38b), oki-biki "put-puli' refers to stealing a thing (typically
a bag) that someone has put somewhere in a public place. Semantically, the alleged
agents of the first root (the victim) and the second root (the thief) are different.
Although this is a peculiar situation, it is compatible with the hypothesis of in-
V-V COMPOUNDS
339
troducing the agent by v. If oki-biki cannot be selected by v, there is no agent, and
there is no need for the alleged agents of the two roots to be identical. The alleged
agents (the victim and thief) are only contextually implicated.
12.3.4.2 Accidental gaps
Note that there are accidental gaps in V-V compounds:17
(39) a.	Ziroo-ga	Hanako-o	maneki-ire-ta.
	Ziroo-NOM	Hanako-Acc	beckon-put.in-PAST
	'Ziroo had Hanako come		in by beckoning her.'
b.	*Ziroo-ga	Hanako-o	maneki-dasi-ta.
	Ziroo-NOM	Hanako-Acc	beckon-put.out-PAST
c.	*John-ga	sushi-o	tukuri-tabe-ta.
	John-NOM	sushi-acc	make-eat-PAST
	'John cooked sushi and ate it.'		
d.	*Taroo-ga	sirase-o	kiki-kaet-ta.
	Taroo-NOM	news-ACC	hear-return-PAST
'Taroo returned due to hearing the news?
Given that (39a) is possible, there seems to be no principled account for the
absence of the compound in (39b). The absence of the compound in (39c) is also
noteworthy, for 'cook' and 'eat' is a common combination in serial verb con-
structions (cf. (21b)). Regarding examples such as(39d), Matsumoto (1996,1998)
offers a semantic constraint on causal V-V compounds. Put simply, it says that the
event denoted by V2 cannot be intended when it is caused by the event denoted by
Vj. This constraint might also rule out (39b,c), given that the event denoted by V2 is
intended. However, there is a caveat. Because (39a) is a minimal pair with (39b) but
is still grammatical, the constraint should not apply to (39a,b). The difference is
that, whereas (39a,b) involve a means/manner relation between the two events,
(39d) involves a causal relation. The distinction is reflected in the translations by
Fukushima, who endorses this constraint. If one adopts this constraint, the con-
sequence is that although (39b) is really an accidental gap, at least the ungram-
maticality of (39c,d) has semantic basis.
However, the distinction between means/manner and causal compounds,
which is crucial for the constraint, is often obscure. Consider osi-taos- 'push-
toppleTR' (see (2a), (6a), (22a)), for example. Because the event denoted by V2 is
intended but the compound is grammatical, it must be a means/manner com-
pound such as 'to topple by pushing.' But it seems equally possible to interpret it as
involving a causal relation, for pushing is obviously the cause of the patient being
toppled. Unless there is a clear criterion to sort out between means/manner and
cause, the constraint does not seem to have much substance and(39b~d) are all
considered accidental gaps. See Fukushima 2005 for relevant discussion on pro-
ductivity in V-V compounds, utilizing Bauer's (2001)definition of morphological
productivity.
34〇 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
12.3.4.3 Peculiar combinations
This subsection discusses two types of compounds that are analyzed in detail by
Fukushima (2005). Such compounds are peculiar in that, although they are
compositional semantically, they show noncanonical ways of argument realization.
A first type is mirror-image compounds:
(40)	Taroo-ga hon-o Hanako-kara yuzuri-uke-ta.
Taroo-NOM book-ACC Hanako-from yield-receive-PAST
'Taroo received a book from Hanako who yielded it to him?
This type is strange because, using the conventional labels for 0-roles, the compo-
sition is: (agent, goal, theme) + (agent, source, theme) => (agent, source, theme).
That is, despite semantic incompatibility, the source of Vゝ and the goal of V2 are
matched, producing the source in the output. Fukushima's solution is that in this
case, the argument structure of Vゝ is modified as (agent, source, theme) so as to
match that ofV2. Fukushima acknowledges that the solution overgenerates, but he
justifies it by observing that the pattern is "more widespread than one might
imagine" (Fukushima 2005:577).
Within the syntactic approach, we can postulate the same structure for
canonical ditransitive compounds, as in (27), for the compound in (40). In this
analysis, the applicative head introduces a location-related argument, but whether
it is a goal or a source is unspecified. The exact interpretation is obtained based on
the verb that Appl selects. In (40), Appl selects uke- 'receive/ which yields the
source interpretation for the argument.
A second peculiar type is a compound with flexible argument realization:
(41)	a.	Karera-ga	sono yoru-ni	omoide-o	katari-akasi-ta.
they-NOM	that night-during	memory-acc	talk-spend.the.night-PAST
'They talked about the memories that night until dawn.'
b.	Karera-ga	omoidebanasi-de	itiya-o	katari-akasi-ta.
they-NOM	memory.story-with	one.night-ACC	talk-spend.the.night-PAST
"They spent one night telling reminiscent stories until dawn.'
According to Fukushima, the situation here is that there is no argument matching
for the internal arguments, and both arguments can be realized in a peculiar way;
either of the arguments can be selected as the direct object of the compound, but if
one is selected, the other is relegated to an adjunct. Fukushima (2005:5886) shows how
the prototype approach to 9-roles guarantees that both arguments can be inherited
to the whole compound, although only one of them can be the direct object.
It seems to me that this characterization of (41) is disputable. In particular, it is
not clear whether Vx and V2 are transitive verbs in both (41a,b), although this is
assumed by Kageyama (1993) and Matsumoto (1996), as well as Fukushima (2005).
Katar- can be either intransitive (like talk) or transitive (like tell). Thus, when it has
no overt object, it merely describes the act of talking, without implying any content
established in discourse.18 Thus, katar- in (41b) may well be intransitive. As for
V-V COMPOUNDS
341
akas-, note that Fukushima's gloss is 'spend the night', hence having an object
itiya-o 'one night' is almost redundant semantically.19 By itself, the verb means
make open' and is used as in (42a).
(42)	a. Taroo-ga himitu-o akasi-ta.
Taroo-NOM secret-ACC make.open-PAST
'Taroo revealed the secret.'
b.	Taroo-ga himitu-o katat-ta.
Taroo-NOM secret-ACC tell-past
'Taroo told the secret?
c.	渉Taroo-ga himitu-o karari-akasi-ta.
Taroo-NOM secret-ACC tell-make.open-PAST
'Taroo revealed the secret by telling it.'
Example (42b) shows that the same object himitu 'secret' can be used with katar-
'tell.' Crucially, as in (42c), when the two verbs are compounded, the object can no
longer be used. This is unexpected if the compound is really compositional. The
contrast between (41a) and (42c) suggests that some kind of idiomaticity is involved
in (41). That is, compounding renders okas- an intransitive and, as a consequence,
renders the apparent object in (41b) an adjunct. If this is correct, (41a) is treated as
transitive-intransitive on a par with (9), and (41b) as intransitive-intransitive on a
par with (28).
For the analysis in Nishiyama 1998a, analogizing (41a) with (9) significantly
weakens the stipulation to limit vP complementation to motion verbs. However,
the pattern in (41) does not seem to be widespread or systematic enough to call for
a novel mechanism in the grammar. I briefly return to the issue of how and to what
extent we should accommodate peculiar patterns into the scope of the analysis in
the next section on theoretical implications.
12.4	Theoretical Implications
I have reviewed several issues with V-V compounds and showed how competing
analyses handle them. They all point to one question: where is morphology? If
lexical analyses are correct, then we still need the "productive" lexicon equipped
with Argument Structure in the sense of Williams (1981b) and Grimshaw (1990). If,
however, the syntactic analysis is correct, the implication is that we can dispense
with the lexicon as the place of word formation, in accord with the fundamental
standpoint of Distributed Morphology. Although the purpose of this chapter has
not been to choose one analysis as optimal,I would like present a guideline for
future research.
Because of their many complexities and idiosyncrasies, V-V compounds offer a
bona fide example of the tension between explanatory and descriptive adequacy,
342 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
which has provided an important perspective throughout the history of generative
grammar. On the explanatory side, the optimal analysis should be equipped with
mechanisms that are independently motivated. In this sense, Nishiyama's transi-
tivity selection seems to be more desirable than Kageyama's transitivity harmony
or Fukushima's matching convention. But we have seen that Nishiyama's analysis
must make stipulations on motion verbs and vP complementation.
As for the empirical side, the crucial questions are how and to what extent the
analysis should accommodate exceptions, without rendering it a restatement of
the fact and losing its explanatory strength. Because idiosyncrasies are generally
believed to be aliens to the syntax, I investigated in section 12.3.4.1 the kinds of
idiosyncrasies of V-V compounds that Distributed Morphology can account for.
As it turns out, at least semantic idiomaticity and categorial idiosyncrasy can be
accommodated, if not explained, but the status of transitivity idiosyncrasies must
be stipulated. Although not covered in this chapter, V-V compounds involve
many other examples with idiosyncrasies (whether of the same kind as reviewed or
different). Further study of V-V compounds would shed light on the scope and
limitations of the roots-as-categorially-neutral hypothesis and thus contribute to
the development of the theory.
In conclusion, I hope to have provided a basis for further research on V-V
compounds, which directly touch on the important issue of the place of
morphology in linguistic theory.
NOTES FOR CHAPTER 12
I would like to thank the following people for comments and suggestions: the organizers of
the Workshop on Linguistic Theory and the Japanese Language (Shigeru Miyagawa and
Mamoru Saito), the participants of the workshop, Heidi Harley, and an anonymous referee
for the handbook.
1.	Another construction that has yielded controversies is adjectives. See Nishiyama
1999,2005 and Namai 2002. Sells (1995) also treats various constructions, such as honorifics
and polite forms, to argue for the lexical approach. See Nishiyama 1998b for a review of
Sells 1995, and Koopman 2005 for a syntactic reinterpretation of the data and insights by
Sells.
2.	But see Matsumoto 1996 for some complications.
3.	On completely different grounds, Carstens (2002) argues that serial verb con-
structions in I)o, a head-final language related to Yoruba, are underlyingly head initial like
those in Yoruba. She derives the word order by movement in the sense of Kayne (1994).
This analysis implies that in serial verb constructions in Ijo, Vr is the head, despite their
apparent similarity to Japanese V-V compounds. Because Kayne's theory is supposed to
apply universally, the issue of headedness in Japanese V-V compounds bears relevance to
headedness and phrase structure in general.
4.	Strictly speaking, Li's (1993) theta-identification is analogous to the process of
modification in the sense of Higginbotham (1985). As noted by Nishiyama (1998a) and
V-V COMPOUNDS
343
Fukushima (2005), this is a syntactic process, despite the fact that it targets argument
structure. Li 2005 can be regarded as a development of this hybrid standpoint.
5.	See Newmeyer 2001(p. 65任)for problems with proto-0-roles.
6.	Because Fukushima adopts the prototype approach and rejects the unaccusativity
hypothesis, he has no problem matching the 'taker' and 'leaver' in (11c).
7.	Fukushima (2005:598) argues that wazato is subject-oriented rather than agent-
oriented, based on the following example:
(i)	* Wazato	sebiro-ga	Taroo-ni(-yotte)	ki-rare-ta.
deliberately	suit.jacket-NOM	Taroo-DAT(-by)	wear-PASS-PAST
'The suit jacket was deliberately worn by Taroo.'
Although the grammatical status of (i) itself requires an account, the contrast in (15) is
real, and this seems to be sufficient to justify the agent-orientation of wazato.
8.	Saito's (2001)analysis also features the parallelism between V-V compound and
serial verb constructions. Haseagawa's (1998, 2000) analysis also shares the same spirit, for
it features the parallelism between V-V compound and resultative constructions. Their
analyses are, however, empirically more limited than Nishiyama's (1998a) in that they do
not cover all the core data cited in section 12.2. For this reason and also due to space
limitation, I focus on Nishiyama's (1998a) analysis as a representative of syntactic
approaches to V-V compounds.
9.	PRO in (22b) is licensed on the assumption that PRO appears in a non-Case
position and accusative Case is assigned to the object position only if the verb is dominated
by an active vP (i.e., vP introducing the external argument). Alternatively, the empty
category in (22b) is a trace/copy of the matrix object and the chain receives two 0-roles, as
in Homstein's (1999) control-as-movement analysis. Furukawa 1999 is an implementation
of this insight.
10.	The exact definitions and characterization of unaccusatives are controversial (see
Alexiadou, Anagnostopoulou, and Everaert 2004), and Matsumoto (1996) and Fukushima
(2005) do not adopt the unaccusativity hypothesis in their analyses ofV-V compounds. For
the purposes of this subsection, unaccusatives are defined as intransitive verbs that have
morphologically related transitive counterparts, and I believe that at least this definition is
less controversial. See Harley, this volume, for examples and discussion.
11.	The analysis in (27) implies that the case order of accusative-dative in (25b) is due
to scrambling, contra Miyagawa (1997). See also Takano, this volume.
12.	The structure is entertained by Nishiyama (1998a) for a certain type of V-V
compound in Chinese. See Li 2005 for arguments against this structure for Chinese. The
operation of head movement as a way of compounding in (28) seems hard to implement,
due to the coordinate structure. This makes "morphological merger" in the sense of
Marantz (1988) and Embick and Noyer (2001)more promising for the compound in (28)
and, by extension, probably for other kinds of combinations.
13.	In Matsumoto's (1996) terms, V2 is deverbalized semantically. There are also cases
where Vi loses its original meaning:
(ii)	sasi-ager(u) thrustTR-give 'give (honorific)'
Here, V】seems to be functioning to yield an honorific form of ordinary ager-'give'. See
Matsumoto 1996 for more examples of compounds where one of the two verbs has lost its
original meaning.
14.	The structures in (33) simplify Volpe's analysis based on Aronoff 1976, where there
are two types of -able, depending on whether -able selects a root or a verb.
344 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
15.	See Ogawa 2001 for another view on nominalization in syntactic terms.
16.	Ito and Sugioka (2002:140) note that there are few V-V compounds involving
rendaku, and they claim that such V-V compounds are derived by "back-formation":
(iii)	ki-bukure-ru — ki-bukure
wear-swell-pres wear-swell
'to wear too much' 'wearing too much'
('Swell' is originally hukure-, and bukure- is due to rendaku.) According to Ito and
Sugioka, ki-bukure-ru (the verb) is derived from a noun, ki-bukure. In the present terms,
ki-bukure-ru has the structure of (37a), and rendaku applies in a domain selected by n.
17.	Examples (39a,b) are from Fukushima 2005, and (39c) is from Nishiyama 1998a.
Example(39d) is originally attributed to Matsumoto 1998 and is taken from Fukushima 2005.
18.	Fukushima (2005:601) cites the following as ungrammatical:
(iv)	*Taroo-ga	(omoide banasi-de) katat-ta.
Taroo-NOM	memory.story-with	talk-past
I agree that the sentence is ungrammatical with the bracketed part, but for me it is
grammatical without the bracketed part.
19.	Even the 'one' part is redundant, for katari-akas- cannot be used when one spends
more than one night.
REFERENCES
Alexiadou, Artemis, Elena Anagnostopoulou, and Martin Everaert, eds. 2004. The un-
accusativity puzzle. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Arad, Maya. 2003. Locality constraints on the interpretation of roots: The case of Hebrew
denominal verbs. Natural Language & Linguistic Theory 21:737-778.
Aronoff. Mark.1976. Word formation in generative grammar. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Baker, Mark C.1988. Incorporation: A theory of grammatical function changing. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Baker, Mark C.1989. Object sharing and projection in serial verb constructions. Linguistic
Inquiry 20:513-553.
Bauer, Laurie. 2001.Morphological productivity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Carstens, Vicki. 2002. Antisymmetry and word order in serial constructions. Language
78:3-5〇.
Chomsky, Noam.197〇• Remarks on nominalization. In Readings in English transforma-
tional grammar, ed. Roderick A. Jacobs and Peter S. Rosenbaum, 184-221. Waltham,
Mass.: Ginn & Co. (Reprinted in Noam Chomsky,1972, Studies on semantics in gen-
erative grammar, 11-61. The Hague: Mouton.)
Collins, Chris.1997. Argument sharing in serial verb constructions. Linguistic Inquiry
28:461-497.
Dowty, David.1991.Thematic proto-roles and argument selection. Language 67:547-619.
Embick, David. 2004. On the structure of resultative participles in English. Linguistic
Inquiry 35335-392.
Embick, David, and Alec Marantz. 2008. Architecture and blocking. Linguistic Inquiry
39：i-53-
V-V COMPOUNDS
345
Embick, David, and Rolf Noyer. 2001.Moving operations after syntax. Linguistic Inquiry
32：555-595.
Fanner, Ann K.198〇• On the interaction of morphology and syntax. Doctoral dissertation,
MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Farmer, Ann K.1984. Modularity in syntax. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Fukushima. Kazuhiko. 2005. Lexical V-V compounds in Japanese: Lexicon vs. syntax.
Language 81:568-612.
Furukawa, Yukio.1999. Argument sharing in JWCs' constructions and relativized
minimality. In Proceedings ofTACL Summer Institute of Linguistics y 13-24. Department
of English language and literature, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Tokyo.
Gamerschlag, Thomas. 2002. Complex predicate formation and argument structure of
Japanese V-V compounds. Japanese/Korean linguistics 10, ed. Noriko Akatsuka and
Susan Strauss, 532-544. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI Publications.
Grimshaw, Jane.199〇• Argument structure. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Halle, Morris, and Alec Marantz.1993. Distributed morphology and the pieces of inflec-
tion. The view from Building 20t ed. Kenneth Hale and Samuel Jay Keyser, 111-176.
Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Hasegawa, Nobuko.1998. Syntax of resultatives. In Researching and verifying an advanced
theory of human languages(2-A), 31-57. Graduate School of Language Sciences, Kanda
University of International Studies, Chiba, Japan.
Hasegawa, Nobuko. 200〇• Resultatives and language variations: Result phrase and W
compounds. Japanese/Korean linguistics 9, ed. Mineharu Nakayama and Charles J.
Quinn, Jr., 269-282. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI Publications.
Higginbotham, James.1985. On semantics. Linguistic Inquiry 16:547-593.
Himeno, Masako.1999. Hukugoodoosi-no koozoo-to imiyoohoo [Structure and semantic
usage of compound verbs]. Tokyo: Hituzi Shobo.
Hornstein, Norbert.1999. Movement and control. Linguistic Inquiry 30:69-96.
Ito, Takane, and Yoko Sugioka. 2002. Go-no sikumi-to gokeisei [Mechanism of words and
word formation]. Tokyo: Hituzi Shobo.
Kageyama, Taro.1989. The place of morphology in grammar: Verb-verb compounds in
Japanese. Yearbook of Morphology 2:73-94.
Kageyama, Taro.1993. Bumpoo-to gokeisei [Grammar and word formation]. Tokyo: Hituzi
Syobo.
Kayne, Richard.1994. The antisymmetry of syntax. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Kiparsky, Paul.1982. Word formation and the lexicon. In Proceedings of the Mid-
America Linguistics Conference, ed. Fred Ingeman, 3-29. Lawrence: University
of Kansas.
Kitagawa, Yoshihisa.1986. Subjects in Japanese and English. Doctoral dissertation, Uni-
versity of Massachusetts, Amherst. (Published 1994, New York: Garland.)
Koopman, Hilda. 2005. Korean (and Japanese) morphology from a syntactic perspective.
Linguistic Inquiry 36:601-633.
Kuno, Susumu.1973. The structure of the Japanese language. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Kuroda, S.-Y.1965. Generative grammatical studies in the Japanese language. Doctoral
dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Li, Yafei.1993. Structural head and aspectuality. Language 69:480-504.
Li, Yafei. 2005. X°. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Marantz, Alec.1988. Clitics, morphological merger, and the mapping to phonological
structure. In Theoretical morphology, ed. Michael Hammond and Michael Noonan,
253-27〇. San Diego, Calif.: Academic Press.
346 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Marantz, Alec.1993. Implications of asymmetries in double object constructions. In
Theoretical aspects of Bantu grammar 1,ed. Sam I. Mchombo, 113-151. Stanford, Calif.:
CSLI Publications.
Marantz, Alec.1997. No Escape from syntax: Don't try morphological analysis in the
privacy of your lexicon. In Proceedings of the 21st annual Penn Linguistic Colloquium:
University of Pennsylvania working papers in linguistics 4.2, ed. Alexis Dimitriadis,
Laura Siegel, Clarissa Surek-Clark, and Alexander Williams, 201-225. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania.
Matsumoto, Yo.1996. Complex predicates in Japanese. Stanford, Calif: CSLI Publications.
Matsumoto, Yo.1998. Nihongo-no hukugoodoosi-ni okeru doosi-no kumiawase [Com-
bination of verbs in Japanese lexical compound verbs]. Gengo Kenkyuu 114:37-83.
Miyagawa, Shigeru.198〇• Complex verbs and the lexicon. Doctoral dissertation, University
of Arizona, Tucson.
Miyagawa, Shigeru.1989. Structure and case marking in Japanese (Syntax and Semantics
22). San Diego, Calif.: Academic Press.
Miyagawa, Shigeru.1997. Against optional scrambling. Linguistic Inquiry 28:1-25.
Namai, Kenichi. 2002. The word status of Japanese adjectives. Linguistic Inquiry 33:340-349.
Newmeyer, Frederick J. 2001.Grammatical functions, thematic roles, and phrase structure:
Their underlying disunity. In Objects and other subjects: Grammatical functions,
functional categories, and configurationality^ ed. William D. Davies and Stanley
Dubinsky, 53-75. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Nishiyama, Kunio. 1998a. V-V compounds as serialization. Journal of East Asian Linguistics
7:175-217.
Nishiyama, Kunio. 1998b. The morphosyntax and morphophonology of Japanese predi-
cates. Doctoral dissertation, Cornell University, Ithaca, N.Y.
Nishiyama, Kunio.1999. Adjectives and the copulas in Japanese. Journal of East Asian
Linguistics 8:183-222.
Nishiyama, Kunio. 2005. Morphological boundary of Japanese adjectives: Reply to Namai.
Linguistic Inquiry 35:134-143.
Ogawa, Yoshiki. 2001.A unified theory of verbal and nominal projections. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Pylkkanen, Liina. 2002. Introducing arguments. Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge,
Mass.
Reinhart, Tanya, and Tai Siloni. 2005. The lexicon-syntax parameter: Reflexivization and
other arity operations. Linguistic Inquiry 36:389-436.
Saito, Mamoru. 2001.Movement and 〇•roles: A case study with resultatives. In Proceedings
of the 2nd Tokyo Conference on Psycholinguisticsy ed. Yukio Otsu, 35-6〇. Tokyo: Hituzi
Syobo.
Sells, Peter.1995. Korean and Japanese morphology from a lexical perspective. Linguistic
Inquiry 26:277-235.
Tagashira, Yoshiko.1978. Characterization of Japanese compound verbs. Doctoral dis-
sertation, University of Chicago.
Tagashira, Yoshiko, and Jean Hoff 1986. Handbook of Japanese compound verbs. Tokyo:
Hokuseido.
Volpe, Mark Joseph. 2005. Japanese morphology and its theoretical consequences: Deri-
vational morphology in Distributed Morphology. Doctoral dissertation, Stony Brook
University, New York.
V-V COMPOUNDS
347
Williams, Edwin. 1981a. On the notions lexically related and head of a word. Linguistic
Inquiry 12:245-274.
Williams, Edwin. 1981b. Argument structure and morphology. The Linguistic Review 1:81-
114.
Yumoto, Yoko. 2005. Hukugoo-doosi, hasei-doosi-no imi-to toogo [The semantics and
syntax of compound verbs and derived verbs]. Tokyo: Hituzi Shobo.
CHAPTER 13
WH-QUESTIONS
NORVIN RICHARDS
13.1	Introduction
Among the properties of Japanese that have been of theoretical interest is the
behavior of its wh-phrases, which may be left in situ:1
(1)	Taroo-wa [Hanako-ga nani-o	katta to] omoimasita ka?
Taro-TOP Hanako-NOM what-ACC bought that thought	q
(2)	What did Taro think [that Hanako bought — ]?
Approaches to this difference between English and Japanese may be classified into
two camps. One type of approach makes use of cross-linguistic differences in the
mapping of the syntax to the phonological representation. The other posits dif-
ferences in the mapping of the syntax onto the semantic representation.
For the first type of approach, the syntax of w/z-questions is always essentially
the same, but the wh-movement that such questions universally involve is difficult
to detect in some languages, having little or no effect on the phonology. This
difference in phonology might itself be the result of some syntactic difference; this
is the claim of theories that follow the lead of Huang (1982) in suggesting that
Japanese wh-movement takes place during a part of the syntactic derivation that
never feeds the phonology ("covert movement")?
In the second type of approach, the relation between the syntax and the
phonology is comparatively simple, at least in this domain; w/z-movement occurs
only where it has an effect on the phonology. The point of variation between
languages, on this approach, has to do with the mapping between the syntax and
the semantics; a w人-question may have a semantic representation with the
w/i-phrase in situ or in a moved position, and languages vary in which of these
WH-QUESTIONS 349
types of semantic representations they allow. Shimoyama (2001,2006, this volume)
offers arguments for an approach of this kind.
In section 13.2, I outline the distribution of island effects in Japanese and
consider what each of these types of theories might have to say about them.
Section 13.3 considers other kinds of phenomena that might bear on the choice
between the theories. Section 13.4 touches on a series of interesting recent papers on
the phonology of w/z-in-situ in Japanese, and section 13.5 summarizes this chapter.
13.2	Core Data: Japanese Islands
.....................................
Watanabe (1992a, 1992b) claims that Japanese wh-in-situ exhibits wh-island effects.
A w/i-phrase in an interrogative complement clause, as in (3a), is prevented from
taking wide scope; by contrast, a w/z-phrase in a declarative complement clause, as
in (3b), can freely take wide scope.
(3)	a. *John-wa [Mary -ga	nani-o katta ka dooka] siritagatteiru no?
John-Top Mary-NOM what-ACC bought whether know-want q
'What does John want to know whether Mary bought?'
b. John-wa	[Mary-ga	nani-o	katta	to] omotteiru no?
John-Top	Mary-NOM	what-ACC bought that thinks q
'What does John think that Mary bought?'
Other types of islands, however, seem to be absent for Japanese iv/r-in-situ; the
examples in (4) involve a complex NP island and an adjunct island.
(4)	a. Mary-wa [John-ga nani-o	nusunda koto]-o
Mary-TOP John-NOM what-ACC stole	fact-ACC
mondai-ni siteiru no?
problem-DAT make q
'What is Mary making an issue out of [the fact that John stole __ ]?'
b. John-wa [dono hon-o yonde kara] dekaketa no?
John-Top which book-ACC read after went.out q
"Which book did John go out [after he read __ ]?
Unlike their English translations, the examples in (4) are well formed in Japanese.
This type of island effect does reappear, however, for certain 印/!-phrases, notably
naze 'why' and wh-phrases modified by ittaic... in the world':
(5)	*Mary-wa	[John-ga	naze	sore-o	nusunda	koto]-o
Mary-TOP	John-NOM	why	that-ACC	stole	fact-ACC
mondai-ni siteiru no?
problem dat make q
'Why is Mary making an issue out of [the fact that John stole it __ ]?'
__________
35〇 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(6)	a. Mary-wa [John-ga nani-o	ageta	hito]-ni	atta no?
Mary-TOP John-NOM what-ACC gave	person-DAT met q
'What did Mary meet [the person that John gave __ to]?'
b. *Mary-wa	[John-ga ittai nani-o	ageta hito]-ni atta no?
Mary-TOP John nom ittai what-ACC gave person-DAT met q
'What in the world did Mary meet [the person that John gave — to]?'
This, then, is the array of facts about islands that theories about Japanese wh-
questions are attempting to capture. If these islands reflect conditions on syntactic
operations, then the distribution of island effects for w/i-in-situ represents a
challenge for both of the above types of theories about w/i-in-situ.
On one kind of theory, wft-in-situ is syntactically like w/z-movement; on this
approach, the main difference between overt movement and w〃-in-situ is a
phonological one. The difficulty for a theory of this kind is how to account for the
gaps in the distribution of islands outlined above; if 印ん-in-situ is simply a pho-
nologically masked version of w/i-movement, then why are some of the familiar
islands for w/z-movement absent for wh-in-situ?
The second type of theory is one in which wh-in-situ and w/i-movement differ
syntactically; both w/z-movement and w/i-in-situ can yield syntactic structures with
the semantics of wh-questions. The challenge for this kind of theory is to explain
why wh-in-situ exhibits any island effects at all, if it is syntactically completely
unlike M-movement.
.Let us consider how these types of theories might account for the distribution
of island effects. In what follows I concentrate on the difference between wh-islands
and other types of islands. I also reexamine the facts about ittaic... in the world' in
section 13.3.1.1, but I do not discuss the facts about naze 'why', mainly for reasons of
space; see Tsai 1994 for one approach.
13.2.1	Covert Movement Theories:
Why Are Some Islands Missing?
A theory that posits covert movement for Japanese 印/！-phrases must offer some
explanation for why some island effects are missing; why, for example, are sen-
tences such as (4), repeated here as (7), acceptable in Japanese?
(7)	a. John-wa [nani-o	katta hito]-o	sagasiteiru no?
John-Top what-ACC bought person-ACC looking.for q
'What is John looking for [the person who bought __ ]?'
b. John-wa [dono hon-o yonde kara] dekaketa no?
John-Top which book-ACC read after went.out q
'Which book did John go out [after he read __ ]?
Much work on covert 诚-movement follows the influential proposal of Nishi-
gauchi (1986,1990) and Choe (1987), who argued that although there is indeed
covert movement in examples such as (7), the moving phrases are not simply the
WH-QUESTIONS ZZ1
boldfaced 印//-phrases but in fact the entire islands containing these phrases. In
(7a), for instance, the moving phrase is nani-o katta hito-o £the person who bought
whaf, and in (7b) the moving phrase is dono hon-o yonde kara 'after he read which
book\ Given that these phrases do not in fact exit any islands when they undergo
movement, the absence of island effects is expected.
On this account, covert movement in Japanese is much like overt wh-move-
ment in certain languages, which sometimes appears to avoid island effects by
pied-piping the island. In Imbabura Quechua, for instance, Cole (1982) notes that
w/i-movement may pied-pipe clauses:
(8) a. Ima	-ta -taj ya	-ngui	[Juan randi	-shka]	-ta?
what	acc int think 2	Juan buy	NLZ	ACC
'What do you think that Juan bought?'				
b. [Ima	-ta Juan randi -shka]	-ta -taj	ya	-ngui?
what	acc Juan buy nlz	ACC INT	think	2
'What do you think that Juan bought?'
For ease of processing, I have underlined the w/i-fronted phrases. Example (8a)
shows w/2-movement without clausal pied-piping; the w/z-word ima has moved
to its scope position at the beginning of the matrix clause. In (8b), wh-movement
has pied-piped the entire complement clause. In either case, the fronted phrase is
followed by the suffix -taj, glossed here as iNT(errogative).3 As Cole points out,
wide-scale pied-piping may be used as a means for avoiding island effects:
(9) a. *Ima	-ta	-taj	riku	-rka -ngui	[randi	-shka	runa-ta] ?
what	ACC	INT	see	past 2	buy	NLZ	man acc
'What did	you see the man who bought?'						
b. [Ima -ta	randi	-shka	runa	-ta -taj]	riku	-rka	-ngui?
what acc buy		NLZ	man	ACC INT	see	PAST	2
Lit. '[The man that bought what] did you see?'
As we can see in (9a), Imbabura Quechua exhibits complex NP island effects; (9b)
shows that these effects may be circumvented by moving the whole island.
Cable (2007) discusses similar facts for Tlingit. Like Imbabura Quechua,
Tlingit can pied-pipe islands to circumvent them. A w/z-phrase embedded in a
relative clause, for example, cannot simply be extracted, as in (10a), but it may
pied-pipe the relative clause together with the head noun, as in (10b).
(10)	a. *Waa sa [kligeiyi xaat] i	tuwaa sigoo?
how int it.is.big fish your spirit be.happy
b. [Waa kligeiyi xaat sa] i	tuwaa sigoo?
how it.is.big fish int your spirit be.happy
'[A fish that is how big] do you want?'
Ortiz de Urbina (1989) also analyzes Basque as a language with overt wh-
movement and with pied-piping as a way of avoiding island violations (here,
adjunct island and complex NP island violations):4
352 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(11)	a. [Zer ikusi ondoren] joan ziren hemen-dik?
what see	after	go aux here from
'What did they leave [after seeing ___ ]?'
b.	*Zer joan ziren	hemen-dik [ ___ ikusi	ondoren]?
what go aux	here	from see	after
(12)	a.	[Nork idatzi	zuen	liburua] irakurri	du Peruk?
who-ERG write	AUX	book	read	AUX Peter-ERG
"Who did Peter read [the book that __ wrote]?'
b. *Nork	irakurri du Peruk [ __ idatzi zuen liburua]?
who-ERG read	aux Peter-ERG write aux book
Interestingly, Ortiz de Urbina also notes that this strategy does not work for
心一islands, which cannot be pied-piped:
(13)	a. *[Nor etorriko d-en] galdetu duzu?
who came aux-q asked aux
"Who have you asked [whether ___ has come]?'
b. *Nor galdetu duzu [ ___ etorriko d-en]?
who asked aux come	aux q
Thus, we need a theory of movement that allows languages to circumvent
islands by means of pied-piping the entire island; this strategy is straightforwardly
present for several languages with overt movement of wh-phrases. At least for
Basque, we can also see that this strategy does not work for w/i-islands, which
cannot be pied-piped.5 rFhe only question, then, once we have developed such a
theory, is whether to apply it to Japanese. We have seen that w/i-in-situ in Japanese
is subject just to wん-islands—that is, just to the type of island that cannot be
avoided by pied-piping. The possibility arises, then, that Japanese is simply a covert
version of Tlingit, Quechua, or Basque.
Of course, we would like to have a theory of pied-piping that gets these results;
what makes w£-islands special in this way, so that they are impervious to pied-
piping? 1 We might start by exploiting another special property of wft-islands; they
are the one type of island that is fairly straightforwardly captured via approaches
involving the Minimal Link Condition.6 Movement out of a 印と-island involves
movement past a position where the moving phrase could in principle land, and it
often moves it past another w/i-phrase that could in principle be undergoing a
(shorter) movement into the higher clause. Other islands (e.g., CED islands) are
less susceptible to explanations of this kind.
In Richards 2000, I try to make use of this distinction between these types
of islands to develop an account of why w/i-islands were not susceptible to
pied-piping. The account makes use of van Riemsdijk's (1984) observation that
pied-piping typically requires the operator to be in a high position within the pied-
piped phrase (see also Heck 2004) and that in cases of clausal pied-piping, the
operator in question often moves to the periphery of the clause, a type of move-
WH-QUESTIONS ZZZ
ment van Riemsdijk dubs uinternal movement” (the example in (14) is Imbabura
Quechua, from Hermon 1984:152).
T	I	-
(14)	[Ima-ta	wawa __ miku-chun-taj] Maria muna-n?
what acc child eat fin int Maria want 3.pres
£What does Maria want (that) the child eat __ ?'
Just in the case of a wh-island, pied-piping of the island would require internal
movement of the pied-piping wh-phrase to the specifier of the interrogative CP,
which is a possible scope position. Consequently, I have suggested, the wh-phrase
doing the pied-piping must take scope in the interrogative CP rather than in the
matrix one. Wide scope would be ruled out by whatever conditions rule out (15), in
which a wh-phrase moves from one scope position to another.
(15)	*Who does John wonder — Mary saw __ ?
Of course, if we do decide to invoke internal movement, a new question arises:
does Subjacency constrain internal movement? I return to this question in section
13.3.4. But it seems clear that whatever mechanism we use for excluding 印/!-islands
from the rescuing effects of island pied-piping, the special status of w/i-islands is
顾……….
13.2.2	Interpretation-in-situ Theories:
Why Are Some Islands Present?
In a theory in which Japanese tv/i-phrases never move, the task is to understand
why some island effects nevertheless appear. Why should nonmoving phrases be
subject to w/i-islands, for example?
Shimoyama (2001,2006, this volume) offers an account in which the "^-island"
effects are only apparent; in fact, the effect follows from the way the relevant structures
are interpreted. Shimoyama, following Hamblin (1973), has w/i-words such as dare
'who' denote sets of individuals. When such an expression combines with, for ex-
ample, a predicate, the function denoted by the predicate applies pointwise to the
members of the set, giving a set of propositions. Shimoyama gives the example in (16);
the words dare 'who' and odorimasu 'dance' have the denotations in (17).
(16)	Dare-ga odorimasu ka?
who nom dance q
'Who dances?'
(17)	For all possible worlds w and variable assignments g,
a.	[dare] w, g={x e De: person (x)(w)}
b.	[odorimasu] w,8= {XxXw7 [dance (x)(w/)]}
_____
354 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
To derive the meaning of (16), we apply the function in (17b) pointwise to the set in
(17a), giving the set of propositions in (18).
(18)	[dare-ga odorimasu]w,8= {f(x):f e [odorimasu]w,8> x 6 [dare]w,8}
={入w7[dance (x)(w>)]: person (x)(w)}
The question in (16) thus has a denotation that is a set of propositions, essentially
the propositions of the form 'x danced', where x is a member of the (contextually
restricted) set of people. This is a reasonable denotation for a question, following
Hamblin (1973) and Karttunen (1977).
Following a suggestion that she credits to Angelika Kratzer, Shimoyama then
suggests that the question particle ka takes a set of propositions and returns a
singleton set whose sole member is a question denotation. The apparent w/i-island
effect in (19) follows.
(19)	Mary-wa [John-ga nani-o	tabeta ka ] siritagatteimasu ka?
Mary-TOP John-NOM what-ACC ate	q wonders	q
a.	'Does Mary wonder what John ate __?'
b.	?*'What does Mary wonder if John ate __ ?'
The preference for the reading in (19a) over the reading in (19b) looks like a wh-
island violation, but in this kind of account, it is not. Once the lower instance of
ka (the one after tabeta 'ate') is added to the structure, the result is no longer
a set of propositions一that is, it is no longer the kind of thing with which
ka combines to form a wh-question. As a result, the higher ka cannot create a
wh-question.
In this type of account, Japanese 印/！-questions are not in fact subject to any
island effects at all.rFhey appear to be subject to 印/!-islands, but this is an illusion
created by the conditions on interpretation of ka. Because no movement is in-
volved, other islands are not expected to appear.
13.3	Controversies:
Distinguishing the Theories
.........................................................................
In both types of theories that we just considered, the distribution of island effects
can be captured using independently needed assumptions. In the movement ap-
proach, Japanese exhibits a type of pied-piping that we already know exists and
must be accounted for. Even if the existing theories of pied-piping are not the
correct ones, we know that some theory of pied-piping must be constructed to
account for the data from Basque, Quechua, and Tlingit, and once we have that
theory we can apply it to covert movement in Japanese. In the nonmovement
approach, the apparent w/i-island effects are a result of general principles of se-
mantic composition.
WH-QUESTIONS ZZZ
If this is a fair summary of the situation, then we cannot make this choice on
the basis of theoretical simplicity; the complications that the two approaches make
use of are unavoidable ones. Choosing between the approaches has to involve
finding more data bearing on the relevant questions.
13.3.1	Non-w/z-islands and Wh-in-situ
One piece of evidence that all islands are relevant, even for wh-in-situ languages
such as Japanese, involves the distribution of a morpheme appearing in wh-
questions in some languages. In section 13.2.1,1 have shown that for some languages
that do wide-scale pied-piping, such as Imbabura Quechua and Tlingit, the moved
phrase is followed by a particle I glossed int(-1 勿 in Quechua and -sd in Tlingit):
(20)	a. Ima -ta -taj ya -ngui [Juan randi -shka] -ta
what acc int think 2 Juan buy nlz acc
'What do you think that Juan bought?'
b. Goodei sa uwajee [wugoot] i shagoonich?
where.to int they.think he.went your parents
'Where do your parents think he went?'
We also have seen that in sentences involving islands, int is attached not to the
w/i-word itself but to the island containing the w/i-word. In other words, int never
appears separated from the wh-scope position by an island:
(21)	a.	[Ima	-ta randi	-shka	runa -ta	-taj] riku -rka	-ngui
what	acc buy	nlz	man acc	int see past	2
Lit. ' [The man that bought what] did you see?'
b.	[Waa	kligeiyi	xaat	sa] i	tuwaa sigoo?
how	it.is.big.	fish	int your	spirit be.happy
'[A fish that is how big] do you want?'
Kishimoto (1992, 2005) and Hagstrom (1998) discuss data from Sinhala that
show that for that language, although islands do not constrain the distribution of
w/i-in-situ, they do constrain the distribution of the Sinhala version of int, -d@.
Sinhala w/i-in-situ is exemplified in (22).
(22)	Siri mokak do keruwe?
Siri what int did-E
'What did Siri do?'
As (22) exemplifies, the w/i-word mokak 'what' is left in situ in Sinhala, followed by
the int particle do; the verb in w/i-questions also bears a special suffix -e. When
w/i-in-situ is in an island, the int particle do appears outside the island:
(23)	a. Oyaa [kauru liyspu pots] da kieuwe?
you	who wrote book int read-E
'Who did you read [a book that __ wrote]?'
356 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
b. *Oyaa [kauru do liyspu pota] kieuwe?
you who int wrote book read-E
Similar facts are discussed in the literature on Shuri Okinawan (Sugahara 1996)
Hagstrom 1998) and premodern Japanese (Whitman 1997)Hagstrom 1998, Wa-
tanabe 2002); the data are omitted here for reasons of space.
In Sinhala, Shuri Okinawan, and premodern Japanese, then, w/i-phrases co-
occur with a particle that cannot be separated from the scope position of the wh-
phrase by islands一not just w/i-islands, but all the familiar types of islands. If these
are w/i-in-situ languages,7 and if these islands are reliable diagnostics of a move-
ment operation, then apparently some kind of movement operation takes place in
some w/z-in-situ languages.8
Of course, modern Japanese has no int attaching to the 印ん-phrase in wh-
questions.9 We might conclude that, although there are indeed wh-in-situ lan-
guages in which movement operations relate the wh-phrase to its scope position,
Japanese is not one of them. The next three sections discuss phenomena in Jap-
anese 可//-questions that militate against this approach.
13.3.1.1 Ittai
Hoji (1985), Pesetsky (1987), and Hagstrom (1998), among others, note that islands
appear to constrain the distribution of ittai '... in the world'. Example (24) is a
straightforward case containing ittai.
(24)	John-wa ittai nani-o	kaimasita ka?
John-Top ittai what-ACC bought q
"What in the world did John buy?'
In (24), ittai immediately precedes the 印/!-wo rd that it modifies. This is not
necessary, however. In fact, when a wh-word is inside an island, ittai must be
outside the island (Pesetsky 1987:112,126):
(25)	a. Mary-wa	ittai	[John-ni	nani-o	ageta	hito-ni]	atta no?
Mary-TOP	ittai John-DAT	what-ACC	gave	person-DAT	met q
'What in the world did Mary meet [the person that gave __ to John]?'
b. *Mary-wa [John-ni ittai nani-o ageta hito-ni] atta no?
The facts about ittai are quite similar to the facts discussed earlier about the
distribution of int particles. In both cases, although wh-words themselves may
freely occur inside islands, certain other morphemes associated with the wh-
question must be outside the island. Again, the facts seem to urge against theories
in which non-wft-islands such as the one in (25) are simply irrelevant for wh-
questions in Japanese. If 印/2-questions are interpreted via unselective binding, then
why is the distribution of ittai constrained by movement islands? Of course, in
principle, one could posit a hybrid theory, in which rttcri-questions involve covert
movement but questions without ittai involve no movement.
IVH-QUESTIONS 357
13.3.1.2	Intervention effects
In Japanese, when certain types of quantifiers c-command w/i-in-situ, intervening
between wh-in-situ and its scope position, the result is ill formed (for much
discussion of the relevant phenomena in Japanese and other languages, see Hoji
1985; Beck 1996; Beck and Kim 1997; Tanaka 1997,1999a, 2002; Hagstrom 1998, and
references cited there). One example is given in (26).
(26)	*John-ka Bill-ga nani-o	katta no?
John or Bill-NOM what-ACC bought q
'What did John or Bill buy?'
In (26) the subject John-ka Bill 'John or Bill' intervenes between the w/i-word nani
and its scope position, causing ungrammaticality.
Nishigauchi (1986,1990) notes that intervention effects do not always con-
strain the relation between a w/i-word and its scope position, per se. In particular,
when w人-words are inside islands, intervention effects hold for the relation be-
tween the island containing the w/2-word and the scope position. The result is that
embedding an example like (26) in an island actually improves its grammaticality,
as long as the potentially offending intervener is inside the island with the w/i-word
(Hagstrom 1998:54-55):
(27)	a.	Mary-wa [John-ka Bill-ga	nani-o	katta	ato de]	dekaketa	no?
Mary-TOP John or Bill-NOM	what-ACC	bought	after	left	q
'What did Mary leave [after John or Bill bought __ ]?'
b.	*John-ka Bill-wa [Mary-ga	nani-o	katta	ato de]	dekaketa	no?
John or Bill-Top Mary-NOM	what-ACC	bought	after	left	q
'What did John or Bill leave [after Mary bought __]?'
The ill-formedness of (27b) shows that we do not want to simply claim that wh-
words in islands are somehow not sensitive to intervention effects. Rather,
the intervention effect constrains the relation between the island and the scope
position; the intervener therefore intervenes in (27b), where the intervener
c-commands the island, but not in (27a), where it is contained in the island.
Here we see, again, that the formation of Japanese w/z-questions is crucially
influenced by islands—not just wh-islands, but islands of all types. If we take the
relevance of non-w/i-islands to be a reliable sign of movement, then there must be
movement going on here. In an approach assuming pied-piping, the data in (27)
show that covert movement involves pied-piping of the entire island and that
intervention effects constrain the operation of (covert) movement.
13.3.1.3	Multiple-wh "trapping"
Watanabe (1992a) and Richards (2000) offer another argument for covert
pied-piping of islands, which Watanabe attributes to a personal communica-
tion from Mamoru Saito. The argument concerns multiple 印/z-phrases inside
islands.
358 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Consider a Japanese sentence with two w/z-phrases and two potential scope
positions:
(28)	Keesatu-wa [dare-ga dare-o korosita ka] sirabeteiru	no?
police-TOP who-NOM who-ACC killed	q are.investigating q
Speakers of Japanese vary in how they can interpret (28) (cf. Nishigauchi 1986,
1990; Saito 1994; Richards 1997; Shimoyama 2001,2006). The easiest reading for
(28)	is one in which both w/i-phrases take scope in the embedded clause (infor-
mally represented in (29a)). Some speakers also allow readings such as (29b), in
which both w/i-phrases take scope in the matrix clause.
(29)	a. Are the police investigating for which x and which y, x killed y?
b. ?For which x and which y are the police investigating whether x killed y?
Some speakers also allow a reading in which the two ivh-phrases take distinct
scopes. For speakers who allow this, the reading with hierarchically crossed paths
(30a) is preferred to the one with hierarchically nested paths (30b).
(30)	a. ?For which x are the police investigating for	which y, x	killed	y?
b. *For which y are the police investigating for	which x, x	killed	y?
The facts change when we add an island containing both w/i-phrases:
(31)	Keesatu-wa [Nakamura-san-ga [dare-ga	dare-o
police-TOP Nakamura-HON-NOM who-NOM	who acc
korosita	tatemono-o]	katta	ka]	sirabeteiru	no?
killed	building-ACC	bought	q	are.investigating	q
Lit. cq the police are investigating q Nakamura-san bought [a building
where who killed who]?'
In examples such as (31), in which both iv£-phrases are contained in an island, the
two w/z-phrases must both have the same scope, even for speakers who can give
sentences such as (28) readings where the wh-phrases have distinct scopes (that is,
speakers for whom (28) can have the reading in (30a)). In other words, (31) can
have a reading such as (32a) but not a reading such as (32b).
(32)	a. Are the police investigating for which x and which y, Nakamura-
san bought a house where x killed y?
b. *For which x are the police investigating for which y, Nakamura-
san bought a house where x killed y?
This state of affairs is expected under a theory in which w/2-phrases in Japanese
get their scope by covert w/z-movement, sometimes pied-piping the islands that
contain them. In an example such as (31), the two w/i-phrases have to pied-pipe
their island to a single scope position, and this is the scope position for both
phrases; neither then is able to move to a different scope position, because this
crucially involves exiting the island.
In a theory in which Japanese wh-phrases get their scope by unselective
binding, on the other hand, these facts are unexpected; the whole point of this kind
WH-QUESTIONS 359
of theory is that islands (perhaps with the exception of w/i-islands) are irrelevant
for w/i-in-situ. These facts suggest that that conclusion is too hasty. Although wh-
in-situ may freely appear inside an island, islands do constrain the behavior of wh-
in-situ in ways which the pied-piping approach predicts.
13.3.1.4	Summary
In section 13.2,1 described Japanese as a language whose w/i-words obey only wh-
islands. Sections 13.3.1.1-13.3.1.3 have shown that this is not quite true. We have now
seen three kinds of arguments that in Japanese wh-questions, some domain that
contains the 印//-word is related to the scope position of the w/z-phrase, in a way
that respects islands—not just w/i-islands, but islands of all kinds. This domain is
the one that ittai precedes; it is the domain whose relation with the scope position
may be interrupted by intervention effects; and it appears to be the domain whose
position determines w/z-scope, given that multiple 印ん-phrases in a single domain
must have the same scope. Viewed in this way, Japanese appears to have all the
familiar island effects (though these effects are sometimes masked, because
the domain in question can be larger than the wh-word itself; in other words,
Japanese w/i-movement allows pied-piping).
13.3.2	Additional-w/i effects
Watanabe (1992a, 1992b) discusses the data in (33).
(33)	a. *John-wa	[Mary-ga	nani-o	katta	ka dooka] siritagatteiru	no?
John-Top	Mary-NOM	what-ACC	bought	whether	wants.to.know	q
'What does John want to know whether Mary bought __?'
b.	John-wa	[Mary-ga	nani-o	katta ka dooka]	dare-ni tazuneta no?
John-Top	Mary-NOM	what-ACC	bought	whether	who-DAT asked	q
'Who did John ask __ whether Mary bought what?'
Example (33a) is a familiar ill-formed example; on one approach, it is a wh-island
violation. Example (33b) demonstrates that adding another w/z-phrase outside the
island (in this case dare-ni ‘who-DAT’)improves the example.
Richards (1997, 2001)notes that similar additional-w/i effects can be found in
languages with overt 印z:-movement. The examples in (34) are from Bulgarian
(Roumyana Pancheva, Ani Petkova, Roumyana Slabakova, pers. comm.).
(34)	a. *Koja kniga otrece senatorat [malvata ce iska
which book denied the.senator the.rumor that wanted
da zabrani __ ]?
to ban
'Which book did the senator deny [the rumor that he wanted to
ban ]?'
________	___________
Z60 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
b. ?Koj senator koja kniga __ otrece [malvata ce iska da zabrani __ ]?
which senator which book denied the.rumor that wanted to ban
"Which senator denied [the rumor that he wanted to ban which book]?
Example (34a) involves extraction from a complex NP and is ill formed. In
(34b), an additional w/i-phrase (koj senator "which senator') has been added
outside the island, and the result is better than the straightforward island vio-
lation in (34a). For Richards, the Japanese and Bulgarian facts are both instances
of the Principle of Minimal Compliance; a Probe that has Agreed with one
Goal in a way that creates a well-formed dependency is free to violate island
conditions in later Agree operations. In this case, the Agree operation with the
additional wh-phrase is the one that amnesties the later, island-violating wh・
movement.
The Bulgarian case is clearly an instance of movement. The additional-wh
effect that the Bulgarian and Japanese cases share, then, is one that demonstra-
bly occurs when movement is involved, and in a theory in which Japanese
w/z-questions are created via movement, the commonality between Bulgarian and
Japanese is expected. However, if the Japanese effect in (33a) follows from the
nature of semantic composition, then it is unclear why Japanese should be mim-
icking Bulgarian in this way.
13.3.3	Also, Mo
Japanese wh-phrases may be combined with the particle mo to give universal
expressions. The 印//-phrase may be adjacent to mo, but need not be:
(35)	a. Dono gakusei-mo odotta.
which student-MO danced
"Every student danced/
b. [Dono gakusei-no okaasan]-mo odotta.
which student-GEN mother-MO danced
"Every student's mother danced.'
The particle mo can also be associated with multiple 印//-phrases:
(36)	[Dono	gakusei-ga	dono	ie-ni	syootaisita	sensei]-mo
which	student-NOM	which	house-to	invited	teacher-MO
odotta.
danced
"For every student x and every house y, the teacher(s) x had invited to y
danced.'
The particle mo may also appear without a w/i-phrase, in which case it means talso,
or "even':
WH-QUESTIONS Z6l
(37)	Ano gakusei-mo odotta.
that student-MO danced
'That student also danced?
Shimoyama (2001,2006, this volume) offers compelling arguments that the
relation between Japanese w/7-phrases and mo in examples such as(35)—(37)par-
allels the relation between w/z-phrases and the question particle ka (see also
Nishigauchi 1990, Ohno 1991, Watanabe 1992a, von Stechow 1996, and Takahashi
2002 for important discussion). In particular, she shows that just as w?2-phrases
prefer to be associated with the closest instance of ka (that is, they exhibit apparent
w/i-island effects), they prefer to be associated with the closest instance of mo. The
easiest reading for (38) is the one given below.10
(38)	[[Taroo-ga nan-nen-ni nani-ni-tuite kaita	ronbun]- mo
Taro-NOM what-year-in what-about wrote	paper	mo
yonda	sensei] -mo	totemo	tukareta.
read	teacher mo	very	got.tired
'The teacher who read, for every topic x, every year y, the paper that
Taro wrote on x in y also got very tired/
In (38), the preference is to translate the higher mo, the one attached to sensei
'teacher', with 'also', rather than interpreting it in tandem with one of the wh-
phrases. In other words, given the two instances of mo in (38), the w/i-phrases
prefer to associate with the lower mo rather than the higher mo.
In fact, the generalization appears to be that mo and ka are equivalent as far as
this type of intervention is concerned; mo intervenes for association with ka, and ka
intervenes for association with mo. Thus, the w/2-phrases in (39) prefer to associate
with the closer ka, not with the higher mo, and are interpreted as 印/！-phrases with
scope in the lowest clause, rather than as universal expressions:
(39)	[Yamada-ga dare-ni nani-o	okutta kaj sitteiru syoonin] -mo
Yamada-NOM who-dat what-ACC sent q know witness mo
damatteita.
was.silent
a.	'The witness who knew what Yamada sent to whom was also silent.'
b.	*'For every person x, for every thing y, the witness who knew whether
Yamada sent y to x was silent.'
However, association with mo disregards other familiar types of islands:
(40)	[Dono TA-ga	osieta gakusei-ga	syootaisita sensei] -mo kita.
which rFA-nom taught student-NOM invited	teacher mo came
'For every TA x, [the teacher(s) [that the student(s) that x had taught]
invited] came.'
As Shimoyama (2001,2006, this volume) points out, this is a powerful prima facie
argument for giving the same type of explanation both for the relation between
)62 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
wh-phrases and ka and for the relation between w/i-phrases and mo.u Any argu-
ments that bear on the nature of one of these relations, then, ought to be tried on
the other. I leave investigation of the properties of mo to other work (see Shi-
moyama 2001,2006, this volume, for much careful discussion).
13.3.4	Pied-piping and the Semantics of W?i-Questions
Ohno (1989) and von Stechow (1996) point out a very serious problem with
Nishigauchi's (1986,1990) LF pied-piping analysis: it predicts the wrong readings.
Their point holds, as far as I can see, for any type of pied-piping:
(41)	Whose book did you buy?
The problem with an example such as (41) is that the w/i-moved object is not just
whose but whose book. Given the type of semantics for 印//-questions that Nishi-
gauchi assumes, the syntactic structure in (41) would be mapped onto the semantic
representation informally represented in (42).
(42)	For which x, y, x a book, y the book's owner, you read x?
The problem with the representation in (42) is that the nucleus of the question
('you read x') contains only one variable, x, which corresponds to a book. But the
question should not be answered with the name of a book; it is a question about a
person. The real semantic representation should be one in which the variable in the
nucleus corresponds to a person:
(43)	For which y, you read y's book?
In other words, although the entire phrase whose book has moved overtly, inter-
pretation of (41) must involve reconstruction of everything but who to create the
representation in (43).
Ohno's and von Stechow's point is that Nishigauchi's examples have the same
problem; Nishigauchi gives the Japanese sentence in (44a) the semantics in (44b),
which makes the question one about books. In fact, it must have the semantic
structure in (44c), that of a question about people.
(44)	a. John-wa	[dare-ga	kaita hon-o]	yomimasita ka?
John-Top who-NOM wrote book-ACC read	q
"Who did John read [a book that __ wrote]?'
b.	For which x, y, x a book, y a person that wrote x, John read x?
c.	For which y, y a person, John read a book that y wrote?
If we posit covert pied-piping in examples such as (44), then, the process of in-
terpretation must apparently involve operations that give a representation such
as the one in (44c). In other words, even if the covert derivation begins by pied-
piping the entire island dare-ga kaita hon-o 'a book that who wrote' into a scope
position, we must then go on to extract the w/i-word dare 'who' out of the island
WH-QUESTIONS Z6Z
and then reconstruct the island back into the base position. This is in fact the
type of derivation von Stechow (1996) outlines. In (45b), the 印万-phrase pied-
pipes the entire island, so that dare-ga kaita hon-o 'a book that who wrote'
moves to the specifier of CP. In (45c), the 印/!-phrase dare-ga 'who' moves out of
the pied-piped island, and finally, in (43d), the remnant of the island recon-
structs.12
dare-ga kaita hon-o
'a book that who wrote*
John-wa _____yomimasita
'John'	'read'
Although it gets us the right semantic representation, the derivation in (45) has
some unsettling properties. For one thing, it is fairly baroque. Do we really need a
derivation with all these steps?13 One way of avoiding this derivation would be to
revise the assumptions Ohno and von Stechow make about the semantics of
questions. This is the tack taken by Hagstrom (1998) and Cable (2007), who
propose a semantics for questions that can interpret pied-piped structures.
One can imagine several possible solutions, then, to the problems raised by
Ohno and von Stechow; we might avail ourselves of the derivation in (45), or adopt
different assumptions about the semantics or questions, for example. But it seems
clear that we cannot simply deny the existence of large-scale pied-piping as a way of
circumventing island effects. In section 13.2.1 we saw that in some languages (e.g.,
364 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Quechua, Tlingit, and Basque), pied-piping to avoid islands is a property of overt
movement:
(46) a. *Ima-ta -taj riku -rka -ngui [randi -shka runa -ta]?
what acc int see past 2 buy nlz man acc
'What did you see the man who bought?'
b. [Ima -ta randi -shka runa -ta -taj] riku -rka -ngui?
what acc buy nlz man acc int see past 2
Lit. '[The man that bought what] did you see?'
If this is the correct analysis for languages such as Quechua, and if Ohno's and von
Stechow's claims about the interpretation of iv/r-questions are correct, then we
cannot have a simpler theory in which this kind of derivation is impossible; some
version of this derivation must be possible to deal with the interpretation of
languages like Quechua. The only question is whether we want to use covert
versions of these operations in Japanese.
The derivation in (45) has another, more serious problem, however. Recall that
the whole point of positing covert pied-piping was to deal with islands. Nishi-
gauchi's proposal was that Japanese lacks certain types of island effects, because
covert w/i-movement pied-pipes the entire island, so that the w/i-word itself never
actually exits the island, and thus no island violation is incurred. But the derivation
in (45) does appear to have an island violation; the pied-piping step in (45b)
may not violate any islands, but subextraction of the w/i-word itself in (45c) cer-
tainly does. Von Stechow acknowledges this and suggests that, if we are to employ
derivations such as (45), we need to posit a derivation with multiple levels on
which covert movements can take place. The first, which he calls WH-structure, is
the one constrained by Subjacency; this is the level on which pied-piping of islands
takes place. WH-structure is followed by LF, which is not constrained by Sub-
jacency and in which the w人-word itself is moved out of the island, which creates a
structure that can be correctly interpreted semantically.
This proposal is disturbing in several ways. For one thing, the introduction
of a new level is always cause for suspicion (as Heck 2004 points out). Perhaps
more important, the original goal of the pied-piping proposal seems to have been
lost. Nishigauchi first proposed covert pied-piping to explain why island effects
seem not to appear. Rather than simply stipulating that island effects do not
apply to covert operations, he allowed island effects to remain constant and gave
covert movement another way of circumventing them. Now, it seems, we are
back to stipulating that island effects do not appear for certain types of move-
ment.
As it happens, a related proposal has been made on independent grounds.
Richards (1997, 2001)and Hiraiwa (2001)claim that the conditions on a Probe
are not uniform through the derivation; in particular, they claim that once a
Probe has undergone its first Agree operation, it becomes subject to looser lo-
cality conditions. They explicitly avoid making any reference to differences in
levels of representation. The relevant distinction is simply between the first
WH-QUESTIONS Z6Z
Agree operation by a given Probe and subsequent Agree operations, regardless
of the levels on which these take place. Richards's (1997, 2001)Principle of
Minimal Compliance allows a Probe that has participated in one well-formed
Agree relation to subsequently ignore the locality conditions that normally
constrain Probes. Hiraiwa's (2001)notion of Multiple Agree allows Probes to
ignore Goals with which they have previously Agreed, when locality conditions
are computed.
From this perspective, von Stechow's version of Nishigauchi's proposal no
longer looks so peculiar. Richards and Hiraiwa have already proposed that when
a Probe performs multiple Agree operations, instances of Agree after the first one
are subject to looser locality conditions. This is precisely what von Stechow
proposes; Japanese interrogative C first Agrees with the island, triggering pied-
piping, and may then pull the wh-word out of the island with impunity. The
stipulation that the second of these Agree operations is less subject to islands than
the first turns out to be a special instance of a more generally observable phe-
nomenon.
Shimoyama (2006) suggests that this version of a pied-piping analysis, in
which w/i-phrases eventually do exit the pied-piped island, loses the result de-
scribed in section 13.3.1.3, in which multiple wh-phrases inside an island must all
take the same scope. She offers the derivation in (48), which begins with two
interrogative CPs, with an island containing two w/i-phrases embedded inside the
lower CP:
(48) a.	[cp	[cp	[island Whi Wh2]]]
b.	[cp	[cp	[island whi wh2]	一 ]] _1
c.	[cp	[cp whi [island 一 wh2]	一 !]
		I	I	
d.	[cP [island	 L	wh2] [cp whi 	 	1	一 ]]
In the derivation in (48), the island first moves to Spec,CP in the embedded clause,
and one of the wh-phrases moves out of it. The island then moves up to the higher
clause, where the second w/i-phrase ought to be able to move out of it, thereby
taking scope in a different clause.
Shimoyama's point is well taken. The Minimal Link Condition might be en-
ough to rule out this derivation, however. At the point in the derivation in (48c),
the first wh-phrase moves out of the island to a higher specifier of the embedded
CP. As a result, the move of the island in(48d) violates the Minimal Link Con-
dition; is a closer possible Goal for the matrix C than the island is. The
366 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
prediction that multiple 印//-phrases that share an island must have the same scope
thus appears to be safe, at least from this particular derivation.14
None of this, of course, is a positive argument that Japanese w/z-movement
ought to be done in this way. All we have seen here is that we need the type of
derivation under consideration, in any event, to deal with the facts from Basque,
Quechua, and Tlingit, and that the tools we need to do wh-movement in this way
are already present in the syntactic literature, having been proposed on indepen-
dent grounds.
13.4	Interlude: IVh-Intonation
The intonation associated with Japanese wh-questions has been the subject of a
number of recent papers (including Deguchi and Kitagawa 2002; Ishihara 2002)
2003; Sugahara 2003; Kitagawa, Roehrs, and Tomioka 2004; Hirotani 2005; Smith
2005). In Tokyo Japanese, the special 印万一intonation involves an area of pitch
compression, beginning with the M-phrase and ending at the C marking the scope
position for that w/z-phrase.
Some of the work on Japanese ivん-intonation (see, in particular, Ishihara 2002,
Deguchi and Kitagawa 2002, Kitagawa, Roehrs, and Tomioka 2004) argues for the
conclusion that some of the data under discussion here are in fact illusory. For
instance, they reanalyze examples like (33a), repeated here as (49).
(49)りohn-wa [Mary-ga nani-o	katta ka dooka] siritagatteiru no?
John-Top Mary-NOM what-ACC bought whether wants.to.know q
'What does John want to know whether Mary bought —?'
The proposal, as I understand it, is that (49) is not in fact ill formed but is
simply frequently given an improper intonation, in which the intonational do-
main following the 印・-phrase ends in the embedded clause rather than in the
matrix clause. Because this intonational domain must end at the scope position of
the w/2-phrase, and the embedded clause in this case is headed by ka dooka
'whether' and is therefore not a scope position for a w/z-phrase, the result is a
semantic anomaly.
This is an extremely interesting proposal. My understanding is that there is
some debate among native speakers about whether intonation can make (49)
completely well formed or simply easier to interpret. It is very difficult to know
how to adjudicate this type of debate. Similarly, it is difficult to see how to find
out whether Japanese 印//-island effects are like wh-island effects in other lan-
guages (for instance, in English) or qualitatively different in some way that we
want the theory to capture. In both Japanese and English, speakers vary in how
robust they find the 心-island effect. It may be that we need to consider more
semantically sophisticated kinds of effects on interpretation; rather than simply
WH-QUESTIONS 367
asking whether the sentences are ill formed, we may wish to concentrate on the
distribution of pair-list readings, interactions between wh-phrases and quantifi-
ers, and so forth. ~
13.5	Implications and Conclusions
Our access to the syntactic and semantic properties of wh-in-situ is necessarily
somewhat indirect, and it is probably no surprise that no complete consensus on
these topics has been reached. I have reviewed here two types of proposals from the
literature. In one of these, wh-in-situ remains in situ throughout the derivation
and is given a semantic type that allows it to be interpreted without movement.
In the other, wh-in-situ is moved via a syntactic operation not unlike overt wh-
movement; the particular derivation that we considered was first proposed by
Nishigauchi and refined by von Stechow.
The proponents of these theories often offer simplicity arguments in favor of
their approaches. Researchers championing the first type of approach point to the
complex array of steps that the Nishigauchi derivation requires, once it is modi-
fied as von Stechow has argued it must be. Researchers arguing for the second type
of approach tend to push for the desirability of a single type of syntax for wh-
questions, with variation appearing only in the phonology.
Although I have certainly been guilty of this type of argumentation in my own
work, I think that it is misplaced. Theories such as Shimoyama's (2001,2006, this
volume) cover a wide range of data elegantly and simply and without recourse to
semantic trickery that is unneeded in other domains. No simplicity arguments
should be leveled against such an approach.
The pied-piping proposal does force us to either alter our assumptions about
the semantics of questions or posit a derivation with more steps than we are
typically familiar with. I have argued here, however, that we cannot avoid positing
some type of pied-piping derivation in certain languages (namely, languages such
as Quechua, which use overt pied-piping as a way of avoiding islands). It seems to
me, then, that a simplicity argument is out of place here as well, given that our
theory of Universal Grammar (UG) must allow for derivations of this kind. Of
course, we could simplify our theory of Japanese by pretending that these deri-
vations do not exist, but this does nothing to simplify our overall theory.
In my opinion, then, the relevant evidence bearing on the choice between these
theories must come not from considerations of simplicity but from the kind of
evidence reviewed in section 13.3一that is, evidence gathered by investigating the
properties of the syntax-semantics interface.
Several recent theories have focused on the properties of the particles I glossed
with int (Hagstrom 1998; Kishimoto 1992, 2005; Cable 2007). The discussion here
has centered on the relation between w/i-phrases and interrogative C, but once the
368 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
behavior of int is taken seriously, we have a third morpheme to investigate. It may
well be that the correct theory is a hybrid of the two extremes I have been con-
sidering, with different types of relations holding between the different syntactic
objects participating in a w/z-question.
NOTES FOR CHAPTER 13
Many thanks to Danny Fox, Takako Iseda, Shigeru Miyagawa, and Mamoru Saito for
useful discussion of these topics. Any mistakes are my own responsibility.
1.	Abbreviations used in this chapter are: acc — accusative, pres — present tense,
int — interrogative, q — question particle, nlz — nominalizer, top — topic, nom —
nominative.
2.	The literature offers us a number of models for covert movement, including post-
Spell-Out movement of the type first suggested by Huang (1982), pronunciation of a
lower copy (e.g., Bobaljik 2002), and movement of some object other than the wh-phrase
itself (a null operator, as in Watanabe 1992a, 1992b, or the w/i-particle ka, as in Hagstrom
1998).
3.	I discuss these particles in more depth in section 13.3.1. They do not appear to be
instances of C, given that multiple questions contain multiple instances of int:
(i)	Pi-taj,	ima	-ta	-taj,	riku-rka Utavalu-pi -ka?
who int	what	acc	int	see past.	3 Otavalo in top
'Who saw what in Otavalo?'	(Imbabura Quechua; Cole 1982:27)
(ii)	Aa	sa	daa	sa	aawaxaa?
who int	what int they.ate.it
'Who ate what?'	(Tlingit; Cable 2007)
4.	Though see Arregi 2002 for another analysis of Basque w/i-questions.
5.	As of this writing, I have not been able to find the relevant data for Tlingit or
Quechua.
6.	See Ochi 1999, Tanaka 1999b, and references cited there for discussion.
7.	These languages have all typically been analyzed as having w/2-in-situ. However,
Watanabe (2002) claims that older Japanese had overt M-movement.
8.	On the basis of these data, because it is the particle whose position is partly de-
termined by islands, we might conclude that it is the particle, or the projection headed by
the particle, that undergoes covert movement in these cases. See Hagstrom 1998; Kishimoto
2005; Cable 2007.
9.	See Hagstrom 1998, however, for arguments that the Japanese interrogative particle
ka is identical to the int particle ka in premodern Japanese but undergoes overt movement
in modern Japanese to its scope position.
10.	For more discussion of the possible readings, see Shimoyama's (2001,2006, this
volume) discussion.
11.	We might instead try to relate the facts about mo to the intervention effects in
section 13.3.1.2.
12.	I represent reconstruction as a lowering operation, but this is just for graphic
convenience; any approach to reconstruction would work equally well.
WH-QUESTIONS 369
13.	Some readers may particularly object to the step in (45c), in which C apparently
Probes into its own specifier, pulling the w/z-word dare out and moving it to another
specifier. See Richards 2004 for arguments that operations like this are in principle possible.
Briefly, what I claim there is that we should not impose a c-command requirement (or
wsearch domain") on Probes. Approaches to Cyclicity in which Probes must perform Agree
operations early in the derivation will handle many of the cases that a c-command re-
quirement on Agree would rule out; the potentially offending Goals will simply not be
present in the structure at the point in the derivation at which the Goal is active. The only
purpose of a c-command requirement on Agree, I claim, would be to rule out derivations
like the one in (45); I offer evidence from Bulgarian that such derivations are in fact licit. See
also Rezac 2003 for related discussion and Ko 2005 for counterarguments.
14.	Another derivation, in which whx does indeed move into the matrix clause and wh2
later moves to a scope position in the embedded clause, could be ruled out by Cyclicity.
15.	Kitagawa, Roehrs, and Tomioka (2004), for example, note that Japanese wh-
phrases separated by a 印//-island cannot have a pair-list reading, even on the correct
intonation. They propose that covert movement is required just for pair-list readings and
that single-pair readings may be generated without such movement (and hence without
w/i-island effects).
REFERENCES
Arregi, Karlos. 2002. Focus on Basque movements. Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge,
Mass.
Beck, Sigrid.1996. Quantified structures as barriers for LF movement. Natural Language
Semantics 4:1-56.
Beck, Sigrid, and Shin-Sook Kim.1997. On wh- and operator scope in Korean. Journal of
East Asian Linguistics 6:339-384.
Bobaljik, Jonathan. 2002. A-chains at the PF interface: Copies and "covert” movement.
Natural Language & Linguistic Theory 20:197-267.
Cable, Seth. 2007. The grammar of Q: Q-particles and the nature of w/z-fronting, as
revealed by the rv/r-questions ofTlingit. Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Choe, Jae W.1987. LF movement and pied-piping. Linguistic Inquiry 18:348-353.
Cole, Peter.1982. Imbabura Quechua (Lingua Descriptive Studies vol.5). Amsterdam:
North Holland.
Deguchi, Masanori, and Yoshihisa Kitagawa. 2002. Prosody and w/i-questions. In Pro-
ceedings of NELS 32, ed. Masako Hirotani, 73-92. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA Publications.
Hagstrom, Paul.1998. Decomposing questions. Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge,
Mass.
Hamblin, Charles.1973. Questions in Montague English. Foundations of Language 10:41-53.
Heck, Fabian. 2004. A theory of pied piping. Doctoral dissertation, University of Tubingen,
Germany.
Hermon, Gabriella.1984. Syntactic modularity. Dordrecht: Foris.
Hiraiwa, Ken. 2001.Multiple Agree and the Defective Intervention Constraint in Japanese.
In MITWPL 40: The proceedings of HUMIT 2000, ed. Ora Matushansky, Albert Costa,
Javier Martin-Gonzalez, Lance Nathan, and Adam Szczegielniak, 67-8〇. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Working Papers in Linguistics.
37〇 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Hirotani, Masako. 2005. Prosody and LF interpretation: Processing Japanese w/i-questions.
Doctoral dissertation, University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Hoji, Hajime.1985. Logical Form constraints and configurational structures in Japanese.
Doctoral dissertation, University of Washington, Seattle.
Huang, C.-T. James.1982. Logical relations in Chinese and the theory of grammar. Doc-
toral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Ishihara, Shinichiro. 2002. Invisible but audible w/i-scope marking: W/z-questions and
deaccenting in Japanese. In Proceedings of WCCFL 21,ed. Line Mikkelsen and
Christopher Potts, 180-193. Somerville, Mass.: Cascadilla Press.
Ishihara, Shinichiro. 2003. Intonation and interface conditions. Doctoral dissertation,
MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Karttunen, Lauri.1977. Syntax and semantics of questions. Linguistics and Philosophy
i：3-44.
Kishimoto, Hideki.1992. LF pied piping: Evidence from Sinhala. Gengo Kenkyu 102:46-87.
Kishimoto, Hideki. 2005. Wh-in-situ and movement in Sinhala questions. Natural Lan-
guage & Linguistic Theory 23:1-51.
Kitagawa, Yoshihisa, Dorian Roehrs, and Satoshi Tomioka. 2004. Multiple w/z-interpre-
tations. In Generative grammar in a broader perspective: Proceedings of the 4th GLOW
in Asia 2003, ed. Hang-Jin Yoon, 209-233. Seoul: Hangkook.
Ko, Heejeong. 2005. Syntactic edges and linearization. Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cam-
bridge, Mass.
Nishigauchi, Taisuke.1986. Quantification in syntax. Doctoral dissertation, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst.
Nishigauchi, Taisuke.199〇• Quantification in the theory of grammar. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Ochi, Masao.1999. Constraints on feature checking. Doctoral dissertation, University of
Connecticut, Storrs.
Ohno, Yutaka.1989. Mo. In Papers on quantification, ed. Emmon Bach, Angelika Kratzer,
and Barbara Partee, 223-25〇. Amherst: University of Massachusetts, Department of
Linguistics.
Ohno, Yutaka.1991.Arguments against unselective binding in Korean. In Harvard studies
in Korean linguistics IV, ed. Susumu Kuno, John Whitman, Young-Se Kang, Ik-Hwan
Lee, Joan Maling, and Young-Joo Kim, 553-562. Seoul: Hanshin.
Ortiz de Urbina, Jon.1989. Parameters in the grammar of Basque. Dordrecht: Foris.
Pesetsky, David.1987. Wz-in-situ: Movement and unselective binding. In The represen-
tation of (in)definiteness, ed. Eric Reuland and Alice ter Meulen, 98-129. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.
Rezac, Milan. 2003. The fine structure of cyclic Agree. Syntax 6:156-182.
Richards, Norvin.1997. What moves where when in which language? Doctoral dissertation,
MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Richards, Norvin. 200〇. An island effect in Japanese. Journal of East Asian Linguistics
9:187-205.
Richards, Norvin. 2001.Movement in language: Interactions and architectures. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Richards, Norvin. 2004. Against bans on lowering. Linguistic Inquiry 35:453 — 463.
Riemsdijk, Henk van.1984. On pied-piped infinitives in German relative clauses. In Studies
in German grammar, ed. Jindrich Toman, 165-192. Dordrecht: Foris.
Saito, Mamoru.1994. Additional-w" effects and the adjunction site theory. Journal of East
Asian Linguistics 3:195-24〇.
WH-QUESTIONS )/1
Shimoyama, Junko. 2001.Wh-constructions in Japanese. Doctoral dissertation, University
of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Shimoyama, Junko. 2006. Indeterminate phrase quantification in Japanese. Natural Lan-
guage Semantics 14:139-173.
Smith, Jennifer. 2005. On the w/z-question intonational domain in Fukuoka Japanese:
Some implications for the syntax-prosody interface. In UMOP 30: Papers on prosody,
ed. Shigeto Kawahara, 219-237. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA Publications.
Stechow, Arnim von.1996. Against LF pied-piping. Natural language Semantics 4:57-11〇.
Sugahara, Mariko.1996. Shuri Okinawan kakari-musubi and movement. In MITWPL 29:
Formal approaches to Japanese linguistics 2, ed. Masatoshi Koizumi, Masayuki Oishi,
and Uli Sauerland, 235-254. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working Papers in Linguistics.
Sugahara, Mariko. 2003. Downtrends and post-FOCUS intonation in Tokyo Japanese.
Doctoral dissertation, University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Takahashi, Daiko. 2002. Determiner raising and scope shift. Linguistic Inquiry 33:575-615.
Tanaka, Hidekazu.1997. Invisible movement in sika-nai and the linear crossing constraint.
Journal of East Asian Linguistics 6:143-188.
Tanaka, Hidekazu. 1999a. Conditions on logical form derivations and representations.
Doctoral dissertation, McGill University, Montreal.
Tanaka, Hidekazu. 1999b. LF wh-islands and the Minimal Scope Principle. Natural Lan-
guage & Linguistic Theory 17:371-402.
Tanaka, Hidekazu. 2002. Remarks on Beck s effects. Linguistic Inquiry 34:314-323.
Tsai, Wei-tien Dylan.1994. On economizing the theory of A-bar dependencies. Doctoral
dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Watanabe, Akira. 1992a. W7z-in-situ, Subjacency, and chain formation. MIT occasional
papers in linguistics 2. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working Papers in Linguistics.
Watanabe, Akira. 1992b. Subjacency and S-structure movement of w/z-in-situ. Journal of
East Asian Linguistics 1:255-291.
Watanabe, Akira. 2002. The loss of overt w/i-movement in Old Japanese. In Syntactic effects
of morphological change, ed. David Lightfoot, 179-195. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Whitman, John.1997. Kakarimusubi from a comparative perspective. In Japanese/Korean
linguistics 6, ed. Ho-min Sohn and John Haig, 161-178. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI
Publications.
CHAPTER 14
INDETERMINATE
PRONOUNS
JUNKO SHIMOYAMA
14.1	Introduction
This chapter surveys some of the major issues surrounding so-called indeter-
minate pronouns in Japanese such as dare 'who' and nani 'what'. One of the
questions that has attracted the most attention in this domain concerns how
indeterminate pronouns associate with quantificational particles that occur higher
in the structure. Two major approaches to this question—namely, the movement
and nonmovement analyses—are reviewed from the perspective of the syntax-
semantics interface, and the challenges that these analyses face are presented.
Closely related to this issue is the question of what the semantics of indeterminate
pronouns is. I survey two views on this and point out the advantages and disad-
vantages.
14.2	Brief Introduction of the
Problem: Indeterminate Pronouns
Japanese expressions such as dare 'who', nani'what', doko 'where', and so forth—
although typically given English translations using w/i-words一do not have in-
terrogative meanings inherently. The quantificational force of these expressions
depends on the particles that they co-occur with, as table 14.1 shows (the table is
373
INDETERMINATE PRONOUNS
Table 14.1	Japanese indeterminate pronouns and their quantificational meanings					
a. Interrogative			b. Existential	c. Universal	d. NPI any	e. FC any
da're... ka		<who‘	da're-ka	da're-mo	dare-mo	dare-de-mo
na'ni... ka		'what,	na'ni-ka	(na'ni-mo)	nani-mo	nan-de-mo
do're... ka		'which (one)'	do're-ka	do're-mo	dore-mo	dore-de-mo
do'no N...	ka	'whichDet'	do'no N-ka	do'no N-mo	dono N-mo	dono N-de-mo
do'tira... k;	1	'which of the two'	do'tira-ka	do'tira-mo	dotira-mo	dotira-de-mo
do'ko... ka		'where'	do'ko-ka	do'ko-mo	doko-mo	doko-de-mo
i'tu... ka		'when'	i'tu-ka	i'tu-mo	一	itu-de-mo
naze...ka		'why'	na'ze-ka	一	—	一
do'o... ka		'how'	(do'o-ka)	(do'o-mo)	(doo-mo)	doo-de-mo
not intended to be an exhaustive list of indeterminate pronouns). The apostrophes
in the table indicate the location of accent in the standard dialect.
Because of their varying semantics, the expressions in question are referred to
as huteigo "indeterminate words' in traditional Japanese grammar and as inde-
terminate pronouns by Kuroda (1965:91). Indeterminate pronouns are interpreted
as interrogative when they associate with the question particle ka that occurs at the
right periphery of a clause as in column (a) of the table. When the indeterminates
are immediately followed by ka as in column (b), they take on existential meaning.
Columns (c) and (d) show that accented indeterminates and the particle mo give
rise to universal meaning, whereas nonaccented indeterminates and mo give rise to
meaning similar to the negative polarity item (NPI) any. Finally, column (e) shows
that nonaccented indeterminates and -de-mo are interpreted as free choice any.
What we have just seen is by no means a phenomenon peculiar to Japanese, as
can be seen in cross-linguistic studies such as Haspelmath 1997. To provide just one
sample, table 14.2 shows a list of what we might call indeterminate pronouns in
Basque and how they take on various quantificational meanings depending on the
co-occurring particles (Haspelmath 1997:315).
When the common cores of all the series (nor, zer, non, etc.) occur on their own as
in column (a), interrogative meaning arises. The -bait-series in column (b)
are nonemphatic indefinites used in nonnegative polarity contexts, and the i-series
in column (c) are negative polarity items. The edo-series and -nahi-series in col-
umns (d) and (e) are found in free choice contexts.
Among the various uses of indeterminate pronouns in Japanese, the interroga-
tive use, or more precisely its syntax, has received the most attention in the literature.
As overviewed by Richards in this volume, Japanese indeterminates in the context of
^-questions have figured more prominently in the development of syntactic theory
in the last few decades than those in any other contexts. However, given the way
quantification is expressed in general in Japanese as observed in table 14.1 and the fact
374 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Table 14.2 Basque indeterminate pronouns and their quantificational
meanings
a. Interrogative	b. -bait-series	c. i-series	d. edo-series	e. -nahi-series
nor 'who'	nor-bait	i-nor	edo-nor	nor-nahi
zer 'what'	zer-bait	i-zer	edo-zer	zer-nahi
non 'where'	non-bait	i-non	edo-non	non-nahi
noiz 'when'	noiz-bait	i-noiz	edo-noiz	noiz-nahi
nola 'how'	nola-bait	i-nola	edo-nola	nola-nahi
zein 'whichDet'	—	一	edo-zein	zein-nahi
that the Japanese-type indeterminate pronouns are found cross-linguistically, we can
say that looking at w/z-questions in isolation may not necessarily give us an insight
into learning how quantification in general works in Japanese. For any of the contexts
where indeterminates show up, its analysis should be couched within a general theory
of indeterminate pronoun quantification in Japanese. Of course, we would ultimately
want to see a theory of quantification involving indeterminate pronouns across
languages. First steps toward that direction have been taken by Kratzer and Shi-
moyama 2002 and Kratzer 2005, to which the reader is referred.
14.3	Description of the Core Data:
Association of Indeterminate
Pronouns and Particles
One of the central questions that has been addressed in the literature concerns how
indeterminate pronouns associate with particles that do not occur locally. This
section introduces the core data in this domain.
14.3.1	Nonlocal Association
Looking at table 14.1, one might get the impression that except for the interrogative
case, Japanese is not that different from Basque, or English for that matter, because
the particles from which indeterminates derive their quantificational force occur
right next to them. This, however, is not always the case. The examples in (1)
illustrate that the particle mo or ka can occur at either side of the postposition ni
'to' or kara 'from'.
(1)a. Dare-mo-ni/-ni-mo denwa-o kaketa.
who-MO-to/-to-MO phone-ACC rang
'(I) called everyone.'
INDETERMINATE PRONOUNS 375
b.	Dare-ka-kara/-kara-ka denwa-ga atta.
who-KA-from/from-KA phone-NOM existed
"There was a call from someone.'
These are cases of universal and existential quantification, but a similar observation
can be made fbr the NPI and free choice contexts. In these contexts, however, the
particles mo and de-mo must occur to the right of postpositions.
In the universal construction, the distance between indeterminates and
associating particles can even be farther than just across postpositions. The
example in (2a) illustrates that the universal particle mo can associate with
dare "who' across a noun phrase boundary. The example in (2b) is even more
striking一the association takes place across a complex NP, which contains a rel-
ative clause.
(2)	a. [Dare-no hahaoya]-mo naita.
who-GEN mother-MO cried
"For everyone x, the mother of x cried.'
b.	[Dare-ga katta ie]-mo takakatta.
who-NOM bought house-MO was.expensive
"For everyone x, a/the house(s) that x bought was/were expensive.'
Such data have attracted the attention of Kuroda (1965), Hoji (1985), Nishigauchi
(1986,1990), Ohno (1989), von Stechow (1996), Shimoyama (1999, 2001,2006a),
and Takahashi (2002), among many others. Korean has a very similar construction,
as shown in (3), taken from Ohno 1991.
(3)	[Enu	sonye-ka	pon	koyangi]	-na	kwiyewessta.
which	girl-NOM	saw	cat	-na	were.cute
"The cats that each girl saw were cute.'
The universal mo (and perhaps the free choice de-mo) most freely allows the
long-distance association of the kind we just observed. The existential particle ka,
for instance, does not seem to allow nonlocal association as freely, as shown in (4)
and (5), though Takahashi (2002) and Yatsushiro (2004) report on data from more
permissive dialects.1
(4)	a.	Taroo-wa	dare-ka-no hon-o	nakusita.
Taroo-Top	who-KA-GEN book-ACC	lost
"Taroo lost someone's book.'
b.	?/??Taroo-wa	dare-no hon-ka-o	nakusita.
Taroo-Top	who-GEN book-KA-ACC	lost
(5)	a. Taroo-wa [dare-ka-kara karita	hon]・〇	nakusita.
Taroo-Top who-KA-from borrowed book-ACC lost
"Taroo lost a/the book that he had borrowed from someone.'
b.	??/*Taroo-wa [dare-kara karita	hon]-ka-o	nakusita.
Taroo-Top who-from borrowed book-KA-ACC lost
376 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
14.3.2	Locality
Data such as (2b), where an indeterminate depends on the particle mo outside the
complex NP it is embedded in, are familiar from indeterminates in the interrog-
ative context. In (6), association of doko 'where' and the question particle ka is
established across complex NP (see Richards, this volume).2
(6)	Hanako-wa	[doko-kara	kita	hito]-ni	aimasita	ka?
Hanako-TOP	where-from	came	person-DAT	met	q
'Wherex did Hanako meet a/the person/people who came from x?'
This seemingly long-distance association in the interrogative context as well as
in the universal context is in fact constrained by a certain locality condition.
An important observation made by Nishigauchi (1986,1990) is that the associa-
tion does not result in full grammaticality in the presence of a w/z-island. Start-
ing from a w入-question example in (7), we can see that the sentence is most
readily interpreted as a matrix yes/〃o-question and an embedded multiple ques-
tion.3
(7)	Sabu-wa [Masako-ga dare-ni nani-o	ageta ka] oboeteimasu ka?
Sabu-TOP Masako-NOM who-DAT what-ACC gave q remember q
a.	'Does Sabu remember what Masako gave to whom?'
b.	?*'Whox does Sabu remember what Masako gave to x?'
c.	*'Whatx does Sabu remember to whom Masako gave x?'
d.	?*'Whox does Sabu remember whether Masako gave what to x?'
In a similar manner, the association between indeterminates and mo is blocked by a
印万-island. Note first that the particle mo has a use in which it means 'also' or
'even'. So, when there is no indeterminate pronoun in the scope of mo as in (8),
'also' or 'even' is the only possible interpretation.
(8)	Sono	hito-mo	Sabu-ni	denwasita.
that	hito-MO	Sabu-DAT	called
'That person also called Sabu./Even that person called Sabu.'
In (9), we see that an attempt to interpret dare 'who' and/or nani'what' as having a
universal force fails.
(9)	[[[Masako-ga	dare-ni	nani-o	ageta	ka]	siritagatteiru]
Masako-NOM	who-DAT	what-ACC	gave	q	want.to.know
hito]-mo	Sabu-ni	denwasita.
person-MO	Sabu-DAT	called
a.	'The person who wanted to know what Masako gave to whom also
called Sabu.'
'Even the person who wanted to know what Masako gave to whom
called Sabu.'
b.	*'For every person x, the person who wanted to know what Masako gave
to x called Sabu.'
INDETERMINATE PRONOUNS
377
c.	ヰ»'For every thing X, the person who wanted to know to whom Masako
gave x called Sabu?
d.	必For every person x, for every thing y, the person who wanted to know
whether Masako gave y to x called Sabu.'
Based on observations of this kind, Nishigauchi (1986,1990) has established that a
uniform analysis should be sought for the two types of indeterminate-particle
association.
To reinforce the need for such a uniform analysis, we can add here that a
mo-marked phrase functions similarly to a wh-island in that it blocks indetermi-
nate-particle association. Examples (10) and (11) from Shimoyama 2006a illustrate
this point. Both show that an indeterminate cannot be construed with a
higher particle (either ka or mo) when the lower particle, mo, is interpreted as
universal.4
(10)	Yoko-wa [[[Taroo-ga nan-nen-ni nani-nituite kaita]
Yoko-Top Taroo-NOM what-year-in what-about wrote
ronbun] -mo yuu-datta ka] siritagatteiru.
paper -mo A-was	q want.to.know
a.	'Yoko wonders whether for every topic x, every year y, the paper that
Taroo wrote on x in y got an A.'
b.	?*'Yoko wonders for which year y, for every topic x, the paper that
Taroo wrote on x in y got an A：
c.	必Yoko wonders for which topic x, for every year y, the paper that
Taroo wrote on x in y got an A：
d.	(?)'Yoko wonders for which topic x and for which year y, the paper that
Taroo wrote on x in y also got an A：
(11)	[[[[Taroo-ga	nan-nen-ni	nani-nituite	kaita] ronbun] -mo yonda]
Taroo-NOM what-year-in what-about wrote paper -mo read
sensei]-mo	totemo	tukareta.
teacher-MO	very.much	got.tired
a.	"The teacher who read, for every topic x, every year y, the paper that
Taroo wrote on x in y also got very tired?
b.	“ For every year y, the teacher who read, for every topic x, the paper that
Taroo wrote on x in y got very tired?
c.	**'For every topic x, the teacher who read, for every year y, the paper
that Taroo wrote on x in y got very tired?
d.	(?丿 For every topic x, every year y, the teacher who also read the paper
that Taroo wrote on x in y got very tired?
In summary, indeterminate pronouns can associate with higher particles ka
and mo in a long-distance manner, except when these particles occur in the as-
sociation path as shown in (12).
(12)
indeterminate... ]-ka/mo...] -ka/mo
378 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
This locality pattern observed in Japanese has created an intriguing challenge to
the theory of ^-dependencies. The pattern is different in interesting ways from
the well-studied dependency between a w/i-phrase and its trace in English, created
by overt or covert movement. Overt w/i-movement in English is subject to island
constraints including not just wh-islands but also complex NP, adjunct, and subject
islands, whereas covert wh-movement is not. Providing explanation to this cross-
linguistic variation has been a central concern in syntactic research (see Richards,
this volume). In the next two sections, I provide an overview of two major types of
analyses—namely, the movement and nonmovement analyses—mainly from the
perspective of the syntax-semantics interface. I mainly focus on how they fare in
providing a uniform analysis of the interrogative and universal constructions.
14.4	Issues and Controversies
Regarding Analysis:
The Movement Analysis, Covert
Pied-Piping, and the
Syntax-Semantics Interface
The fact that the indeterminate-particle dependency is sensitive to w/z-islands has
been taken by many researchers to indicate that this dependency is mediated
through movement (see, e.g., Nishigauchi 1986,1990; Watanabe 1992a, 1992b; Maki
1995; von Stechow 1996; Richards 1997, 2000, 2001;Hagstrom 1998; Ochi 1999;
Tanaka 1999). A challenge for the movement analysis, then, is to explain the lack of
all other island constraints. An influential syntactic proposal in this area was made
by Nishigauchi (1986,1990) and Choe (1987), to which we now turn.
14.4.1	Covert Pied-Piping
A special mechanism that allows covert pied-piping of a whole island was proposed
to account for the lack of island effects other than the 印/i-island effect (Nishigauchi
1986,1990; Choe 1987). According to the pied-piping analysis, a whole island
embedding an indeterminate pronoun counts as a 印ん-phrase due to feature per-
colation, and it is this big constituent that undergoes covert movement. The key in
this proposal is that indeterminate pronouns within islands are never extracted out
of them throughout the derivation, thus circumventing island violation. Though
the authors cited in the previous paragraph do not necessarily agree on what moves
at what level, most of them rely on some form of pied-piping analysis. For precise
syntactic mechanisms of pied-piping, see Nishigauchi 1986,1990 and Richards
2000?
INDETERMINATE PRONOUNS
379
14.4.2	Pied-Piping and Semantic Interpretation
From the perspective of syntax-semantics mapping, however, the pied-piping
analysis comes with an undesirable consequence and therefore needs to be aug-
mented with reconstruction of the pied-piped material, as discussed in detail in von
Stechow 1996 (see also Chomsky 1977; Heim 1987; and Fiengo, Huang, Lasnik, and
Reinhart 1988). Below I summarize von Stechow's main point一namely, that the LF
structure with pied-piping is not suitable for deriving appropriate semantic inter-
pretation for 印//-questions, and I show how the revised pied-piping analysis solves
the problem.6
According to the movement analysis, a wh-question such as (13a) has a Logical
Form such as (13b).
(13)	a. Yoko-ga dono hon-o	yomimasita ka?
Yoko-NOM which book-ACC read	q
"Which book did Yoko read?'
b. [CP [dono hon-o]】[TP Yoko-ga ら yomimasita] ka]
This LF has basically the same structure as the LF of the English 印//-question Which
book did Yoko read? and thus a standard interrogative semantics can be derived
compositionally following a standard procedure proposed for its English coun-
terpart. That is, we can assume, for example, that indeterminates introduce exis-
tential quantifiers that bind variables created by their movement, and that there is
an interrogative operator, say in C°, that forms a set of propositions that are
possible answers to the question, along the lines of Hamblin (1973) and Karttunen
(1977)/ The formula in (14), a suitable semantics for the question in (13a), can then
be read off from the LF in (13b).
(14)	Xp3x[book(x)(w) & p = kw/.read(x)(Yoko)(w7)]
The question denotes a set of propositions of the form Yoko read x, where x is a
book in the actual world.
When an indeterminate pronoun is embedded in an island other than a wh-
island, the whole island undergoes covert movement, according to the pied-piping
analysis.8 In (15a), for example, where dare 'who' occurs inside the complex NP dare-
ga kaita hon "book that who wrote', the LF structure is derived by moving this entire
object, as shown in (15b). The LF in (15b) also shows the movement of dare 'who'
within the complex NP. It moves within the relative clause according to Nishigauchi
(1986,1990,1999) and outside the relative clause according to Richards (2000). For
Nishigauchi, the purpose of this type of internal movement is to make the wh-
feature percolation from dare 'who' possible (see also van Riemsdijk 1984).
(15)	a. Kimi-wa [[dare-ga	kaita] hon]・〇	yomimasita ka?
you-TOP who-NOM wrote book-ACC read	q
'Whox did you read a book that x wrote?'
b. [[ [dare-ga]j t】kaita] hon-o]2 kimi-wa t2 yomimasita ka
who-NOM wrote book-ACC you-TOP read	q
Z80 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
It is proposed by Nishigauchi (1986,1990) that variables introduced by both dare
'who' and hon 'book' are bound unselectively by ka and the question is claimed to
receive the paraphrase in (i6a)> which can be translated into (16b).
(16)	a. For which x, y, x a book, y a person that wrote x, did you read x?
b. Xp3x3y[book(x) (w) & person (y)(w) & wrote(x)(y)(w) & p — Xw,.read
(x)(you)(w,)]
As von Stechow (1996) points out, this semantic interpretation derived from the
pied-piped LF structure incorrectly predicts that the sentence in (17a) is a possible
answer to the question.
(17)	a. Umibe-no	Kafuka-o	yomimasita.
shore-GEN	Kafka-Acc read
'(I) read Kafka on the Shore"
b. Murakami-ga kaita hon-o yomimasita.
Murakami-NOM wrote book-ACC read
'(I) read a book that Murakami wrote.'
A possible answer to this question should in fact have the form represented in
(17b). Given this fact, the denotation of the question should be (18), which can be
derived from the LF in (19).
(18)	Xp.3x[person (x)(w) & p — Xw,.3y[book(y)(w,) & wrote(y)(x)(w,) & read
(y)(you)(W)]]
(19)	[dare-ga]i [[[^ kaita] hon-o]2 kimi-wa t2 yomimasita ka]
who-NOM wrote book-ACC you-TOP read	q
According to von Stechow, a series of three covert movements are involved
in the derivation of this LF structure. First, the entire island dare-ga kaita hon-o
'book that who wrote' undergoes covert pied-piping. At the second step, where no
island constraints are operative, dare-ga 'who' is extracted out of the island and
adjoined to it.9 Finally the pied-piped material[t kaita hon-o] is reconstructed to
an interpretable position in the nucleus (this step does not leave a trace).
One might wonder why we even bother to covertly move the entire island to
begin with, if most of it should be reconstructed for interpretational purposes.
This is necessitated by the fundamental idea in the movement analysis that the
locality effect we observed in section 14.3.2 is an indication of a movement relation
between indeterminates and the particle ka or mo. One is then forced to assume that
w/i-movement takes place in Japanese at a level where island constraints do apply.10
14.4.3	A Consequence for the Universal Construction
So far in this section we have focused on indeterminate pronouns in the inter-
rogative context. In particular, we have seen how the movement analysis, coupled
with the amended pied-piping analysis, accounts for the puzzling pattern of
INDETERMINATE PRONOUNS
Z8l
island effects and derives appropriate interpretations. If we are to seek a general
theory of indeterminate pronouns, and in particular, a uniform analysis of the
interrogative and universal constructions, we want this analysis to extend to the
universal construction. As becomes clear shortly, this turns out to be a difficult
task. Therefore, if one insists on the movement analysis sketched for the inter-
rogative construction, a uniform analysis of the interrogative and universal
constructions has to be given up, which goes against Nishigauchi's (1986,1990)
original insight.
The main problem lies in the fact that the LF structure derived for the nonlocal
universal construction following the successive steps assumed in the amended
pied-piping analysis is not suitable for appropriate semantic interpretation. An
example of the nonlocal universal construction is repeated here:
(20)	a.	[Dare-ga	katta	ie]-mo	takakatta.
who-NOM	bought	house-MO	was.expensive
"For everyone x, the house that x bought was expensive/
b.	[[dare-ga]j	[[tA katta	ie]-mo]]	takakatta.
who-NOM bought house-MO	was.expensive
Following the steps described above, [dare-ga katta ie] "house that who bought'
first undergoes covert pied-piping to the specifier position of the phrase headed by
mo. Then the indeterminate dare-ga 'who' is extracted out of the island and ad-
joined to it, and finally the pied-piped part undergoes reconstruction, which re-
sults in the LF in (20b).
The semantic interpretation we want for the quantified sentence in (20a)
is (21), disregarding tense and possible worlds (Ohno 1989, von Stechow 1996).11
(21)	Vx[person(x) 一 expensive(iy[house(y) & person(x) & buy(y)(x)])]
The LF structure in (20b), however, cannot be transparently mapped to the se-
mantic representation (21) given that it does not have the typical tripartite struc-
ture that corresponds to the semantic interpretation. A technical device for the
purpose of deriving (21) from the LF in (20b) is indeed proposed by von Stechow
(1996), which I cannot go into here for reasons of space (see Shimoyama 2006a for
a brief review). The proposed device, however, is not an attractive solution, relying
on ad hoc assumptions made only for this type of sentence and hence not well
motivated in the grammar of Japanese.
14.4.4	More Questions Surrounding Covert Pied-piping
There are many other issues surrounding the pied-piping analysis that cannot be
fully discussed in this survey. For example, for the amended pied-piping analysis to
be complete, pied-piped wh-islands should be blocked in a principled manner.
Richards (2000, this volume) addresses this important question and tries to derive
why pied-piping of wh-islands does not give rise to grammatical sentences. Readers
382 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
are referred to his work, where a connection is made between the non-pied-
pipability of w力一islands in overt w/i-movement in Basque and the putative non-
pied-pipability of 印/！-islands in covert wh-movement in Japanese (see also Ortiz de
Urbina 1990 and Arregi 2003).
Richards (2000) also presents examples similar to (22) as an argument
for covert pied-piping in Japanese. The example in (22) is taken from
Watanabe (i992a:fh. 9), where the observation is attributed to Mamoru Saito (pers.
comm.).
(22)	John-wa [Mary-ga [[nani-o doko-de katta] hito]-o
John-Top Mary-NOM what-ACC where-LOC bought person-ACC
sagasiteiru ka] siritagatteiru no?
looking.for q want.to.know q
a.	[CP... [CP... [CNP • • • indeterminate】indeterminate?...]... q2] ... qJ
*cFor which x, x a thing, John wants to know for which y, y a place, Mary
is looking for the person who bought x at y?'
b.	[〇>... [cp • • • [cnp • • • indeterminate]... indeterminate2...]... q] ... q】セ]
??/？必For which x, x a thing, for which y, y a place, John wants to know
whether Mary is looking for the person who bought x at y?j12
c.	[cp -. - [cp • • • [cnp • • • indeterminate] • • • indeterminate2qj>2] ... q]
"Does John want to know for which x, x a thing, for which y, y a place,
Mary is looking for the person who bought x at y?'
Readings (a) and (b) both involve wん-island violations. The observation is that
reading (a), where the two indeterminates in the same complex NP are assigned
distinct scopes, is worse than typical wh-island violations.
It is claimed in Watanabe 1992a and Richards 2000 that the contrast in
grammaticality between (22a) and (22b) is accounted for straightforwardly by
assuming that covert pied-piping takes place in Japanese. One crucial assumption
there is that the reading in (22a) cannot be derived without extracting one inde-
terminate, in this case, nani "what', out of the complex NP, whereas the reading in
(22b) can be derived without extracting any indeterminate from the complex NP.
Hence, an additional island effect is detected for (22a) but not for (22b), where only
the w入-island effect is detected.
However, given that the original pied-piping analysis needs to be augmented
with subsequent wh-extraction out of islands and reconstruction for the semantic
reasons discussed above, extraction out of complex NPs always takes
place, even in the same scope readings. That is, extraction out of the complex NP
occurs not just in (22a) but in (22b) as well. Thus, the degradedness of the distinct
scope reading does not follow simply from the assumption that covert pied-piping
takes place in Japanese.
Consider, for instance, the derivation of the reading in (22a) in which the
complex NP first moves to the lower scope position, and then indeterminate2
is extracted out of the complex NP. From this second step on, no island constraints
are operative in the amended pied-piping analysis. Then, indeterminate] can move
INDETERMINATE PRONOUNS
Z8Z
out of the complex NP to the matrix scope position without any island viola-
tion (see also Richards, this volume). Thus, covert pied-piping and the distinct
scope reading do not necessarily exclude each other in the amended pied-piping
analysis.13
The contrast between (22a) and (22b) does not seem to follow, either, if we
further augment the amended pied-piping analysis so that Subjacency needs to be
satisfied only once per C°, as briefly touched on in note 9. Starting from a
derivation of (22b), the movement of the complex NP to the matrix scope po-
sition incurs a w/i-island violation. Because Subjacency has not yet been obeyed at
the matrix Q level, the subsequent extraction of the two indeterminates incurs
two complex NP island violations. In a derivation of (22a), it is possible to first
move the complex NP to the lower scope position and extract indeterminate2
without incurring any violation. Then, we either further move the complex NP to
the higher scope position, extract indeterminate^, and reconstruct the island, or
move only indeterminate1 to the higher scope position out of the complex NP.
Either way, we have at most one w/i-island violation and one complex NP vio-
lation.14
The upshot is that in the amended pied-piping analysis, a possible source of
the contrast between (22a) and (22b) cannot be as simple as the former hav-
ing one extra island violation. That a possible source of the contrast is, in fact, of
a more general nature than having to do with a complex NP island violation is
suggested by the following example. Example (23) is a slight variation of example
(22)	: The complex NP in the original example has now been replaced by a simple
NP, dare-no nan-nen-no syasin 'a photo of whom from what year'. The pattern of
grammaticality stays more or less the same in this example.
(23)	John-wa [Mary-ga [dare-no nan-nen-no syasin]-0
John-Top Mary-NOM who-GEN what-year-GEN photo-ACC
sagasiteiru ka] siritagatteiru no?
looking.for q want.to.know q
a.	*For which x, x a person, John wants to know for which y, y a year,
Mary is looking for a photo of x from y?'
b.	??/?"For which x, x a person, for which y, y a year, John wants to know
whether Mary is looking for a photo of x from y?'
c.	"Does John want to know for which x, x a person, for which y, y a
year, Mary is looking for a photo of x from y?'
More research is needed to provide a satisfactory answer to the question as to
where the contrast in the (a) and (b) examples stems from in (22) and (23).
384 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
14.5	More Issues and
Controversies Regarding
Analysis: The Nonmovement
Analysis and Wh-Island
As I have discussed, the movement analysis takes the presence of the w/i-island
effect to be indicative of a movement relation between indeterminates and higher
particles and attempts to provide an account for the lack of other island effects.
Alternatively, one could consider the lack of most island effects to be evidence
that there is no such movement relation, as proposed in Toyoshima 1996 and
Shimoyama 1999, 2001,for example. The challenge now is turned around: the
presence of the wh-island effect requires an explanation.
14.5.1	The Hamblin Analysis and Locality
To see how the apparent w步-island effect can be accounted for without appealing
to a movement relation between indeterminates and particles, we should first
address what the semantic denotations of indeterminate pronouns are. Two pro-
posals are found in this domain一one says that indeterminate pronouns denote sets
of alternatives, and the other says that they denote open propositions. In what
follows I first summarize the former proposal and present how it accounts for the
apparent 印/!-island effect without w/z-movement. I then summarize the latter
proposal and evaluate its way of handling the apparent wh-island effect.
The idea that indeterminate pronouns denote sets of alternatives is based on a
proposal in Hamblin 1973 that English w/i-pronouns denote sets of alternatives. For
example, who denotes the set of all persons. The application of Hamblin's se-
mantics to indeterminate pronouns is found in Ramchand 1997 for Bengali, as well
as in Lin 1996 for the Chinese wulun 'no matter'-construction. For Japanese, a
Hamblin semantics is adopted by Hagstrom (1998) for indeterminate pronouns
that occur in the interrogative and existential contexts. Its extension to the uni-
versal context is suggested in Shimoyama 2001 and more fully explored in Kratzer
and Shimoyama 2002. Starting from the interrogative context, dare 'who' in (24)
denotes the set of all people (with appropriate contextual restriction) as in (25a).
The VP utaimasu 'sing', in contrast, denotes a singleton set whose sole member is
its ordinary denotation, as shown in (25b).
(24)	[Dare-ga utaimasu] ka?
who-NOM sing q
'Who sings?'
(25)	For all possible worlds w and variable assignments g,
a.	[dare] w,g — {x g De: person(x)(w)}
b.	[utaimasu]w,8 — {XxXw7 [sing(x)(w7)]}
INDETERMINATE PRONOUNS Z85
In composing these two pieces, we apply the function XxXw/[sing(x)(w/)] to each
of the members in the set denoted by dare 'who' and create a bigger set一namely,
the set of propositions in (26).
(26)	[dare-ga utaimasu]w,s — {f(x): f e [utaimasu]w,s, x e [dare]w,8}
—{Xw/[sing(x)(w/)]: person(x)(w)}
Thus we arrive at an appropriate basic form of interrogative semantics.
The question now is whether this view of i^/r-questions due to Hamblin can
make a uniform analysis possible with the universal construction. A uniform
analysis in fact becomes possible if we leave our standard conception of the
nonlocal universal construction. The nonlocal universal construction is standardly
assumed to involve quantification at a distance or some kind of inverse linking as
represented in (28) (see, for example, Ohno 1989, von Stechow 1996, and Takahashi
2002).
(27)	[Dare-ga katta ie]-mo takakatta.
who-NOM bought house-MO was. expensive
'For everyone x, the house that x bought was expensive.'
(28)	Vx[person(x) 一 expensive (ty [ ho use (y) & person(x) & buy(y)(x)])]
Alternatively, one could conceive the nonlocal universal construction as involving
a rather direct quantification, as proposed in Shimoyama 1999, 2001.More spe-
cifically, we could assume that the restriction of the universal quantification is not
provided by the embedded indeterminate pronoun but is provided directly by the
sister constituent as a whole as in (29).15
(29)	Vx[x e {iy[house(y) & buy(y)(z): person(z)} —• expensive(x)]
The domain of quantification in (29), the set of unique individuals that are houses
each person bought, is exactly what is obtained through successive pointwise
functional application. We thus obtain a uniform analysis of the interrogative
and universal constructions based on a Hamblin semantics of indeterminate
pronouns.
In the Hamblin analysis of indeterminate pronouns, the relation between
indeterminates and particles is not mediated through movement. Rather, the re-
lation is established by the fact that indeterminate pronouns introduce Hamblin
alternatives, which expand as they compose with the denotations of other con-
stituents, and the particles ka and mo select such denotations. In this mode of
association, the lack of island effects is expected.
Crucially, the expansion of the Hamblin alternatives introduced by indeter-
minates is stopped when the first operator that selects Hamblin alternatives is
encountered. The particles ka and mo take the Hamblin alternatives and return
singleton sets, thereby making the alternatives created by indeterminates inac-
cessible to even higher particles.16 This is how the locality constraint illustrated
in (12) follows, whether there is a single indeterminate or multiple indeterminates
in the scope of the lower particle. Other long-distance associations across, for
386 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
example, complex NP islands, are allowed as desired. Thus the puzzling locality
pattern simply comes out as a consequence of the interpretation system.17
14.5.2	Indeterminate Pronouns as Open Propositions
A more widely held view on the semantics of w/i-pronouns or indeterminate
pronouns (other than the one in which they introduce existential quantifiers) is
that they introduce free variables and denote open propositions. This type of
proposal for English w/i-phrases is explored by Baker (1970), Pesetsky (1987),
Berman (1991),and Reinhart (1998) among many others. The idea builds on in-
fluential work by Kamp (1981)and Heim (1982) on indefinites in English. As for
Japanese indeterminate pronouns, Kuroda (1965:101) was the first to observe that
"the role of the indeterminate pronouns [is] very much like that of yet unbounded
logical variables,n and his insight was pursued further by Nishigauchi (1986,1990).
The idea has been adopted for other languages, such as Chinese (Aoun and Li 1993,
Tsai 1994, and Lin 1996, among others) and Malayalam (Jayaseelan 2001).
Although the Hamblin analysis of indeterminates introduced above made in-
situ interpretation of indeterminates possible, the idea that indeterminates denote
open propositions makes semantic interpretation possible with short movement of
indeterminates and without movement to the specifier of CP or of the phrase
headed by mo. As is discussed shortly, a uniform analysis of the interrogative and
universal construction is achieved under the assumption that the semantics of the
nonlocal universal construction is perceived as proposed in Shimoyama 1999,2001)
introduced in section 14.5.1. Thus similar results are achieved in the Hamblin
analysis, on the one hand, and in the open proposition analysis, on the other hand.
When we consider how the locality puzzle is dealt with within the latter analysis, a
difference emerges. Let us first see the basic syntax-semantics mapping in the open
proposition analysis and then consider how the locality puzzle is accounted for.
Following Heim (1982), we can assume that dare 'who' in (30a) and (31a), for
example, receives index 1 and is interpreted as: the individual assigned to variable 1
is a person. Because this is not of the suitable semantic type to be combined with
utaimasu 'sing' or katta 'bought', dare 'who' has to move to an interpretable
position. For example, moving out of VP (normal subject movement) or adjoining
to TP would do (see Heim 1982).
(30)	a. [Dare-ga utaimasu] ka?
who-NOM sing q
"Who sings?'
b. [[darerga [tp/vp ん utaimasu] ] Op』ka
(31)	a. [Dare-ga katta ie]-mo takakatta.
who-NOM bought house-MO was.expensive
"For everyone x, the house that x bought was expensive.'
b. [[[darerga [tp/vp ん katta]] ie] OpJ-mo takakatta.
INDETERMINATE PRONOUNS )8/
It is proposed in Shimoyama 2001 that interpretability forces an introduction of a
set creating operator (Op) at LF, which gets copies of indices and is interpreted as
in (32) along the lines of Heim 1982 and Berman 1991.The part g,R ゝ …"g in (32b)
says that assignment gz is just like assignment g, except possibly for values assigned
to the variables 1,...,n.
(32)	a. Op-indexing: Copy the index of each indeterminate pronoun onto the c-
commanding Op.
b. [xPO0,...,”]g = {『xpNg7—"g}
={z：ヨ如景ng & z=[ XP ]町}
In the LFs in (30b) and (31b), for instance, Op combines with its sister constituent
and forms the set of propositions {that xis a person and x sings: x 6 D} and the set
of individuals {ty[house(y) & person(x) & buy(y)(x)]: x e D}, respectively, by
abstracting over the free variable that it is coindexed with. The steps are shown in
(33)	and (34).18
(33)	[ [dare】-ga 岳 utaimasu]] Op】]]g	,
={[ [darerga [ん utaimasu]] ]す:ga%'}
—{p: 3x[p — Xw/[person(x)(w7) & sing(x)(w/)]}
—{kw7[person(x)(w7) & sing(x)(w/)]: x e D}
(34)	[ [[darerga [t± katta]] ie] Op,『
={ [ [darerga [t. katta]] ie P： g^^}
—{z: 3x[z — ty[house(y) & person(x) & buy(y)(x)]]}
—{iy[house(y) & person(x) & buy(y)(x)]: x e D}
Once the denotation in (34) is available, the universal quantifier mo can directly
quantify over it, giving us the appropriate semantics.
So far, the open-proposition analysis does not seem to differ significantly from
the Hamblin analysis——both derive appropriate semantics from LF structures.
Now, though, I show a difference. Recall that in the Hamblin analysis, the puzzling
locality pattern simply falls out from the interpretation mechanism. In the open-
proposition analysis, however, a Relativized Minimality-type locality principle
(Rizzi 1990) needs to be stated independently. That is, the Op-indexing rule in (32a)
should be modified to: "Copy the index of each indeterminate pronoun onto the
lowest c-commanding Op：' Note that Heim's (1982) rule of Quantifier Indexing,
which the Op-indexing rule builds on, also has the locality clause built in. The
purpose there is to block a certain LF representation that corresponds to an un-
available reading in sentences with indefinites and adverbs of quantification. This
way of looking at the w/i-island effect is specifically proposed in Toyoshima 1996
and Shimoyama 1999, 2001 and in a more general form in works such as Ochi 1999,
Tanaka 1999, and Yoshida 1999. The Hamblin analysis fares better in this respect,
because any independent statement of such locality principles is made unneces-
sary.19 For further exploration and consequences of the Hamblin analysis, see
Kratzer and Shimoyama 2002 and Kratzer 2005?〇
Z88 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
14.6	Implications and Open
Questions
I have reviewed two major approaches (i.e., movement vs. nonmovement) to the
nonlocal association of indeterminates and particles. The focus of the discussion
on association in the literature has been on the interrogative and universal
contexts—two contexts where nonlocal association is most naturally allowed. The
nature of limitations in nonlocal association in other series (existential, NPI, free
choice) is yet to be investigated carefully, and the question whether the reviewed
proposals can be extended to handle the syntax and semantics of the Japanese
indeterminate pronoun system in general, as well as the indeterminate pronoun
system in natural language, remains to be examined.
Another important question that has been addressed in the literature but needs
more work is whether various uses of ka and mo should or can be related to one
another. As is well known, ka is not just a question particle but also marks exis-
tential quantification (e.g., nani-ka 'something') as well as disjunction (e.g., Ha-
nako-ka Taro[-ka] "Hanako or Taro'). Mo is used to mark universal quantification
but can also be used to mean even or also when there is no indeterminate in its
scope.21 Although works such as Hagstrom 1998 and Suzuki 2003 take up this
question, we are still far from a good understanding of it.
NOTES FOR CHAPTER 14
I would like to thank Shigeru Miyagawa and Mamoru Saito, the editors of this volume
and organizers of the Workshop on Linguistic Theory and the Japanese Language held at
Harvard University in July 2005. I also wish to thank the participants at the workshop, in
particular, Norvin Richards, Akira Watanabe, and Jim Huang, as well as an anonymous
reviewer and Bernhard Schwarz for useful comments and discussions. All remaining errors
are my own.
1.Interestingly, somewhat similar speaker variations in Malayalam are reported by
Jayaseelan (2001:72) with respect to the distance between a w/i-word and a disjunction
marker, which form an existential quantificational phrase.
2.	Naze 'why' cannot be associated with ka across complex NP or adjunct island for
some reason, as shown in (i) and (ii). See Huang 1982, Saito 1994, Tsai 1994, Ochi 1999, and
Ko 2005, for example.
(i)	*Hanako-wa	[ Kyoto-ni	naze	kita	hito]-o	yobimasita	ka?
Hanako-Top	Kyoto-to	why	came	person-ACC	invited	q
'Whyx did Hanako invite a person who came to Kyoto for reason x?'
(ii)	*Yumi-wa	[Mika-ga	naze	kaetta-ra]	okorimasu	ka?
Yumi-TOP	Mika-NOM	why	left-if	get.angry	q
"Whyx would Yumi get angry if Mika left for reason x?'
INDETERMINATE PRONOUNS 389
3.	Certain cases of whether-island violations are known to improve with particular
prosodic renditions (see, e.g., Deguchi and Kitagawa 2002, Ishihara 2003, and Hirotani
2004). However, prosody does not rescue all cases of 印//-island violations, as can be seen
from the examples to follow in the text. See Kratzer 2005 for speculation on how certain
prosodic conditions might affect the scope of indeterminates.
4.	It is tempting to try to work out a unification of mo as universal and mo as 'also' (see
Suzuki 2003). The (d)-readings in (10) and (11), however, are in principle available as long
as the presupposition that comes with the lower mo as 'also' is satisfied. This suggests that
the two instances of mo should be treated as distinct lexical items.
5.	It is proposed by Nishigauchi (1986,1990) that examples such as (i) in note 2 are
ruled out because of the category mismatch between naze 'why' and the head noun of the
relative clause. It is not obvious how an analysis along those lines would extend to ex-
plaining why (ii) in note 2 is not possible, or why nominals such as dare 'who' and nani
'what' occur freely in adjunct clauses such as the 沪clause in (ii).
6.	Sharvit (1998) and Watanabe (2001:222-223) attempt to assign semantic interpre-
tation to the pied-piped structure. See Shimoyama 2006a (pp. 160-161) for comments
on the latter attempt. See also Sauerland and Heck 2003.
7.	Alternatively, indeterminates may introduce free variables, which are bound by
existential closure, as proposed for D-linked w/i-in-situ in English and Japanese by
Pesetsky (1987). Nishigauchi (1986,1990) assumes that this interpretational device applies
to covertly moved indeterminates. See von Stechow 1996 for the spelling out of this
idea.
8.	This is not the case in Hagstrom's (1998) movement analysis of w/i-questions in
Japanese. There, it is the question particle ka that undergoes overt movement from the
position next to a w/i-phrase.
9.	The stipulation that island constraints do not apply at this second step一namely, in
the derivation from what von Stechow refers to as WH-structure to LF一may not be
necessary if we assume with Brody (1995) and Richards (1997, 2001)that Subjacency needs
to be satisfied only once per C° (as an effect of the Principle of Minimal Compliance in
Richards's terms).
10.	In Watanabe's (1992a, 1992b) analysis, the movement relevant here is not the
ivh-movement at LF but the invisible operator movement at S-structure, whereas in
Hagstrom's (1998) analysis, it is the overt movement of the particle ka/no. In the former
analysis, subsequent LF w/i-movement of the standard kind is assumed, including large-
scale pied-piping, which raises the same problem as it does for Nishigauchi's (1986,
1990) LF.
11.	The domain of quantification is, in the end, narrower presumably due to ac-
commodation of the existence presupposition of the definite description (see Shimoyama
2006a).
12.	This reading is marked "ok" in Watanabe (19923:61.9), but it is at least as difficult
to get as cases where there is no complex NP island in addition to a w/i-island (see (7)). See
also Richards 2000 (fh. 6) for a clarifying note on degrees of ungrammaticality.
13.	The following examples also show that pied-piping and distinct scope readings are,
in principle, not incompatible with each other ((iii) is from van Riemsdijk and Williams
1981:196 and (iv) is from Fiengo, Huang, Lasnik, and Reinhart 1988:88). According to van
Riemsdijk and Williams, whom in (iii) can take either matrix scope or embedded scope.
(I thank Jon Nissenbaum for confirming this judgment.)
(iii)	Who, tj knows [[which picture of whom]j Bill bought り]?
39〇 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(iv)	?Whoj do you wonder [[which pictures of り are on sale]?
Fiengo and his colleagues also discuss Spanish examples similar to (iv) from Chomsky 1986
(pp. 25-26), originally observed by Torrego (1985).
14.	The first of the two subderivations is possibly blocked by an independent principle,
given that there is a stage, before reconstruction, at which the trace of indeterminate2 is not
bound by its antecedent (see, e.g., Saito 1992).
15.	An extensional system is used here for simplicity. It remains to be seen whether
truly parallel analyses can be given to the local and nonlocal cases of association with mo
when the denotation is relativized to possible worlds.
16.	Ka presumably returns a singleton set whose sole member is a question denotation
as proposed by Groenendijk and Stokhof (1982).
17.	For Hagstrom (1998), who adopts Hamblin denotations for indeterminates in the
interrogative context, the source of the apparent w/z-island effect is still movement.
18.	Note that, unlike in (26), the system derives the nontransparent interpretation of
dare in (33). See Beck and Rullmann 1999 for discussion.
19.	See Wold 1996 for related discussion in the domain of association with focus. See
also Beck 2007 for more recent discussion in a broader context.
2〇. It does not necessarily follow that all indeterminate pronouns across languages
should have a Hamblin semantics. For example, it is reported in Jayaseelan 2001 that
Malayalam indeterminates can associate with a conjunction or disjunction particle across a
closer particle. This suggests that this language presumably employs a selective version of
the Op-indexing without the locality clause added.
21.Nishigauchi (1990) and, more recently, Yamashina and Tancredi (2005) assume
that mo lacks quantificational force on its own (see also Shimoyama 2006b).
REFERENCES
Aoun, Joseph, and Yen-hui Audrey Li.1993. Wh-elements in situ: Syntax or LF? Linguistic
Inquiry 24:199-238.
Arregi, Karlos. 2003. Clausal pied-piping. Natural Language Semantics 11:115-143.
Baker, C. L.197〇• Notes on the description of English questions: The role of an abstract
question morpheme. Foundations of Language 6:197-219.
Beck, Sigrid. 2007. The grammar of focus interpretation. In Recursion + Interfaces —
Language? Chomsky's minimalism and the view from syntax and semanticsy ed. Uli
Sauerland and Hans-Martin Gartner, 255-28〇. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Beck, Sigrid, and Hotze Rullmann.1999. A flexible approach to exhaustivity in questions.
Natural Language Semantics 7:249-298.
Berman, Stephen.1991.On the semantics and Logical Form of w/z-clauses. Doctoral dis-
sertation, University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Brody, Michael.1995. Lexico-logical form: A radically minimalist theory. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Choe, Jae W.1987. LF movement and pied-piping. Linguistic Inquiry 18:348-353.
Chomsky, Noam.1977. On w/z-movement. In Formal syntax, ed. Peter Culicover, Thomas
Wasow, and Adrian Akmajian, 71-132. New York: Academic Press.
Chomsky, Noam.1986. Barriers. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
INDETERMINATE PRONOUNS
391
Deguchi, Masanori, and Yoshihisa Kitagawa. 2002. Prosody and w/?-questions.
In Proceedings of NELS 32, ed. Masako Hirotani, 73-92. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA
Publications.
Fiengo, Robert, C.-T. James Huang, Howard Lasnik, and Tanya Reinhart.1988. The syntax
of w”-in-situ. In Proceedings of WCCFL 7, ed. Hagit Borer, 81-98. Stanford, Calif.:
CSLI Publications.
Groenendijk, Jeroen, and Martin Stokhof 1982. Semantic analysis of iv/r-complements.
Linguistics and Philosophy 5:175-233.
Hagstrom, Paul.1998. Decomposing questions. Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge,
Mass.
Hamblin, C. L.1973. Questions in Montague English. Foundations of Language 10:
41-53.
Haspelmath, Martin.1997. Indefinite pronouns. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Heim, Irene.1982. The semantics of definite and indefinite noun phrases. Doctoral dis-
sertation, University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Heim, Irene.1987. Where does the definiteness restriction apply? Evidence from the de/
initeness of variables. In The representation of (in) definiteness, ed. Alice ter M eulen and
Eric Reuland, 21-42. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Hirotani, Masako. 2004. Prosody and LF: Processing Japanese w/i-questions. Doctoral
dissertation, University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Hoji, Hajime.1985. Logical Form constraints and configurational structures in Japanese.
Doctoral dissertation, University of Washington, Seattle.
Huang, C.-T. James.1982. Logical relations in Chinese and the theory of grammar. Doc-
toral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Ishihara, Shinichiro. 2003. Intonation and interface conditions. Doctoral dissertation,
MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Jayaseelan, K. A. 2001.Questions and question-word incorporating quantifiers in Ma-
layalam. Syntax 4:63-93.
Kamp, Hans.1981.A theory of truth and semantic representation. In Formal methods in the
study of language (Mathematical Centre Tracts 135), ed. J. Groenendijk, T. Janssen, and
M. Stoldiof. 277-322. Amsterdam: Mathematisch Centrum. (Reprinted in Truth, in-
terpretation, and information, ed. J. Groenendijk, T. Janssen, and M. Stokhog 1-41.
Dordrecht: Foris,1984.)
Karttunen, Lauri.1977. Syntax and semantics of questions. Linguistics and Philosophy
i：3-44.
Ko, Heejeong. 2005. Syntax of w/z-in-situ: Merge into [Spec, CP] in the overt syntax.
Natural Language & Linguistic Theory 23:867-916.
Kratzer, Angelika. 2005. Indefinites and the operators they depend on: From Japanese to
Salish. In Reference and quantification: The Partee effect, ed. Gregory N. Carlson and F.
Jeffry Pelletier, 113-142. Stanford, Calif: CSLI Publications.
Kratzer, Angelika and Junko Shimoyama. 2002. Indeterminate pronouns: The view from
Japanese. In The Proceedings of the 3rd Tokyo Conference on Psycholinguistics, ed. Yukio
Otsu, 1-25. Tokyo: Hituzi Syobo.
Kuroda, S.-Y.1965. Generative grammatical studies in the Japanese language. Doctoral
dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Lin, Jo-wang.1996. Polarity licensing and wh-phrase quantification in Chinese. Doctoral
dissertation, University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Maki, Hideki.1995. The syntax of particles. Doctoral dissertation, University of Con-
necticut, Storrs.
392 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Nishigauchi, Taisuke.1986. Quantification in syntax. Doctoral dissertation, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst.
Nishigauchi, Taisuke.199〇• Quantification in the theory of grammar. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Nishigauchi, Taisuke.1999. Quantification and 印//-constructions. In The handbook of
Japanese linguistics, ed. Natsuko Tsujimura, 269-296. Oxford: Blackwell.
Ochi, Masao.1999. Constraints on feature checking. Doctoral dissertation, University of
Connecticut, Storrs.
Ohno, Yutaka.1989. Mo. In Papers on quantification, NSF Grant Report, Department of
Linguistics, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, ed. Emmon Bach, Angelika Krat-
zer, and Barbara H. Partee, 224-25〇. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA Publications.
Ohno, Yutaka.1991.Arguments against unselective binding in Korean. In Harvard Studies
in Korean Linguistics 4, ed. Susumu Kuno et al. 553-562. Seoul: Hanshin.
Ortiz de Urbina, Jon.199〇. Operator feature percolation and clausal pied-piping. In
MITWPL 13: Papers on wh-movement, ed. Lisa Cheng and Hamida Demirdache,193-
208. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working Papers in Linguistics.
Pesetsky, David.1987. W7z-in-situ: Movement and unselective binding. In The represen-
tation of (in)definiteness, ed. Eric Reuland and Alice ter Meulen, 98-129. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.
Ramchand, Gillian C.1997. Questions, polarity, and alternative semantics. In Proceedings of
NELS 27, ed. Kiyomi Kusumoto, 383-396. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA Publications.
Reinhart, Tanya.1998. VWi-in-situ in the framework of the Minimalist Program. Natural
Language Semantics 6:29-56.
Richards, Norvin.1997. What moves where when in which language? Doctoral dissertation,
MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Richards, Norvin. 200〇. An island effect in Japanese. Journal of East Asian Linguistics 9:187-
205.
Richards, Norvin. 2001.Movement in language: Interactions and architectures. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Riemsdijk, Henk van.1984. On pied-piped infinitives in German relative clauses. In Studies
in German grammar, ed. Jindrich Toman, 165-192. Dordrecht: Foris.
Riemsdijk, Henk van, and Edwin Williams.1981.NP-structure. The Linguistic Review
1:171-217.
Rizzi, Luigi.199〇. Relativized minimality. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Saito, Mamoru.1992. Long distance scrambling in Japanese. Journal of East Asian Lin-
guistics 1:69-118.
Saito, Mamoru.1994. Additional-w/t effects and the adjunction site theory. Journal of East
Asian Linguistics 3:195-24〇.
Sauerland, Uli, and Fabian Heck. 2003. ^^-intervention effects in pied-piping. In Pro-
ceedings of NELS 23, ed. Makoto Kadowaki and Shigeto Kawahara, 347-366. Amherst,
Mass.: GLSA Publications.
Sharvit, Yael.1998. Possessive iv/r-expressions and reconstruction. In Proceedings of NELS
28, ed. Pius N. Tamanji and Kiyomi Kusumoto, 409-423. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA
Publications.
Shimoyama, Junko.1999. Complex NPs and w/i-quantification in Japanese. In Proceedings
of NELS 29, ed. Pius N. Tamanji, Masako Hirotani, and Nancy Hall, 355-365. Amherst,
Mass.: GLSA Publications.
Shimoyama, Junko. 2001.WZz-constructions in Japanese. Doctoral dissertation, University
of Massachusetts, Amherst.
INDETERMINATE PRONOUNS
393
Shimoyama, Junko. 2006a. Indeterminate phrase quantification in Japanese. Natural
Language Semantics 14:139-173.
Shimoyama, Junko. 2006b. A QVE-like phenomenon in the Japanese universal con-
struction and its implications. In In search of the essence of language science: Festschrift
for Professor Heizo Nakajima on the occasion of his 60th birthday^ ed. Yubun Suzuki,
Keizo Mizuno, and Ken-Ichi Takami, 297-309. Tokyo: Hituzi Syobo.
Stechow, Arnim von.1996. Against LF pied-piping. Natural Language Semantics 4:57-11〇.
Suzuki, Shogo. 2003. Additive mo. Ms., MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Takahashi, Daiko. 2002. Determiner raising and scope shift. Linguistic Inquiry 33:575-615.
Tanaka, Hidekazu.1999. LF w/z-islands and the minimal scope principle. Natural Language
& Linguistic Theory 17:371-402.
Torrego, Esther.1985. On empty categories in nominals. Ms., University of Massachusetts,
Boston.
Toyoshima, Takashi.1996. LF Subjacency and stationary w/z-in-situ. Ms., Cornell Uni-
versity, Ithaca, N.Y.
Tsai, Wei-tien Dylan.1994. On economizing the theory of A-bar dependencies. Doctoral
dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Watanabe, Akira. 1992a. VWz-in-situ, Subjacency, and chain formation. MIT occasional
papers in linguistics 2. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working Papers in Linguistics.
Watanabe, Akira. 1992b. Subjacency and s-structure movement of w/i-in-situ. Journal of
East Asian Linguistics 1:255-291.
Watanabe, Akira. 2001.Wh-in-situ languages. In The handbook of contemporary syntactic
theory, ed. Mark Baltin and Chris Collins, 203-225. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wold, Dag E.1996. Long distance selective binding: The case of focus. In Proceedings
from SALT 6, ed. Teresa Galloway and Justin Spence, 311-328. Ithaca, N.Y.:
CLC Publications.
Yamashina, Miyuki and Christopher Tancredi. 2005. Degenerate plurals. In Proceedings
of SuB 9, ed. Emar Maier, Corien Bary, and lanneke Huitink, 522-537. Nijmegen, the
Netherlands: NCS.
Yatsushiro, Kazuko. 2004. Mo and ka. Ms., University of Connecticut, Storrs.
Yoshida, Tomoyuki.1999. LF Subjacency effects revisited. In MITWPL 34: Papers on
morphology and syntax: Cycle two, ed. Vivian Lin, Cornelia Krause, Benjamin Bru-
ening, and Karlos Arregi, 1-34. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working Papers in Linguistics.
CHAPTER 1 5
NOUN PHRASE
ELLIPSIS
DAIKO TAKAHASHI
15.1	Introduction
A well-known feature that distinguishes Japanese from languages such as English is
the availability of null subjects and objects in finite clauses, which can be illustrated
in the following examples:
(1)	A: Taroo-wa doo simasita ka?
Taroo-Top how did q
'What happened to Taroo?'
B: e ie-ni kaerimasita.
he home-to returned
'He returned home?
C: Sensei-ga e sikarimasita.
teacher-NOM him scolded
'The teacher scolded him.'
(2)	Taroo-ga Hanako-ni [e e kekkonsuru to] yakusokusita.
Taroo-NOM Hanako-DAT he her marry	that promised
'Taroo promised Hanako that he would marry her.'
In (1), speakers B's and C's utterances are intended as replies to speaker A's
question. In speaker B's utterance, the subject is not overtly expressed but is most
naturally interpreted as referring to Taroo. In speaker C's utterance, on the other
hand, the object is empty and yet it is taken as referring to Taroo. Also, null
subjects and null objects can occur simultaneously. In the embedded clause in (2),
NOUN PHRASE ELLIPSIS
395
both the subject and object are covert and interpreted most naturally as referring to
Taroo and Hanako, respectively.
Since Kuroda 1965 it has been more or less standard to analyze null argu-
ments as empty pronouns (see Ohso 1976, Hoji 1985, and Saito 1985)among many
others). One indication comes from the fact that they can serve as variables bound
by quantifiers, as discussed in detail by Hoji (1985). Consider the following ex-
amples:
(3)	Daremo-ga	[e susi-o	taberu to]	itta.
everyone-NOM	he sushi-ACC	eat that said
"Everyone said that he would eat sushi.
(4)	Daremo-ga	[Hanako-ga	e	butta	to] itta.
everyone-NOM	Hanako-NOM	him	hit	that said
"Everyone said that Hanako hit him?
The null subject in (3) and the null object in (4) can be interpreted as bound by the
quantificational matrix subjects. This is straightforward if those null arguments are
pronominal, because, in general, pronouns can serve interpretively as variables
associated with quantifiers (see the English translations of (3) and (4)).
Another argument can be constructed on the basis of condition B of the
binding theory, which particularly prohibits pronouns in object positions from
taking the subjects in the same clauses as their antecedents (see Chomsky 1981 and
Chomsky and Lasnik 1993, among others). Thus, we have ungrammatical sentences
in English such as the following, where the intended interpretation is indicated by
placing the same subscript on the subjects and the objects:
(5)	リohn】 criticized Kim,.
(6)	^Everyone, loves himx.
Bearing this in mind, let us consider the following Japanese examples:
(7)	*Taroo「ga	e】	semeta.
Taroo-NOM	him	criticized
"Taroo criticized him.'
(8)	キDaremo「ga	e】	aisiteiru.
everyone-NOM	him love
"Everyone loves him.'
These examples do not permit the reading in which the null object takes the subject
as its antecedent. If the null object is a pronoun, (7) and (8) can be treated on a par
with (5) and (6) as violations of condition B.
This pronoun theory has not necessarily been unchallenged, however (see
especially Huang 1984 and Hasegawa 1984/1985). Since the late 1980s, researchers
have pointed out a number of examples that pose problems for the pronoun
theory. I consider some of them in the next section. The existence of such data has
led linguists to seek an alternative analysis of null arguments. In section 15.3, I
396 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
illustrate two analyses of null arguments in terms of ellipsis, which might look
similar on the surface but should be distinguished in details. In section 15.4,1 point
out some implications of the ellipsis theory on the typology of languages with null
arguments. In section 15.5, I summarize the entire discussion.
15.2 Core Data
Among the important observations that show the limitation of the pronoun theory
is the one illustrated by the following examples, which are constructed on the basis
of similar examples from Chinese in Xu 1986:1
(9)	A: Dare-ga zibun-o sememasita ka?
who-NOM self-ACC criticized q
'Who criticized himself?'
B: Taroo「ga/DaremOi-ga % sememasita.
Taroo-NOM/Everyone-NOM criticized
"Taroo/Everyone criticized himself.'
(10)	Ken-ga zibunzisin-o semeta	atode, Taroo「wa ら tataeta.
Ken-NOM himself-ACC criticized after Taroo-TOP praised
'After Ken criticized himself, Taroo praised himself.'
As a reply to the question in (9A), the utterance in (9B) can mean that Taroo
or everyone criticized himself. In (10), the main clause follows the adverbial
clause, which contains an anaphoric object, and can have the interpretation
that Taroo praised himself. That is, the null object can take the subject of the
same clause as its antecedent in (9B) and (10). If null objects (or arguments) were
always pronominal, these cases would be ruled out by condition B on a par with (7)
and (8).
Similar but slightly different examples are provided by Huang (1991)and Otani
and Whitman (1991).They consider cases such as the following, paying attention to
the interpretation of the null object in the main clause:
(11)	Ken-ga zibun-no	sensei-o	semeta	atode,
Ken-NOM self-GEN	teacher-ACC	criticized	after
Taroo	mo e	semeta.
Taroo	also	criticized
Lit. 'After Ken criticized his teacher, Taroo criticized, too.'
With the subordinate clause as the antecedent, the main clause is ambiguous: it
means either that Taroo criticized Ken's teacher or that Taroo criticized his own
teacher. Under the empty pronoun analysis, although the availability of the first
reading is straightforward, the second, sloppy interpretation appears to be unex-
pected. This can be shown by considering English examples such as the following:
NOUN PHRASE ELLIPSIS
397
(12)	After John criticized his teacher, Bill criticized him, too.
Here the pronominal object in the main clause can refer to John's teacher but
significantly cannot mean Bill's teacher. This difference between the null object in
(ii) and the pronominal object in (12) seems to cast doubt on the approach that
analyzes the empty object as a pronoun.
Concerning cases such as (11), Hoji (1998) makes an important remark
about how the null object is interpreted. He considers examples such as the fol-
lowing:
(13)	a. Taroo-ga zibun-no kuruma-o aratta.
Taroo-NOM self-GEN car-ACC washed
'Taroo washed his car.'
b. Taroo igai-no	subete-no hito	mo e aratta.
Taroo except-GEN all-GEN	person also washed
Lit. 'Everyone other than Taroo washed e, too.'
Observing that (13b) does not allow the "distributed reading" of the sort found in
(14a), Hoji (1998) points out that (13b) is rather similar to (14b), where an indef-
inite nominal phrase appears in place of the null object in (13b).
(14)	a. Taroo igai-no	subete-no hito	mo zibun-no kuruma-o
Taroo except-GEN all-GEN person also self-GEN car-ACC
aratta.
washed
"Everyone other than Taroo washed his car, too.'
b. Taroo igai-no	subete-no hito	mo kuruma-o aratta.
Taroo except-GEN all-GEN person also car-ACC washed
"Everyone other than Taroo washed a car, too.'
Based on the similarity between (13b) and (14b), Hoji claims that the null object in
the former is better analyzed as a null indefinite nominal phrase.2
If some null objects such as the ones in (11) and (13b) are indefinite expressions,
one might think that the pronoun theory could accommodate the relevant data, by
analyzing them in the same way as the following cases (see Tomioka 2003 for
related discussion):
(15)	a. John wants to marry a Martian if he can find one.
b. John bought his favorite car, but Bill hasn't yet found one.
In addition to definite pronouns like him, her, it, and so on, English has the
indefinite pronoun one. Proponents of the pronoun theory might say that indef-
inite pronouns as well as definite counterparts can be empty in Japanese, so that
(11) and (13b) can be analyzed in the same way as After Ken criticized his teacher,
Taroo criticized one, too and Hanako washed one, too, respectively.
When null objects are interpreted indefinitely, there seems to be a way to
maintain the pronoun theory, as noted just above. As Saito (2003) and Shinohara
398 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(2004) point out, however, the range of interpretation actually available for null
objects is much wider.3 Saito (2003) considers cases such as the following:
(16)	a. Taroo-ga zibun-no kuruma-o aratta.
Taroo-NOM self-GEN car-ACC washed
'Taroo washed his car.'
b. (Demo) Hanako-wa e arawanakatta.
(but) Hanako-TOP not-washed
Lit. '(But) Hanako did not wash e.'
Although (16a) is the same as (13a), (16b) differs from (13b) in that it is a negative
sentence. Crucially, Saito observes that (16b) can be true if Hanako did not wash
her own car but washed other cars. This interpretation is undoubtedly different
from what the following sentence means:
(17)	Hanako-wa kuruma-o arawanakatta.
Hanako-TOP car-ACC not-washed
"Hanako did not wash a car.'
The object here is an indefinite, and the whole sentence is true if and only if
Hanako did not wash any car, including hers.
Shinohara (2004) provides sentences such as the following:4
(18)	Sono ryokan-wa itiniti-ni	okyaku-o sankumi
the hotel-TOP one-day-per guest-ACC three-group
izyoo	tomeru	ga,	ano ryokan-wa e
more-than accommodate though that hotel-TOP
tomenai.
not-accommodate
Lit. "Though the hotel accommodates more than three groups of guests
per day, that hotel does not accommodate.'
The null object here can specifically mean more than three groups of guests. It is
not obvious how this interpretation is derived from the indefinite pronoun
analysis.
Further data similar to (18) is given here:
(19)	Hanako-ga	taitei-no sensei-o	sonkeisiteiru.
Hanako-NOM	most-GEN teacher-ACC	respect
Sosite Taroo	mo e sonkeisiteiru.
and Taroo	also respect
Lit. "Hanako respects most teachers. And Taroo respects, too?
In the preceding clause, the object is a quantified phrase (QP). Taking it as the
antecedent sentence, the second clause contains a null object and means that Taroo
respects most teachers. That is, the null object seems to behave as a QP meaning
most teachers.
NOUN PHRASE ELLIPSIS
399
One might think that the interpretation of the second clause is derivable even
from the analysis of the null object as an empty pronoun taking as its antecedent
the QP taitei-no sensei 'most teachers' in the preceding clause. In that case, (19)
might be analyzed in a way analogous to the following example:
(20)	Hanako-ga taitei-no sensei-o sonkeisiteiru.
Hanako-NOM most-GEN teacher-ACC respect
Sosite Taroo mo karera-o sonkeisiteiru.
and Taroo also them-ACC respect
'Hanako respects most teachers. And Taroo respects them, too.'
Note that the lexical pronoun karera 'them' occurs in the second clause, somehow
taking most teachers in the first clause as the antecedent. Although the first clause
is the same as (19a), the interpretation of the second clause is slightly different from
that of (19b): it means that Taroo also respects those teachers mentioned in the
preceding clause (namely, those teachers that Hanako respects). That is, the pro-
noun in (20) seems to serve as what is called an E-type pronoun (Evans 1980)
rather than as a genuine quantificational expression. Given that the null object in
(19) is interpreted differently, it is questionable to treat it as a pronoun.
Any theory of null arguments must be able to account for the facts described
above, but the pronoun theory would have difficulty accommodating them. Note
that these considerations do not lead to complete abandonment of empty pro-
nouns: they are still needed to account for cases such as (3), (7), and (8). What this
section has shown is that there are cases for which something other than empty
pronouns must be postulated.
15.3 Analyses
15.3.1	The VP-Ellipsis Analysis
To account for cases such as(9)-(n), Huang (1991)and Otani and Whitman (1991)
put forth the idea that the sentences in questions involve VP-ellipsis. Whereas
Huang mainly deals with Chinese null-object constructions and offers a very
sketchy discussion of VP-ellipsis, Otani and Whitman elaborate on his proposal,
extending it to Japanese. In what follows, therefore, let us consider Otani and
Whitman's analysis of sentences with null objects in terms of VP-ellipsis.
Otani and Whitman's (1991)analysis is based on two assumptions. The first is
Williams's (1977a) so-called copying theory of ellipsis, according to which ellipsis
involves base-generation of empty constituents and subsequent copying of ante-
cedent material onto the empty slots at LF. This is illustrated by (21), an example of
VP-ellipsis in English.
4〇〇 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(21)	John will see Mary, and Bill will, too.
(22)	a. [TP John will[Vp see Mary]], and [TP Bill will[Vp e]]» too.
b. [TP John will[yp see Mary]], and Bill will[Vp see Mary]], too.
Example (21) is supposed to be derived as indicated in (22). Example (22a) is the
overt-syntactic representation, where the VP in the second clause is empty. After
the derivation enters into LF, the VP in the first clause is copied onto the empty VP,
which is now fully materialized (the reconstructed VP is shown in boldface). Otani
and Whitman s second assumption is that those languages that have null objects
with the relevant properties, such as Chinese and Japanese, have overt V-to-T
raising just like French, Italian, and so on (see Emonds 1978; Huang 1991;Kishi-
moto, this volume; Koizumi 1995; Miyagawa 2001;and Pollock 1989). Thus, the
sentence in (23a) is represented as in (23b) in overt syntax.
(23)	a. Taroo-ga Hanako-o semeta.
Taroo-NOM Hanako-Acc criticized
"Taroo criticized Hanako?
b. [TP Taroo-ga [T/ [vp Hanako-o ty] [T semev-taT]]]
In (23b) the verb seme moves out of VP and adjoins to T.
Bearing these points in mind, let us illustrate Otani and Whitman's (1991)
analysis of null-object sentences in terms of VP-ellipsis. Let us start with (11), the
derivation of which is given in (24).
(24)	a. [tp Ken-ga 序[Vp zibun-no sensei-o %] [y semev-taT]]]
Ken-NOM	self-GEN teacher-ACC criticize-T
atode, [TP	Taroo mo [T/ [yp e] [T semev-taT]]]
after	Taroo also	criticize-T
Lit. 'After Ken criticized his teacher, Taroo criticized, too.'
b. [TP Ken-ga 序[vp zibun-no sensei-o 如][T semev-taT] ] ] atode,
[tp Taroo mo [^ [vp zibun-no sensei-o ty] [t semev-taT]]
Example (24a) is the overt representation, where the main verbs appear in T and
the VP in the second clause is empty. In LF, the antecedent VP is copied onto the
empty VP, yielding (24b), where the second clause contains the anaphor as well.
Example (24b) represents the right interpretation of the sentence, especially
accounting for its sloppy interpretation.5
The VP-ellipsis analysis also accommodates the examples in (9) and (10),
which are assigned the derivations in (25) and (26), respectively.
(25)	a. [TP Dare-ga [Vp zibun-o ty] [T sememasiv-taT] ] ka?
who-NOM self-ACC criticize-T q
"Who criticized himself?'
[TP Taroo-ga/Daremo-ga [vp e] [T sememasiv-taT]].
Taroo-NOM/everyone-NOM criticize-T
Lit. 'Taroo/Everyone criticized.'
NOUN PHRASE ELLIPSIS
401
b. [TP Dare-ga [yp zibun-o 如][t sememasiv-taT] ] ka?
[Tp Taroo-ga/Daremo-ga [yp zibun-o 如][t sememasiv-taT]].
(26)	a. [tp Ken-ga [yp zibunzisin-o ty] [T semev-taT] ] atode,
Ken-NOM himself-ACC criticize-T after
[TP Taroo-wa [yp e] [T tataev-taT]].
Taroo-Top	praise-T
Lit. "After Ken criticized himself Taroo praised?
b. [TP Ken-ga [yp zibunzisin-o tv] [T semev-taT] ] atode,
[TP Taroo-wa [yp zibunzisin-o tv] [T tataev-taT]].
Examples (25a) and (26a) are overt syntactic representations, where the clauses
with null objects actually involve elliptic VPs. These empty VPs are reconstructed
at LF by copying the VPs in the antecedent clauses. This yields (25b) and (26b),
where the second clauses contain anaphors and are correctly predicted to have
sloppy interpretations.6
Cases such as (18) and (19) where null objects are understood as quantifica-
tional fall into place as well. Examples (18) and (19) are analyzed as in (27) and (28),
respectively.
(27)	a. [TP Sono	ryokan-wa	[vp itiniti-ni	okyaku-o sankumi
the	hotel-10? one-day-per guest-ACC three-group
izyoo ty] [T tomey-ruy] ] ga, [TP ano ryokan-wa
more-than accommodate-i though that hotel-10?
[vp e] [t tomey-naxeg-ii]]
accommodate-not-i
Lit. 'Though the hotel accommodates more than three groups of guests
per day, that hotel does not accommodate?
b. [TP Sono ryokan-wa [yp itiniti-ni okyaku-o sankumi izyoo tv]
[T tomev-ruT] ] ga, [TP ano ryokan-wa [VP itiniti-ni okyaku-o
sankumi izyoo tv]	[T	tomev-naNeg-ii]]
(28)	a. [TP Hanako-ga	[yp	taitei-no	sensei-o ty]
Hanako-NOM	most-GEN	teacher-ACC
[T sonkeisiv-teiruT]]. Sosite [TP Taroo mo [yp e] [T sonkeisiv-teiruT]].
respect-i	And	Taroo also	respect-i
Lit. "Hanako respects most teachers. And Taroo respects, too?
b. [TP Hanako-ga [yp taitei-no sensei-o ty] [T sonkeisiv-teiruT]].
Sosite [TP Taroo mo [yp taitei-no sensei-o tv] [T sonkeisiv-teiruT]].
Examples (27a) and (28a) are overt representations, where the second clause
contains an empty VP. Examples (27b) and (28b) are obtained by copying the VP
in the preceding clause onto the empty VP. The quantifiers are reconstructed in the
elliptic VPs, as desired.
The VP-ellipsis analysis is successful in explaining the data considered above as
well as others (see Otani and Whitman 1991).It is not free from problems, however.
4〇2 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
First of all, let us reconsider (10). It is repeated as (29) and its derivation in (26) is
given as (30).
(29)	Ken-ga zibunzisin-o semeta	atode, Taroo-wa e tataeta.
Ken-NOM himself-ACC criticized after Taroo-NOM praised
'After Ken criticized himself, Taroo praised himself?
(30)	a. [TP Ken-ga [Vp zibunzisin-o ty] [T semev-taT] ] atode,
[tp Taroo-wa [vp e] [t tataey-ta-p]].
b. [tp Ken-ga [yp zibunzisin-o tv] [T semev-taT] ] atode,
[tp Taroo-wa [yp zibunzisin-o ty] [T tataev-taT]].
Notice that the two verbs are different in (29): the verb in the antecedent clause is
seme 'criticize' whereas the verb in the second clause is tatae 'praise'. In (30), this
difference does not pose a problem. At the point where copying takes place, namely
at LF, the antecedent VP contains the trace of seme and the entire VP is copied onto
the empty VP. The trace of the verb inside the reconstructed (or copied) VP is now
associated with the verb tatae, and the resulting verbal chain seems to be licit.
Note, however, that this explanation only works with the trace theory of
movement, which assumes that movement leaves behind nondistinct traces in the
original positions. This view of movement has changed with the advent of the
Minimalist Program. Chomsky (1995) claims that syntactic derivations are con-
strained by what he calls the Inclusiveness Condition, which prohibits introduction
of new material during the course of derivation except already-selected lexical
items. The trace theory is a clear deviation from the Inclusiveness Condition
because it introduces a new entity, namely traces, during the derivation of sen-
tences. The trace theory, therefore, is now replaced with the copy theory, which
posits that movement leaves copies of moved items behind. Under the copy theory,
(29) should be reanalyzed as follows (copies created by movement are italicized):
(31)	a. [TP Ken-ga [yp zibunzisin-o seme] [T semev-taT] ] atode,
[tp Taroo-wa [yp e] [T tataev-taT]].
b. [TP Ken-ga [Vp zibunzisin-o seme] [T semev-taT] ] atode,
[tp Taroo-wa [yp zibunzisin-o seme] [T tataev-taT]].
The antecedent VP in the overt form in (31a) contains the copy of seme. After this
VP is reconstructed onto the empty VP, (31b) is derived. Notice that the repre-
sentation of the second clause in (31b) should be illicit, given that the verb in T and
the verbal copy inside VP do not match. This consideration poses a conceptual,
albeit somewhat theory-internal, problem to the VP-ellipsis analysis (see Kim 1999,
Moriyama and Whitman 2004, and Otani and Whitman 1991 for related discus-
sion).7
In addition to the problem just noted, several empirical counterarguments are
pointed out in the literature. Let us consider three of them here. The first argu-
ment, due to Kim (1999), has to do with the so-called whole-part construction in
Korean. I repeat it here by using the corresponding Japanese data:8
NOUN PHRASE ELLIPSIS
4〇3
(32)	a.	??Taroo-wa zibun-no	kodomo-o	ude-o	tataita.
Taroo-Top sei仁gen	child-ACC	arm-ACC	hit
'Taroo hit his child on the arm.5
b.	Hanako-wa e asi-o	tataita.
Hanako-TOP leg-ACC hit
Lit. "Hanako hit on the leg.5
In (32a), the first accusative phrase zibun-no kodomo-o "selfs child-ACC5 serves
as the "whole55 expression, whereas the second accusative object ude-o "arm-ACC5 is
the "part55 phrase. The latter is understood as part of the former. Example (32a) is
intended as the antecedent of (32b), where although the "whole55 phrase is missing,
the sloppy interpretation is available that Hanako hit her child on the leg. To apply
the VP-ellipsis analysis here, we need an elliptic or empty VP. But the VP in (32b)
does not appear to be empty, because it contains the overt "part55 phrase asi-o "leg-
acc5, clearly a VP-internal object.
Advocates of the VP-ellipsis analysis might say that the part phrase is somehow
dislocated from VP in (32b), creating an empty VP:
(33)	[TP Hanako-wa asi-o [Vp e] [T tataiv-taT]]
Hanako-TOP leg-ACC hit-T
However, this does not seem to be possible. The following examples show that part
phrases are inert for dislocation:
(34)
a.	??Taroo-wa Ken-o	ude-o	tataita.
	Taroo-rop Ken-Acc	arm-ACC	hit
	'Taroo hit Ken on the	arm.5	
b.	*Ude-o Taroo-wa	Ken-o	tataita.
	arm-ACC Taroo-Top	Ken-Acc	hit
c.	*Taroo-wa ude-o	Ken-o	tataita.
	Taroo-Top arm-ACC	Ken-Acc	hit
In (34b,c) the part phrases are dislocated from their normal positions (namely, the
positions between the whole phrases and the verbs), and the examples are com-
pletely degraded in clear contrast with (34a), where the canonical word order for
die construction is reserved. Thus, the VP-ellipsis analysis has difficulty accom-
modating cases such as (32b), where some missing VP-internal material can be
understood sloppily despite the fact that entire VPs are not empty.
The second counterargument to the VP-ellipsis analysis, due to Oku (1998),
pertains to sentences containing adjuncts, such as the following:
(35) a. Taroo-wa kono hoohoo de katta.
Taroo-Top this way	in won
"Taroo won (in) this way.'
b. Hanako mo e katta.
Hanako also won
'Hanako also won.5
4〇4 the oxford handbook of Japanese linguistics
()6) a. Taroo-wa kono riyuu de sinda.
Taroo-Top this reason for died
"Taroo died for this reason.'
b. Hanako mo e sinda.'
Hanako also died
'Hanako also died.'
Examples (35a) and (36a) are intended to serve as the antecedent sentences for
(35b) and (36b), respectively. Example (35a) contains the adjunct kono hoohoo de
£in this way' and (36a) kono riyuu de 'for this reason'. As Oku (1998) correctly
points out, ifVP-ellipsis were available in Japanese, the (b)-sentences above would
have the readings comparable to those of their antecedent sentences. Consider the
following cases of VP-ellipsis in English:
(37)	a. John won this way, and Mary did, too.
b. John died for this reason, and Mary did, too.
The elliptic clauses in (37a,b) can mean that Mary also won this way and that
Mary also died for this reason, respectively. This is because the adjuncts in the
antecedent clauses are internal to the VP, so that they can be reconstructed in
the VP in the elliptic clauses when the entire VP is copied. That (35b) and (36b)
behave differently from (37) casts doubts on the availability of VP-ellipsis in
Japanese.
The third problem with the VP-ellipsis analysis comes from null subjects. As
Oku (1998) points out, the VP-ellipsis analysis predicts that the kind of interpre-
tation exhibited by the null-object construction should not be available for null
subjects because they are arguably outside of VP.9 This is not borne out, however.
Oku provides cases such as the following, showing that null subjects exhibit sloppy
interpretation as well:10
(38)	a. Taroo-wa	[zibun-no	teian-ga	Hanako-o
Taroo-Top	self-GEN	proposal-NOM Hanako-Acc
odorokasu	to] omotteiru.
surprise	that think
'Taroo thinks that his proposal will surprise Hanako.'
b. Ken-wa [e Yumiko-o	odorokasu to] omotteiru.
Ken-TOP	Yumiko-Acc surprise	that think
Lit. 'Ken thinks that e will surprise Yumiko.'
(39)	a. Taroo-wa [zibun-no kodomo-ga Hanako-o	tataita
Taroo-Top self-GEN child-NOM Hanako-Acc hit
toyuu uwasa] -0 kiita.
that rumor-ACC heard
'Taroo heard the rumor that his child hit Hanako.'
b. Ken-wa [e Yumiko-o tataita toyuu uwasa]-0 kiita.
Ken-TOP	Yumiko-Acc hit	that rumor-ACC heard
Lit. 'Ken heard the rumor that e hit Yumiko.'
NOUN PHRASE ELLIPSIS
4〇5
Examples (38a) and (39a) serve as the antecedents for (38b) and (39b), respectively,
where the subjects of the embedded clauses are empty. The (b)-examples can be
understood sloppily: (38b) can mean that Ken thinks that Ken's proposal will
surprise Yumiko, and (39b) can mean that Ken heard the rumor that Ken's child
hit1 fumiko. The VP-ellipsis analysis would be silent about this fact, since what is
missing is VP-external material.11
15.3.2	The NP-Ellipsis Analysis
Given those difficulties faced by the VP-ellipsis analysis, Kim (1999), Moriyama
and Whitman (2004), Oku (1998), and Tomioka (2003) put forth an alternative
account of the data in question in terms of NP-ellipsis.121 use Oku's (1998) analysis
in terms of LF copying to illustrate the NP-ellipsis analysis.13 Let us consider the
example in (10), repeated as (40):
(40)	Ken-ga zibunzisin-o semeta atode, Taroo-wa e tataeta.
Ken-NOM himself-ACC criticized after Taroo-NOM praised
'After Ken criticized himself Taroo praised himself'
(41)	a. [TP Ken-ga [NP zibunzisin-o] semeta] atode,
Ken-NOM himself-ACC criticized after
[TP Taroo-wa [NP e] tataeta].
Taroo-NOM	praised
b. [TP Ken-ga [NP zibunzisin-o] semeta] atode,
[TP Taroo-wa [NP zibunzisin-o] tataeta].
Example (41a) is the overt-syntactic representation of (40) according to the NP-
ellipsis analysis. In (41a) the object position in the second clause is elliptic, indicated
as [NP e]. After the derivation enters into LF, the antecedent NP一namely, the ana-
phoric object in the first clause—is copied onto the empty slot, resulting in (41b),
which represents the correct interpretation for the sentence. Note in particular that
because NP-ellipsis base-generates empty NP positions and just copies the content of
other NPs onto them, it is no longer problematic that the two verbs are different in
(40). Note also that once NP-ellipsis is adopted, V-raising is no longer necessary so
far as the null-object construction in question is concerned, though it might be
needed in other aspects of Japanese syntax (see Koizumi 1995 and Miyagawa 2001).
The examples in (9), (11), and (19) are dealt with easily as well. Their deriva-
tions under the NP-ellipsis analysis are given in (42)-(441, respectively.
(42)	a. A: [TP Dare-ga [NP zibun-o] sememasita] ka?
who-NOM self-ACC criticized q
"Who criticized himself?'
B: [TP Taroo-ga/Daremo-ga [NP e] sememasita].
Taroo-NOM/everyone-NOM criticized
Lit. "Taroo/Everyone criticized.'
4〇6 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
b. A: [TP Dare-ga [NP zibun-o] sememasita] ka?
B: [TP Taroo-ga/Daremo-ga [NP zibun-o] sememasita].
(43)	a. [TP Ken-ga	[NP zibun-no sensei-o]	semeta] atode,
Ken-NOM self-GEN teacher-ACC criticized after
[tp Taroo mo [nP e] semeta].
Taroo also criticized
Lit. "After Ken criticized his teacher, Taroo criticized, too.'
b. [tp Ken-ga [NP zibun-no sensei-o] semeta] atode,
[TP Taroo mo [NP zibun-no sensei-o] semeta].
(44)	a. [TP Hanako-ga [np taitei-no sensei-o] sonkeisiteiru].
Hanako-NOM most-GEN teacher-ACC respect
Sosite [tp Taroo mo [NP e] sonkeisiteiru].
and Taroo also respect
Lit. "Hanako respects most teachers. And Taroo respects, too.'
b. [Tp Hanako-ga [NP taitei-no sensei-o] sonkeisiteiru].
Sosite [TP Taroo mo [NP taitei-no sensei-o] sonkeisiteiru].
In (42) and (43) the reconstructed parts contain the anaphors, which correctly
accounts for the presence of sloppy interpretation, whereas in (44) the quantified
phrase is reconstructed in the second clause, as desired.14
Let us turn to the whole-part construction in (32). Its derivation under the NP-
ellipsis analysis is given here:
(45)	a. [TP Taroo-wa	[yp [np zibun-no kodomo-o] ude-o
Taroo-Top	sel「GEN child-Acc arm-ACC
tataita]]. [Tp Hanako-wa [yp [NP e] asi-o tataita]].
hit	Hanako-TOP	leg-ACC hit
Lit. 'Taroo hit his child on the arm. Hanako hit on the leg.'
b. [Tp Taroo-wa [yp [np zibun-no kodomo-o] ude-o tataita]].
[tp Hanako-wa [Vp [np zibun-no kodomo-o] asi-o tataita]].
In the second clause in (45a), the NP position for the whole object is empty. It is
lexicalized at LF by copying the corresponding NP in the antecedent clause, de-
riving (45b). Note that this analysis works just fine even if the part phrase remains
in VP in the second clause.
Further, note that in principle NP-ellipsis should be able to create empty
positions as long as they are designated for NP. Thus, we expect that null subjects as
well as null objects can be elliptic. We saw that this expectation is borne out by the
cases in (38) and (39) earlier, where the null subjects exhibit sloppy interpretation.
At this point, let us consider how the proponents of the NP-ellipsis analysis
approach the question of why Japanese, unlike English, allows elliptic null argu-
ments. Tomioka (2003) follows Chierchia (1998) in assuming that languages differ
in the way nominal arguments are represented: In one type of language, nominal
expressions are headed by determiners taking NPs as their complements; in
NOUN PHRASE ELLIPSIS
4〇7
another type, they are bare NPs lacking determiners. Tomioka assumes that En-
glish belongs to the first type but Japanese is an instance of the second type (see also
Fukui 1986):
(46)	a. John read a/the/this/that/these/those/some/many book(s).
b. Taroo-ga	hon-o	yonda.
Taroo-NOM	book-ACC	read
'Taroo read a/the book.'
(47)	a. John read [DP [D a/the/this/that/these/those/some/many] [NP book(s)]]
b. Taroo-ga [NP hon]・〇 yonda
The object in the English sentence in (46a) is represented as in (47a), where it is
headed by the determiners. In contrast, the object in the Japanese example in (46b)
is analyzed as in (47b), where it is a bare NP. When NP-ellipsis takes place in these
languages, it should leave determiners stranded in English but delete entire ar-
guments in Japanese, as shown here (the struck-through material represents elliptic
constituents):15
(48)	a. John read [DP [D this/that/these/those/some/many] book(s)]].
b. Taroo-ga hon] 〇 yonda.
Tomioka's (2003) idea is quite appealing because it just posits a single general
operation (that is, NP-ellipsis) for the two languages, attributing their difference in
the presence or absence of null arguments to another independently attested dif-
ference between them in the way nominal expressions are projected. At the same
time, however, it gives rise to at least two questions. The first has to do with bare
NP arguments in English:
(49)	a. Mary loves novels.
b. *But John hates 屁 e].
Here the bare plural NP novels is supposed to undergo ellipsis in the second clause. As
Tomioka (2003) notes, his analysis should expect it to be possible, contrary to fact.
The second question pertains to the existence of those cases of NP-ellipsis in
Japanese where quantifiers are stranded (see Moriyama and Whitman 2004).16
Consider the following examples:
(50)	a. Hanako-wa [DP [NP hon] [D nisatu]]-o yonda.
Hanako-TOP	book two-ACC read
"Hanako read two books?
b. Faroo-wa [DP [NP hon] [D sansatu/motto ooku/subete]]-o yonda.
Taroo-rop	book three/more many/all-ACC read
'Taroo read three/more/all/
With (50a) as the antecedent sentence, (50b) has the NP part of the object elided.
Although I label the quantifiers above as D, it is just for expository purposes and
their categorial identity is immaterial; what is important is the fact that nominal
4〇8 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
arguments in Japanese can sometimes be headed by what seem to be functional
categories, which allow their complement NPs to be elliptic. Even more important
is that entire objects including quantifiers can be elliptic as well. Consider the
following examples:
(51)	a. Hanako-wa [dp [np zibun-ni kansuru hon] [D subete]]-o yonda.
Hanako-TOP	self-to related book all-ACC	read
"Hanako read all the books about herself?
b. Taroo mo e yonda.
Taroo also read
Lit. 'Taroo read, too.'
Example (51b) can mean that Taroo read all the books about himself which
indicates that what is elliptic is the projection headed by subete 'all'.
Further, Saito and Murasugi (1990) argue that cases such as the following
involve NP-ellipsis with a stranded genitive phrase (see also Jackendoff 1971 and
Lobeck 1995):
(52)	a. [DP Gakubusei-no [NP sensei-e-no izon] [D e]] -wa
undergraduates-GEN teacher-on-GEN reliance -top
yuruseru.
is-permissible
'Undergraduates' reliance on teachers is permissible?
b. [Dp Insei-no	[np e] [d e]]-wa yurusenai.
graduate student-GEN	-top is-impermissible
'Graduate students' is impermissible?
Preceded by (52a), (52b) can mean that graduate students' reliance on teachers is
impermissible. Saito and Murasugi (1990) argue that (52b) has the NP part of the
subject DP elided, with the genitive phrase and the empty D head stranded. Bearing
this in mind, let us consider the following examples:
(53)	a. Hanako-wa [Dp zibun-no[NP kusuri-e-no izon] [D e]] -0
Hanako-TOP self^GEN	drug-on-GEN reliance -acc
haziteiru.
is-ashamed
'Hanako is ashamed of her reliance on drugs?
b. Taroo mo [Dp e] haziteiru.
Taroo also is-ashamed
"Taroo is ashamed, too?
Taking (53a) as its antecedent, (53b) means that Taroo is ashamed of his reliance on
drugs. Thus, what is elliptic in (53b) is the entire object, which, according to Saito
and Murasugi, is bigger than NP and arguably a DP.
In short, although NP-ellipsis no doubt is operative in the grammar of Japa-
nese, it cannot be responsible for all the cases of elliptic null arguments, given that
there are elliptic nominal arguments that are bigger than NP.
NOUN PHRASE ELLIPSIS
4〇9
Unlike Tomioka (2003), Oku (1998) avoids the problems noted above. Al-
though he assumes that elliptic null arguments involve NP-ellipsis, the categorial
status of elliptic elements is not crucial. What is crucial for him is not the NPhood
but the argumenthood of elliptic constituents. Let us illustrate Oku's analysis with
the example in (41), repeated as (54):
(54)	a. [TP Ken-ga [NP zibunzisin-o] semeta] atode,
Ken-NOM	himself-ACC	criticized	after
[TP Taroo-wa	[NP	e]	tataeta].
Taroo-Top	praised
Lit. "After Ken criticized himself Taroo praised?
b. [TP Ken-ga [NP zibunzisin-o] semeta] atode,
[TP Taroo-wa [NP zibunzisin-o] tataeta].
The overt form of the second clause in (54a) is shown as if the vacant NP position
were existent. For Oku, however, that position is literally absent, so that (54a)
should be represented more precisely as:
(55)	[TP Ken-ga [vp[np zibunzisin-o] semeta] ] atode,
Ken-NOM	himself^ACC criticized after
[tp Taroo-wa [yp tataeta]].
Taroo-Top praised
Lit. "After Ken criticized himself, Taroo praised/
Whereas the first clause has a usual transitive configuration, the second clause has a
simplex VP. The LF representation in (54b) is derived from (55) by merging the
copy of the object in the first clause with the verb in the second clause. That is, the
second clause has a licit transitive configuration only at LF. Of course, a question
immediately arises as to how the selectional property of the verb in the second
clause does not have to be satisfied in overt syntax in (55).
To answer this question, Oku (1998) adopts Boskovic and rTakahashi's (1998)
proposal that selectional features can be weak (namely, they do not have to
be satisfied in overt syntax) in Japanese. Boskovic and Takahashi are concerned
with the question of how scrambling一an apparently optional, non-feature-driven
movement operation—is ever possible in languages such as Japanese. For instance,
cases such as (56a), where the embedded object undergoes scrambling and
is placed in front of the matrix subject, have been analyzed as in (56b) in the
literature (Saito 1985).
(56)	a. Ken-o Taroo-ga Hanako-ga sikatta to itta.
Ken-Acc Taroo-NOM Hanako-NOM scolded that said
Lit. 'Ken, Taroo said that Hanako scolded?
b. [tp Ken-〇 [tp Taroo-ga [cp Hanako-ga [yp t
Ken-Acc Taroo-NOM Hanako-NOM
sikatta] to] itta]]
scolded that said
410 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
The traditional view assumes that the object is base-generated in the canonical
object position in the embedded VP and is moved by scrambling to the matrix TP-
adjoined position. Given that this movement lacks any semantic effect or mor-
phological reflex (see Saito 1989), it has been regarded as an exception to the
so-called Last Resort principle, which demands that movement be driven for the
purpose of feature checking (Chomsky 1995). In an effort to solve this problem,
Boskovic and Takahashi propose an alternative way to analyze cases such as (56a).
According to them, the example is derived as follows:
(57)	a. [TP Ken-o [TP Taroo-ga [Cp Hanako-ga [vp sikatta]
Ken-Acc Taroo-NOM Hanako-NOM scolded
to] itta]]
that said
Lit. 'Ken, Taroo said that Hanako scolded?
b. [tp Taroo-ga [cp Hanako-ga [yp Ken-o sikatta]
Taroo-NOM Hanako-NOM Ken-Acc scolded
to] itta]]
that said
In overt syntax, the sentence is represented as in (57a), where the "scrambled”
object is actually base-generated in its surface position and the embedded VP
consists of the transitive verb alone. The verb's selectional requirement does not
need to be met in overt syntax because it is "weak." At LF, the object merges with
the verb, to satisfy the verb's selectional property (or to check its selectional fea-
ture), and (57b) is obtained. Considered this way, scrambling is recast as a covert
movement operation motivated by checking of selectional features (see Boskovic
and Takahashi 1998 for details)..
Given that selectional features are weak in Japanese, overt-syntactic
representations such as (55) should be permissible. In fact, Oku (1998) goes
further, claiming that LF copying of antecedent NPs onto elliptic sites is trig-
gered by satisfaction of selectional requirements: the derivation from (55) to
(54b) is caused by the need to satisfy the selectional property of the verb in the
elliptic clause. The presence of elliptic null arguments is now linked with the
possibility of scrambling, both arising from the weakness of selectional fea-
tures. Turning our attention to English, we are led to assume that selectional
features are strong (that is, must be checked in overt syntax soon after verbs are
introduced into the derivation) in English, given that scrambling is absent in
the language. This in turn implies that elliptic arguments, too, are absent in
English.
Notice that Oku's (1998) analysis entails that any category—whether an NP, a
DP, or any other phrase—should be able to be elliptic to the extent that it is an
argument (hereafter I call Oku's analysis the argument ellipsis analysis, following
Saito 2003). Thus, Oku does not suffer from the problem faced by Tomioka (2003).
Further, the two analyses can be distinguished by considering the possibility of PP-
ellipsis. First, Oku would predict that if they are arguments, PPs should be able to
NOUN PHRASE ELLIPSIS
411
be elliptic. This is actually borne out. Takahashi (2006) provides cases such as the
following, observing that argument PPs can undergo ellipsis:
(58)	a. Taroo	to Hanako-ga otagai	kara meeru-o
Taroo	and Hanako-NOM each other from e-mail-ACC
uketotta.
received
'Taroo and Hanako received e-mail from each other.'
b. Ken to Yumiko-wa tegami-o uketotta.
Ken and Yumiko-TOP letter-ACC received
Lit. 'Ken and Yumiko received letters.'
The verb uketotta 'received' selects a source PP argument as well as a theme
nominal argument, as shown in (58a). In (58b), which takes (58a) as the antecedent,
the source PP is missing but the sentence can have the interpretation that Ken and
Yumiko received letters from each other. That is, the source PP is elliptic in (58b).
Under the argument ellipsis analysis, (58) is derived as follows:
(59)	a. [TP Taroo to Hanako-ga [yp [pp otagai kara] meeru-o uketotta]].
[TP Ken to Yumiko-wa [Vp tegami-o uketotta]].
b. [TP Taroo to Hanako-ga [Vp [pp otagai kara] meeru-o uketotta]].
[TP Ken to Yumiko-wa [Vp [pp otagai kara] tegami-o uketotta]].
In the overt form in (59a), the VP in the second clause consists of the theme
object and the verb. After copying the source PP in the first clause into the de-
fective VP, the complete form in (59b) is derived. In the second clause in (59b),
the verb takes two internal arguments as desired and the source argument contains
the reciprocal anaphor, which accounts for the interpretation of the sentence.
Further, the copying in this case is licit with respect to Last Resort: it is caused by
the need to satisfy one of the selectional properties of the verb in the second clause.
Let us consider how the NP-ellipsis analysis treats (58). It has to assign the
following representation to the example:
(60)	a. Taroo to Hanako-ga [PP [NP otagai] [P kara]] meeru-o
Taroo and Hanako-NOM	each other from e-mail-ACC
uketotta.
received
'Taroo and Hanako received e-mail from each other.'
b. Ken to Yumiko-wa [PP [w otagai] [P e]] tegami-o uketotta.
Ken and Yumiko-TOP	each other letter-ACC received
Lit. 'Ken and Yumiko received letters.'
Only NPs can be elliptic under the NP-ellipsis analysis, so what is elided in (60b) is
the NP complement of the source PP. Note that because the entire PP is empty in
(58b), it is necessary to postulate an empty postposition as indicated in (60b). In
general, however, empty postpositions do not seem to be possible in Japanese.
Thus, the following example is ill formed:
412 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(61)	a. Taroo-ga [PP Hanako kara] meeru-o uketotta.
Taroo-NOM Hanako from e-mail-ACC received
"Taroo received e-mail from Hanako?
b. *Ken-wa [pp Yumiko eP] tegami-o uketotta.
Ken-TOP Yumiko letter-ACC received
Lit. 'Ken received letters Yumiko?
The NP-ellipsis analysis has difficulty accommodating, or is silent about, those
cases where categories other than NP undergo ellipsis. The argument ellipsis
analysis, in contrast, can deal with cases such as (58) in the same way as those cases
where nominals are elided.
Let us now turn to the examples in (35) and (36), which show the impossibility
of adjunct ellipsis. Example (35) is repeated as (62).
(62)	a. Taroo-wa kono hoohoo de katta.
Taroo-Top this way in won
"Taroo won (in) this way?
b. Hanako mo e katta.
Hanako also won
'Hanako also won?
The point here is that (62b) cannot have the intended reading that Hanako also
won this way. According to what we have said about the argument ellipsis analysis,
the example is explained as follows:
(63)	a. [TP Taroo-wa [yp kono hoohoo de katta]].
[TP Hanako mo [Vp katta]].
b. *[TP Taroo-wa [Vp kono hoohoo de katta]].
[TP Hanako mo [yp kono hoohoo de katta]].
Example (63a) is the overt form, where there is no adjunct position in the second
clause. To derive the relevant reading, the adjunct in the antecedent clause might be
copied and merged with the verb in the second clause, yielding the LF represen-
tation in (63b). This copying of the adjunct, however, is not selectionally motivated
and hence should be ruled out by Last Resort. This is why adjunct ellipsis is
impermissible.17
Although argument ellipsis works well for the cases considered so far, there is a
complication with regard to null subjects. The relevant case in (38) is repeated as (64).
(64)	a. Taroo-wa [zibun-no teian-ga Hanako-o
Taroo-Top self-GEN proposal-NOM Hanako-Acc
odorokasu to] omotteiru.
surprise that think
"Taroo thinks that his proposal will surprise Hanako?
b. Ken-wa [e Yumiko-o	odorokasu to] omotteiru.
Ken-TOP Yumiko-ACC surprise	that think
Lit. 'Ken thinks that e will surprise Yumiko?
NOUN PHRASE ELLIPSIS
413
The fact here is that the null subject in (64b) can exhibit sloppy interpretation. The
argument ellipsis analysis accounts for this case in the following way: In overt
syntax, (64b) lacks an argument that serves as the embedded subject, and in LF the
copy of the embedded subject in (64a) is merged into the embedded clause in
(64b).18 Given that the embedded verb in (64b) requires a subject argument in
addition to an object argument, the copying operation conforms to Last Resort: it
operates to satisfy one of the selectional properties of the verb. Because Oku (1998)
assumes that argument ellipsis correlates with scrambling, it is expected that
subjects can undergo scrambling.
Saito (1985) makes an observation to the contrary, however, based on the
relative unacceptability of cases such as the following:
(65)	*?Taroo1-ga Ken-ga	[な Hanako-o	aisiteiru to] itta.
Taroo-NOM Ken-NOM Hanako-Acc love	that said
Lit. "Taroo, Ken said loved Mary.5
This sentence is fairly degraded with the intended reading where Taroo serves as the
embedded subject. This fact seems to indicate that subjects cannot undergo scram-
bling. In Boskovic and Takahashi's (1998) terms, the feature of a head that licenses
subject positions, whatever it is, is strong and has to be checked in overt syntax. This
in turn implies that subject ellipsis is impossible. Therefore, Oku argues contra Saito
(1985) that scrambling of subjects is actually possible, and suggests that the awk-
wardness of (65) is due to some parsing difficulty. I refer the interested readers to
Oku 1998 and the references therein for somewhat detailed discussion of this issue
(see also Ko 2007 for an argument that subjects can scramble, as well as Kikuchi 1987,
which examines the properties of operator movement in comparative constructions
in Japanese and argues that subjects can undergo A7-movement in Japanese).
15.4	Implications
The ellipsis analysis of null arguments explicated in the last section should make a
number of predictions. I consider here one of its implications on the typology of
languages with null arguments. Recall that for Oku (1998), the presence of argu-
ment ellipsis is closely linked to the existence of scrambling, both of which share
the weakness of selectional features as one of their necessary conditions. We would
expect, then, that languages that permit null arguments like Japanese but disallow
scrambling (or free word order) unlike Japanese should exhibit yet a different
behavior. Below I examine two such languages, Spanish and Chinese.
Let us first consider Spanish, which permits null subjects as in (66) but does
not have scrambling as shown in (67) and (68) (examples (66) and (68) are cited
from Jaeggli 1982 and (67) from Green 1987).
414 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(66)	Baila bien.
dances well
'He/She dances well.'
(67)	a. Elena	compro	un	coche.
Elena	bought	a	car
'Elena bought a car.'
b. *Elena un coche compro.
(68)	a. Me	parece	que	Juan	no	tiene	el libro.
I	think	that	Juan	not	have	the book
'I think that Juan does not have the book.'
b. *E1libro me parece que Juan no tiene.
Given that Spanish does not allow scrambling, it should not permit argument
ellipsis, either. This is in fact borne out, as Oku (1998) points out on the basis of the
following data:
(69)	a. Maria	cree	que	su	propuesta	sera	aceptada.
Maria	believes	that	her	proposal	will-be	accepted
'Maria believes that her proposal will be accepted.
b. Juan tambien cree	que e sera	aceptada.
Juan also	believes that it will-be accepted
'Juan also believes that it will be accepted.'
Preceded by (69a), (69b) contains a null subject in the embedded clause. Although
the null subject can mean Maria's proposal, it cannot mean Juan's proposal. The
absence of the sloppy interpretation shows that the null subject cannot be elliptic.
Let us turn our attention to Chinese, which provides a more interesting test
because although it allows null arguments exactly like Japanese (see Huang 1984),
researchers do not classify it as a free-word-order language. First of all, let us note
that null objects in Chinese exhibit the sloppy interpretation, as Huang (1991)and
Otani and Whitman (1991)observe. The examples here are from Otani and
Whitman 1991:
(70)	a. Zhangsan	bu	xihuan	guany	ziji	de	yaoyan.
Zhangsan	not	like	about	self	gen	rumor
'Zhangsan does not like rumors about himself.'
b. Mali ye bu xihuan e.
Mali also not like
Lit. 'Mali does not like either.'
The null object in (70b) can mean either rumors about Zhangsan or rumors about
Mali. The possibility of the second reading shows that the sentence involves ellipsis,
as argued by Huang (1991)and Otani and Whitman (1991).Notice, however, that
(70b) should not be analyzed as an instance of argument ellipsis, because Chinese
does not allow scrambling and hence selectional features there must be strong.
Then, it may well be that (70b) involves VP-ellipsis accompanied by V-raising, as
proposed by the authors mentioned above.
NOUN PHRASE ELLIPSIS
415
That Chinese does not allow argument ellipsis is supported by the fact that in
contrast with null objects, null subjects do not permit sloppy interpretation, which
was pointed out to me by Shigeru Miyagawa (pers. comm.) and Jonah Lin (pers.
comm.). The data here are supplied by Jonah Lin:
(71)	a. Zhangsan	shuo	ziji	de	haizi	mei	na qian.
Zhangsan	say	self	gen	child	take	not money
'Zhangsan said that his child did not take money?
b. Lisi	ye	shuo	e mei	na	qian.
Lisi	too	say	take	not	money
Lit. 'Lisi also said that e did not take money?
The null subject in (71b) may refer to Zhangsan's child but cannot mean Lisi's
child. If argument ellipsis is impossible and only VP-ellipsis is available in Chinese,
it is expected that null subjects cannot be elliptic: they themselves cannot be elliptic
because argument ellipsis is not allowed, nor can they be contained in elliptic VP
because subjects are outside VP. The fact is in accordance with this expectation.
Thus, although we have considered in section 15.3 several arguments that VP-
1 ellipsis is not available in Japanese, it does seem to take place in Chinese, as
.originally proposed by Huang (1991)and Whitman (1988).19
15.5 Summary
To summarize, I have explicated the ellipsis theory of null arguments in Japanese,
focusing on those data that are difficult to account for under the pronoun theory
but can be easily explained by the ellipsis theory. Two varieties of the ellipsis theory
have been considered: the VP-ellipsis analysis and the NP-ellipsis analysis. The
latter has two subtypes: one is due to Tomioka (2003) and the other is put forth by
Oku (1998). We have considered several arguments that Oku's argument ellipsis
analysis is empirically preferred. The hypothesis that argument ellipsis is closely
tied to scrambling makes a number of Japanese-particular and cross-linguistic
predictions. For example, it has been shown that adjuncts are inert for ellipsis and
scrambling, and that in Spanish and Chinese (null argument languages without
scrambling) null arguments behave differently from their Japanese counterparts.
I wish to close this article with the following question: Is it possible to analyze
all instances of null arguments in Japanese uniformly as elliptic? The answer seems
to be negative. According to Hankamer and Sag's (1976) taxonomy of anaphoric
expressions, ellipsis (or surface anaphora in their terms) requires the presence of
linguistically expressed antecedents whereas pronouns (or deep anaphora) can do
without them and be "pragmatically controlled." The following examples are cited
from Hankamer and Sag 1976:
416 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(72)	[Hankamer attempts to stuff a 9-inch ball through a 6-inch hoop]
a.	Sag: #It's not clear that you'll be able to.
b.	Sag: It's not clear that you'll be able to do it.
(73)	Hankamer: I'm going to stuff this ball through this hoop.
Sag:	It's	not clear that you'll be able to.
The bracketed part in (72) is intended to show the situation, not verbally expressed,
where the utterances in(72a,b) are produced. In this context, (72a), which involves
VP-ellipsis, is unnatural (as indicated by the # prefixed to the sentence), whereas
(72b), which is constructed by using the pronoun it, is fully acceptable. Example
(73)	indicates that once provided with a linguistic antecedent, the sentence in (72a)
becomes acceptable.
Bearing this in mind, let us consider the following examples:
(74)	[Observing a student smoking in the classroom]
a.	Taroo: e hai gan-de sinu kamosirenai.
lung cancer-of die may
'He may die of lung cancer.'
b.	Taroo: Sensei-ga e sikaru daroo.
teacher-NOM scold will
'The teacher will scold him.'
The subject in (74a) and the object in (74b) are empty, and they can refer to the
student that appears in the nonverbal situation. Given that they are pragmatically
controlled, the null arguments here are arguably pronouns.20 Then we must allow
for two options in analyzing null arguments in Japanese: they may be elliptic or
pronominal.
NOTES FOR CHAPTER 15
Some portions of this chapter were presented at Workshop on Linguistic Theory and
the Japanese Language, held at Harvard University in July 2005. I am grateful to the
participants for useful comments and questions. For helpful discussion and comments I
thank Jim Huang, Jonah Lin, Shigeru Miyagawa, Mamoru Saito, and an anonymous re-
viewer.
1.	Xu (1986) actually discusses a Japanese example (his (51))very similar to (9),
attributing it to Kuno (1980,1982).
2.	I do not agree with Hoji (1998) on the interpretation of (13b), which seems to me to
have the interpretation of (14a). Also, a reviewer pointed out the following data in English,
where each of (ib,c) is intended as a continuation of (ia).
(i)	a. Taroo washed his car.
b.	Hanako washed a car, too.
c.	Hanako washed one, too.
NOUN PHRASE ELLIPSIS
417
According to the reviewer, (ib,c) are pragmatically odd in the context where Hanako
washed her own car. Given that (13b) does not seem (at least to me) to have the oddness of
(ib,c) on the reading that everyone except Taroo washed his own car too, it casts doubts on
analyzing the null object in (13b) as a sort of indefinite expression.
3.	I have not had the chance to read Shinohara 2004. The information below is
obtained from Arimoto and Murasugi 2005.
4.	Precisely speaking, the Japanese expression izyoo means 'more than or equal to'.
Thus, sankumi izyoo should be translated as "three groups or more'. Just for convenience, I
gloss it as "more than' here.
5.	The strict reading can be obtained when the second clause contains an empty
pronoun in the object position, rather than involving VP-ellipsis.
6.	The second clause in (10) (or (26b)) can have the strict reading that Taroo praised
Ken. In that case, it may involve an empty pronominal object referring to Ken, instead of
VP-ellipsis (see also note 5).
7.	As a reviewer pointed out, the problem is more general. Consider the example
in (iia).
(ii)	a. John was criticized, and Bill was, too.
b. [TP John was-T [Vp was criticized John]],
and [tp Bill was-T [Vp was criticized John]]
Assuming that passives involve NP-movement and that be verbs undergo overt raising,
one might analyze (iia) as in (iib), where the antecedent VP with the copy of John is
reconstructed in the elliptic clause.
8.	The example in (32a) is a little degraded due to the violation of the so-called
Double-o Constraint (Harada 1973, Shibatani 1973), which disallows the occurrence of
more than one accusative phrase in a clause in Japanese. I abstract away from this mild
deviance.
9.	That subjects are outside VP in Japanese is indicated by the following examples, due
to Miyagawa (2001):
(iii)	a.	Zen'in-ga	sono tesuto-o uke-nakat-ta.
all-NOM	that test-ACC take-NEG-PAST
'All did not take that test.'
b.	Taroo-ga	zen'in-o home-nakat-ta.
Taroo-NOM all-ACC praise-NEG-PAST
'Taroo did not praise all.'
In (iiia) the subject quantifier is interpreted outside the scope of negation, whereas in
(iiib) the object quantifier is interpreted inside the scope of negation. The reading of (iiib)
is explained by saying that because the object is inside VP, it is c-commanded by negation
(on the assumption that the negation head appears between Tense and V). Then, the
interpretation of (iiia) indicates that the subject is beyond the c-command domain of
negation (arguably in the specifier position of TP).
10.	Whitman (1988) proposes an analysis of the null-object construction in terms of
VP-ellipsis and considers cases similar to (38), pointing out that they do not exhibit the
sloppy interpretation. I concur with Oku (1998) in regard to the judgment of the relevant
examples.
11.	A confirmation that null subjects can be elliptic comes from the fact that given
quantificational antecedents, null subjects can be quantificational as well, as 山口strated
here (see also Oku 1998, where an argument based on indefinite subjects is provided):
418 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(iv) a. Taitei-no gakusei-ga Taroo-o
most-GEN student-NOM Taroo-Acc
"Most students respect Taroo.'
e Hanako-o sonkeisiteiru koto
Hanako-Acc respect that
Lit. 'That e respect Hanako is obvious too?
b.
sonkeisiteiru.
respect
mo akiraka da.
also obvious is
(v) a. Hanbun
Half
kaita
wrote
izyoo-no	gakusei-ga	ronbun ippon-o
more than-GEN student-NOM paper one-ACC
sooda.
I-heard
‘I heard that more than half the students wrote one paper/
b. Boku-wa	e hon	issatu-o	kaita	to	mo	kiita.
I-top	book	one-ACC	wrote	that	also	heard
Lit. ‘1 heard that e wrote one book too.'
Examples (ivb) and (vb) are intended to be continuations of (iva) and (va), respec-
tively. The null subjects in (ivb) and (vb) can be understood as taitei-no gakusei 'most
students' and hanbun izyoo-no gakusei 'more than half the students', respectively.
Incidentally, a reviewer noted that this argument may not be convincing because
the English counterparts of (iv) and (v) with pronominal subjects have the same inter-
pretation.
(vi)	a. Most students respect Taroo and it is obvious that they respect Hanako, too.
b. I heard that more than half the students wrote one paper and I heard that
they wrote one book, too.
According to the reviewer, the pronominal subjects in (via,b) do not have to denote
exactly the same sets as their antecedents in the preceding clauses—namely, they do not
have to be E-type pronouns. If this is the case, the null subjects in (ivb) and (vb) can be
analyzed as pronouns.
12.	By this I do not mean that VP-ellipsis of the form assumed by Huang (1991)
and Otani and Whitman (1991)is ruled out universally. VP-ellipsis with concomitant V-
raising is argued to be existent in Irish by McCloskey (1991)and in Hebrew by Doron
(2000).
13.	The analyses proposed by Kim (1999), Moriyama and Whitman (2004), Oku
(1998), and Tomioka (2003) differ from one another in some details. Due to space
limitations I cannot replicate all of them here, and hence I refer readers to those
references.
14.	Moriyama and Whitman (2004) propose to treat cases such as (44) in the following
way:
(vi) Ken-ga [DP zibun-no [NP sensei-o]] semeta atode,
Ken-NOM self^GEN teacher-ACC criticized after
Taroo mo [DP pro [NP e]] semeta.
Taroo also	criticized
Lit. 'After Ken criticized his teacher, Taroo criticized, too.'
When the example has the sloppy interpretation, the null object in the elliptic clause
has a complex DP structure, where the NP part is elided with the stranded empty pro-
nominal possessor. This kind of NP-ellipsis has been independently shown to be available
in Japanese by Saito and Murasugi (1990) (see (52)). However, as Moriyama and Whitman
NOUN PHRASE ELLIPSIS
419
assume that nominal arguments are DPs and that only NP complements can be elliptic,
they have difficulty accounting fbr cases where entire DPs are elliptic, such as (44) and (51).
15.	For some unclear reason, English disallows NP-ellipsis with some determiners such
as the, a, and every. We do not concern ourselves with these exceptions here. See Elbourne
2001 and Lobeck 1995 fbr related discussion.
16.	See Watanabe, this volume, fbr extensive discussion of quantifiers such as the ones
in (50) and their relation to the structure of DP in Japanese.
17.	The impossibility of adjunct ellipsis correlates with the absence of adjunct
scrambling, which is noted by Saito (1985) on the basis of cases such as the following:
(vii)	*Riyuu	mo	naku	Mary-ga	[John-ga	t sono
reason	even	without	Mary-NOM	John-NOM	that
setu-o	sinziteiru to]	omotteiru.
theory-ACC	believe	that think
Lit. "For no reason, Mary thinks that John believed in that theory?
This sentence disallows the reading where the sentence-initial adjunct modifies the
embedded clause. Under the traditional view that scrambling is optional and not feature
driven, this fact is hard to explain. In Boskovic and Takahashi's (1998) analysis, in contrast,
it is accounted for readily. According to them, the adjunct should be base-generated in its
surface position and be moved into the embedded clause. Notice, however, that because
adjuncts are not selected, there is no selectional motivation for the adjunct to undergo
covert movement in (vii). The impossibility of adjunct scrambling, therefore, is regarded as
a consequence of Last Resort.
18.	A reviewer pointed out the following data (the original is slightly modified here to
avoid an irrelevant complication):
(viii)	a. Taroo-wa	zibun-no	sensei-o	semeta.
Taroo-Top self^GEN	teacher-ACC	criticized
'Taroo criticized his teacher.'
b. Hanako-wa [e kakkoii to] itta.
Hanako-TOP cool-is that said
Lit. 'Hanako said that e was cool.'
The null subject in (viiib) is intended to take the object in (viiia) as its antecedent.
Under the argument ellipsis analysis, nothing prevents the object in (viiia) from being
copied onto the empty subject position in (viiib), so that (viiib) can mean that Hanako said
that her own teacher was cool. The reviewer noted, however, that the reading is difficult to
obtain, suggesting instead that argument ellipsis be subject to some sort of parallelism
constraint such as the one discussed in Fox 200〇. Exactly to what extent and how argument
ellipsis obeys parallelism is left to future research.
19.	If VP-ellipsis is indeed available in Chinese, the example in (ix), supplied by
turning Wang (pers. comm.), is predicted to be possible on a par with the English example
in (x).
(ix)	Zhangsan yong zhege fangfa ying-le. Lisi ye e ying-le.
Zhangsan in this way win-ASP Lisi also win-ASP
'Zhangsan won this way. Lisi also won.'
(x)	John won this way, and Mary did, too.
The second sentence in (ix) is intended to mean that Lisi also won this way, just as the
second clause in (x) means that Mary won this way, too. Native speakers of Chinese seem
420 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
to vary about the judgment of (Lx). I leave it for future research to examine cases such
as (ix).
2〇. Following Williams (1977b), a reviewer pointed out that Hankamer and
Sag's (1976) dichotomy between pronouns and ellipsis is problematic, and the re-
viewer provided the following examples to show that NP-ellipsis can be pragmatically
controlled:
(xi)	a. [In a car lot] I like the white [NP e].
b. [In a coatroom] You took his [NP e].
However, Lasnik and Saito (1992) present evidence to the contrary:
(xii)	[Lasnik and Saito are in a yard with several barking dogs belonging to various
people.]
Lasnik: #Harry's is particularly noisy.
(xiii)	Lasnik: These dogs keep me awake with all their barking.
Saito: Harry's is particularly noisy.
Further, argument ellipsis seems to resist pragmatic control:
(xiv)	[Watching a boy hitting himself]
Taroo: Hanako mo e tataku daroo.
Hanako also hit will
Lit. 'Hanako will hit, too.'
Although the null object can refer to the boy in the nonlinguistic situation, it cannot
have the anaphoric reading: that is, Taroo's utterance cannot mean that Hanako will hit
herself. Because the anaphoric interpretation is a sign of ellipsis, its absence in (xiv)
indicates that argument ellipsis cannot be licensed pragmatically. Then, it may be that the
examples in (xi) do not involve ellipsis, though I have no answer to offer to the question of
exactly how they are analyzed.
REFERENCES
Arimoto, Masatake, and Keiko Murasugi. 2005. Sokubaku to sakuzyo [Binding and dele-
tion]. Tokyo: Kenkyusha.
Boskovic, Zeljko, and Daiko Takahashi.1998. Scrambling and Last Resort. Linguistic In-
quiry 29:347-366.
Chierchia, Gennaro.1998. Reference to kinds across languages. Natural Language Semantics
6:339-405.
Chomsky, Noam.1981.Lectures on government and binding. Dordrecht: Foris.
Chomsky, Noam.1995. Categories and transformations. In The Minimalist Program,
219-394. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Chomsky, Noam, and Howard Lasnik.1993. The theory of principles and parameters. In
Syntax: An international handbook of contemporary research, ed. Joachim Jacobs, Ar-
nim von Stechow, Wolfgang Sternefeld, and Theo Vennemann, 506-569. Berlin:
Walter de Gruyter.
NOUN PHRASE ELLIPSIS
421
Doron, Edit. 200〇• VSO and left-conjunct agreement: Biblical Hebrew vs. Modern Hebrew.
In The syntax of verb-initial languages, ed. Andrew Carnie and Eithne Guilfbyle, 75-95.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Elbourne, Paul.2001.E-type anaphora as NP-deletion. Natural Language Semantics
9:241-288.
Emonds, Joseph.1978. The verbal complex V'-V in French. Linguistic Inquiry 9:151-175.
Evans, Gareth.198〇• Pronouns. Linguistic Inquiry 11:337-362.
Fox, Danny. 200〇• Economy and semantic interpretation. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Fukui, Naoki.1986. A theory of category projection and its applications. Doctoral dis-
sertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Green, John N.1987. Spanish. In The world's major languages, ed. Bernard Comrie, 236-259.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hankamer, Jorge, and Ivan Sag.1976. Deep and surface anaphora. Linguistic Inquiry 7:391-
428.
Harada, S.-1.1973. Counter equi NP deletion. Annual Bulletin 7:113-147. Research Institute
of Logopedics and Phoniatrics, Tokyo University.
Hasegawa, Nobuko. 1984/1985. On the so-called "zero pronouns" in Japanese. The Lin-
guistic Review 4:289-342.
Hoji, Hajime.1985. Logical Form constraints and configurational structures in Japanese.
Doctoral dissertation, University of Washington, Seattle.
Hoji, Hajime.1998. Null object and sloppy identity in Japanese. Linguistic Inquiry
29:127-152.
Huang, C.-T. James.1984. On the distribution and reference of empty pronouns. Linguistic
Inquiry 15:531-574.
Huang, C.-T. James.1991.Remarks on the status of the null object. In Principles and
parameters in comparative grammar, ed. Robert Freidin, 56-76. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Jackendoff, Ray S.1971.Gapping and related rules. Linguistic Inquiry 2:21-35.
Jaeggli, Osvaldo.1982. Topics in Romance syntax. Dordrecht: Foris.
Kikuchi, Akira.1987. Comparative deletion in Japanese. Ms., Yamagata University, Ya-
magata, Japan.
Kim, Soowon.1999. Sloppy/strict identity, empty objects, and NP ellipsis. Journal of East
Asian Linguistics 8:255-284.
Ko, Heejeong. 2007. Asymmetries in scrambling and cyclic linearization. Linguistic Inquiry
38:49-84.
Koizumi, Masatoshi.1995. Phrase structure in minimalist syntax. Doctoral dissertation,
MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Kuno, Susumu.198〇• Discourse deletion. In Harvard studies in syntax and semantics 3, ed.
Susumu Kuno, 1-144. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University, Department of Lin-
guistics.
Kuno, Susumu.1982. Principles of discourse deletion: Case studies from English, Russian,
and Japanese. Journal of Semantics 1:61-93.
Kuroda, S.-Y.1965. Generative grammatical studies in the Japanese language. Doctoral
dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Lasnik, Howard, and Mamoru Saito.1992. Move a. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Lobeck, Anne.1995. Ellipsis: Functional heads, licensing, and identification. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
McCloskey, James.1991.Clause structure, ellipsis, and proper government in Irish. Lingua
85:259-302.
422 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Miyagawa, Shigeru. 2001.The EPP, scrambling, and w/i-in-situ. In Ken Hale: A life in
language, ed. Michael Kenstowicz, 294-338. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Moriyama, Yoshiyuki, and John Whitman. 2004. Null objects in Japanese revisited. Paper
read at a linguistics colloquium at Nanzan University, Nagoya, Japan, September.
Ohso, Mieko.1976. A study of zero pronominalization in Japanese. Doctoral dissertation,
Ohio State University, Columbus.
Oku, Satoshi.1998. A theory of selection and reconstruction in the minimalist perspective.
Doctoral dissertation, University of Connecticut, Storrs.
Otani, Kazuyo, and John Whitman.1991.V-raising and VP-ellipsis. Linguistic Inquiry
22：345-358.
Pollock, Jean-Yves.1989. Verb movement, Universal Grammar, and the structure of IP.
Linguistic Inquiry 20:365-424.
Saito, Mamoru.1985. Some asymmetries in Japanese and their theoretical implications.
Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Saito, Mamoru.1989. Scrambling as semantically vacuous Az-movement. In Alternative
conceptions of phrase structure, ed. Mark R. Baltin and Anthony S. Kroch, 182-20〇.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Saito, Mamoru. 2003. Notes on discourse-based null arguments. Paper presented at the
13th lapanese/Korean Linguistic Conference, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
August.
Saito, Mamoru, and Keiko Murasugi.199〇. Nz-deletion in Japanese: A preliminary study.
Japanese/Korean Linguistics 1:285-301.
Shibatani, Masayoshi.1973. Semantics of Japanese causativization. Foundations of Language
9:327-373.
Shinohara, Michie. 2004. Nihongo-no sakuzyo gensyoo-nituite [On the deletion phe-
nomena in Japanese]. B.A. thesis, Nanzan University, Nagoya, Japan.
Takahashi, Daiko. 2006. Apparent parasitic gaps and null arguments in Japanese. Journal of
East Asian Linguistics 15:1-35.
Tomioka, Satoshi. 2003. The semantics of Japanese null pronouns and its cross-linguistic
implications. In The interfaces: Deriving and interpreting omitted structures, ed. Kerstin
Schwabe and Susanne Winkler, 321-339. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Whitman, John.1988. Discourse ellipsis and the identity of zero pronouns. Linguistics in the
morning calm 2:149-175. Seoul: The Linguistic Society of Korea.
Williams, Edwin. 1977a. Discourse and Logical Form. Linguistic Inquiry 8:101-139.
Williams, Edwin. 1977b. On "deep and surface anaphora." Linguistic Inquiry 8:692-696.
Xu, Liejiong.1986. Free empty category. Linguistic Inquiry 17:75-93.
CHAPTER 1 6
DITRANSITIVE
CONSTRUCTIONS
YUJI TAKANO
16.1	Introduction
This chapter is concerned with the structure and derivation of ditransitive con-
structions (DCs) in Japanese. Focusing particularly on the structural relation between
two objects, this work closely examines syntactic properties of Japanese DCs and
discusses how competing theories account for them. I also consider consequences
and implications following from the study of Japanese DCs, discussing in particu-
lar how the study of Japanese DCs contributes to the development of linguistic
theory.
16.2	Major Questions about
Japanese DCs
One noticeable property of Japanese DCs is that they allow the order between the
theme/accusative phrase and the goal/dative phrase to be free, as shown in (i), in
contrast to English equivalents such as those in (2) and (3).
(1)a.	Masao-ga	Yumi-ni	syasin-o	ageta.
Masao-NOM	Yumi-DAT	picture-ACC	gave
'Masao gave Yumi a picture/gave a picture to Yumi.'
b.	Masao-ga	syasin-o	Yumi-ni	ageta.
Masao-NOM	picture-ACC	Yumi-DAT	gave
424 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(2)	a. John gave Mary a picture.
b. *John gave a picture Mary.
(3)	a. John gave a picture to Mary.
b. *John gave to Mary a picture.
Another important property to note is that, disregarding surface order, Japanese
apparently has only one morphosyntactic pattern for double complements, unlike
English, which has the double-object construction in (2) and the dative con-
struction in (3).
These facts about Japanese DCs immediately raise the following questions:
•	What are the structures of the two variants in (1)? How are they derived?
•	How does free order of the two objects arise?
It is difficult to answer these questions by just looking at the superficial patterns of
Japanese DCs. To answer them, it is necessary to closely examine their syntactic
properties.
In fact, a lot of work has been done to provide answers to these questions,
yielding interesting empirical discoveries and theoretical consequences. Two major
approaches to these questions have been proposed in the literature, which I review
in section 16.3. I discuss various arguments for and against those approaches in
sections 16.4 and 16.5. It becomes clear that some of the previous proposals are
incompatible with each other. Given this state of affairs, we might ask if it is possible
to unify the results of the previous studies. This is the topic of section 16.6.
The rich results of the previous studies of Japanese DCs have various im-
portant consequences and implications in a broader context. Given this, it is also a
goal of this chapter to make clear the contribution that the study of Japanese DCs
makes to linguistic theory in general. Specifically, I raise the following question:
How does the study of Japanese DCs contribute to the development of linguistic
theory? I address this question in section 16.7, which concludes the chapter.
16.3	Two Major Approaches to
Japanese DCs
16.3.1	The Scrambling Approach: Hoji (1985)
The alternation in (i)shows a free-word-order phenomenon with two internal
arguments of Japanese DCs. Two major approaches have been proposed to account
for this phenomenon—Hoji (1985) and Miyagawa (1996,1997). In this subsection, I
review Hoji's approach. Miyagawa's approach is discussed in section 16.3.2.
On the basis of an extensive investigation of Japanese DCs, Hoji (1985) ob-
serves that despite the free word order between the two objects, Japanese DCs show
DITRANSITIVE CONSTRUCTIONS
425
asymmetries between goal-theme and theme-goal orders with respect to (back-
ward) pronominal variable binding. The following are Hoji's original examples
(Hoji 1985:122-125):
(4)	a.冷Kimi-wa [np [s ⑶ q okuttekita] hitoj-ni nanij-o okurikaesita no.
you-TOP	sent.over person-DAT what-ACC sent.back q
'What did you send back to the person that had sent it to you?'
a'. Kimi-wa nanij-o [NP [s eiり okuttekita] hitOi]-ni	okurikaesita no.
you-TOP what-ACC	sent.over person-DAT sent.back	q
b. Kimi-wa [np [s ©i 勺 okuttekita] honj]-o dare「ni okurikaesita no.
you-TOP	sent.over	book-ACC who-DAT sent.back	q
'Who did you send back the book that he had sent to you?'
b'. Kimi-wa darej-ni [NP [s 4 q okuttekita] honj]-o	okurikaesita no.
you-TOP who-DAT	sent.over book-ACC sent.back	q
The empty elements q in (4a) and e； in (4b) are regarded as empty pronouns (i.e.,
pro). Hoji points out that there is a contrast between (4a) and (4b) with respect to
the possibility of a bound-variable interpretation: 4 in (4b) can be interpreted as
bound by the goal”加phrase dare 'who', but q in (4a) cannot be interpreted as
bound by the theme wh-phrase nani 'what'.1 The contrast cannot be accounted
for in linear terms, given that the pro precedes the wh-phrase in both cases. Hoji
proposes an account of the contrast based on the following claims:
(5)	a. Whereas the theme argument is base-generated in the complement of V,
the goal argument is base-generated in the specifier of V.
b. The theme-goal order results from scrambling of the theme over the goal.
Hoji in effect claims that the VP-internal structure of Japanese is configurational
rather than flat. On the assumption that Japanese is head-final and that both
complements and specifiers appear to the left of their sisters, (5a) ensures that the
goal precedes the theme on the surface if no movement takes place. The claim in
(5b) explains the other order. Let us refer to the type of scrambling invoked in (5b)
as short scrambling, to distinguish it from longer scrambling一that is, short
scrambling is scrambling to a postsubject position inside a clause, and longer
scrambling is scrambling to a presubject position inside a clause or scrambling out
of a clause. Hoji claims that short scrambling involves adjunction to VP. On Hoji's
analysis, the lack of the bound-variable interpretation in (4a) follows from the fact
that the pro is not c-commanded by the wh-phrase at any point in the overt
derivation.2 The status of (4b), Hoji argues, is a consequence of short scrambling of
the theme shown in (6).
(6)	Kimi-wa [NP ...pro^... ]-Oj dare「ni 弓 okurikaesita no.
The theme phrase has moved from a position c-commanded by the goal phrase, so
that the pro contained in the former can be bound by the latter through recon-
struction. Hoji's analysis thus captures the contrast between (4a) and (4b).3
Hoji argues that his proposal in (5) accounts for facts related to quantifier
scope as well. He discusses the examples in (7) (Hoji 1985:257-258).
426 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(7)	a.	John-ga	daremo-ni	Bill-ka Mary-o	syookaisita.
John-NOM	everyone-DAT	Bill-or Mary-Acc	introduced
'John introduced Bill or Mary to everyone?
b.	John-ga	Bill-ka Mary-o	daremo-ni	syookaisita.
John-NOM	Bill-or Mary-Acc	everyone-DAT	introduced
Hoji observes that whereas (7a) is unambiguous, having only a reading on which
daremo has wider scope than Bill-ka Mary, (7b) is ambiguous, permitting the op-
posite scope reading in addition to the one available in (7a). The contrast follows
under the proposal in (5), with the assumption about scope relations in Japanese that
if no movement is involved, scope relations between two quantifiers correspond to
their surface order, whereas if one quantifier moves over the other, scope ambiguity
results (Kuroda 1970). On Hoji's view, (7a) involves no movement and hence only
daremo has wide scope, but in (7b) Bill-ka Mary-o has scrambled over daremo-ni and
this makes the inverse scope reading, as well as the surface scope reading, possible.
Thus, Hoji's (1985) approach rests crucially on the idea that short scrambling is
responsible for the free-word-order phenomenon seen in Japanese DCs. Let us call
Hoji's approach the scrambling approach.
16.3.2	The Base-Generation Approach: Miyagawa (1996,1997)
Whereas Hoji (1985) claims that the goal is always higher than the theme in the base
structure, Miyagawa (1996,1997) challenges this claim.4 Among the arguments
Miyagawa provides for his approach, I take up one here that is based on an
observation about forward binding of the Japanese reciprocal otagai "each other?
Recall that the examples in (4) show an asymmetry between the goal-theme
order and the theme-goal order with respect to backward binding. Miyagawa
(1996,1997) points out that such an asymmetry is not found with forward binding.
Let us first look at the examples in (8) (from Miyagawa 1997:4—5).
(8)	a. ???[John-to Mary]-Oj otagai-ga な mita.
John-and Mary-Acc each.other-NOM saw
'John and Mary, each other saw.'
b. [John-to Mary] -o； otagai-no	sensei-ga な mita.
John-and Mary-Acc each.other-GEN teacher-NOM saw
'John and Mary, each other's teachers saw.'
Both examples have the object in front of the subject. It is standardly assumed that
these cases involve scrambling of the object from the position of the trace. Although
forward binding is perfect in (8b), it is degraded in (8a). Miyagawa attributes the
latter fact to the effects of Rizzi's (1986) Chain Condition, which is defined in (9)?
(9)	C — (%,..., an) is a chain iff, for 1 < i < n, % is the local binder of ai+1.
(10)	a is a binder of p iff, for a, p = any category, a and P are coindexed, and a c-
commands P； a is the local binder of P iff a is a binder of P and there is no y
such that y is a binder of P,and y is not a binder of a.
DITRANSITIVE CONSTRUCTIONS
427
In (8a) the object has moved over the subject. Given that the subject c-commands
the trace of the object and is coindexed with it, the subject is the local binder of the
trace, according to (10). The Chain Condition in (9) then requires that the subject,
not the moved object, form a chain with the trace of the object. Because the moved
object cannot form a chain with its trace, it cannot be interpreted properly and
hence the sentence is excluded.
Let us now consider (11) ((11b), together with the judgment, is from Miyagawa
1997：5).
(11)	a. John-ga [Hanako-to Mary]i-ni (paatii-de) otagai「o
John-NOM Hanako-and Mary-DAT party-at each.other-ACC
syookaisita.
introduced
"John introduced each other to Hanako and Mary (at the party)/
b. (?)John-ga [Hanako-to Mary]ro (paatii-de) otagaij-ni
John-NOM Hanako-and Mary-Acc party-at each.other-DAT
syookaisita.
introduced
"John introduced Hanako and Mary to each other (at the party)/
Snyder (1992) and Miyagawa (1996,1997) observe that the example in (11b) is
acceptable, in contrast to the example in (8a).6 The fact that (11b) is better than (8a)
is puzzling if the theme phrase has undergone movement, as in Hoji's (1985)
analysis. Given the Chain Condition, the grammatical status of (11b) implies that
no movement is involved in this example. These considerations led Miyagawa to
the following claims:
(12)	a. The goal and theme arguments are freely base-generated in VP in
either order.
b. VP-internal scrambling does not exist.
Like Hoji (1985), Miyagawa takes a configurational approach to the structure of
Japanese VP. Under this approach, (12) means that the theme and the goal can
freely appear in the complement or specifier of V. Therefore, on Miyagawa's view,
word-order permutations between the two arguments cannot result from short
scrambling but must rather result from base-generation. Let us call Miyagawa's
approach the base-generation approach.
Recall that Hoji (1985) points out that there is an asymmetry in scope in-
terpretation between (7a) and (7b). Miyagawa (1997) takes up the same issue
but claims that there is no such asymmetry. He judges both (13a,b) to be
ambiguous.7
(13)	a.	Hanako-ga	dareka-ni	daremo-o	syookaisita.
Hanako-NOM	someone-DAT	everyone-ACC	introduced
'Hanako introduced everyone to someone.'
b.	Hanako-ga	dareka-o	daremo-ni	syookaisita.
Hanako-NOM	someone-ACC	everyone-dat	introduced
428 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Miyagawa argues that the ambiguity in both examples in (13) follows from
his proposals in (12), coupled with another proposal he makes一namely, that fbcus
movement can move the lower object overtly over the higher object. Thus, on
his analysis, the order in (13a) can be associated with a derivation in which dareka-
ni has moved (by focus movement) from a position lower than daremo-o, and
the order in (13b) with a derivation in which dareka-o has moved from a posi-
tion lower than daremo-ni. The availability of focus movement in the two cases
makes it possible for each of the two quantifiers to take wide scope (recall that in
Japanese, scope ambiguity arises only when one quantifier overtly moves over the
other).
There is an important issue arising here. As pointed out by Takano (1998:
850-852), the postulation of focus movement causes a problem for Miyagawa's
approach. As in the case of quantifier scope, it predicts no asymmetry between the
goal-theme and theme-goal orders. This cannot be correct, given Hop s (1985)
observation that there is indeed an asymmetry between the two orders with respect
to (backward) pronominal variable binding, as illustrated in (4a,b) (and (ia,b) in
note 1).
So far, I have reviewed two major approaches to Japanese DCs一Hojf s (1985)
scrambling approach and Miyagawa's (1996,1997) base-generation approach.
There is in fact a third approach proposed in the literature, one that has the
properties of both the base-generation and scrambling approaches. This account
has been developed by Kitagawa (1994).8 Details aside, Kitagawa proposes that
Japanese has both the double-object and dative constructions, and that the two
constructions differ in surface order. Thus, according to him, the goal-theme
order corresponds to the double-object structure in (2a), whereas the theme-goal
order corresponds to the dative structure in (3a). Kitagawa claims that the two
constructions are derived without movement of either internal argument. In this
sense, it is a variant of the base-generation approach.9
However, Kitagawa (1994) also allows scrambling to move the lower object
over the higher one in both constructions. On this approach, then, there should be
no asymmetries between the two orders一either one can be base-generated and can
also involve scrambling of the lower object over the higher one. In fact, Kitagawa
claims, like Miyagawa (1997), that there is no asymmetry with respect to quantifier
scope, with both orders yielding ambiguity. Kitagawa addresses pronominal var-
iable binding, too, observing that examples such as (4a) are not as bad as standard
weak crossover effects induced by SOV sentences in which the object is a quantifier
and the subject contains a pronoun bound by the object quantifier, and that
examples such as (4b) are not as good as standard reconstruction effects induced
by OSV sentences in which the subject is a quantifier and the moved object con-
tains a pronoun bound by the subject quantifier. Hoji (1985:122,125,302-303) notes
these points, too (in fact, Kitagawa cites Hoji's observations) but crucially claims
that there is still a contrast between (4a) and (4b) (and between (7a) and (7b)) that
supports his proposal in (5) (see also note 3). Kitagawa's approach thus has the
same properties as Miyagawa's (1996,1997) approach equipped with the focus-
movement strategy (recall the discussion surrounding (13)).
DITRANSITIVE CONSTRUCTIONS
429
As mentioned before, Kitagawa makes another important claim—namely, that
Japanese has both double-object and dative structures. I return to this issue in
section 16.5.2 when I discuss a proposal of Miyagawa and Tsujioka (2004).
To sum up so far, I have discussed the two major approaches to free word order
in Japanese DCs一the scrambling approach and the base-generation approach. We
have seen that the scrambling approach can explain the fact that backward binding
is possible only in the theme-goal order, whereas the base-generation approach can
explain the lack of Chain Condition effects in the theme-goal order. We have also
seen that Hoji (1985) and Miyagawa (1997) report different judgments on quanti-
fier-scope phenomena that are consistent with their respective proposals.10
The scrambling approach and the base-generation approach have been ex-
plored in subsequent work by various researchers. In the next two sections, I review
developments of the two approaches advanced in the literature.
16.4	Arguments for the
Scrambling Approach
The scrambling approach is advocated by Koizumi (1995), Takano (1998), and
Yatsushiro (2003). Let us discuss their arguments in turn.
16.4.1	Koizumi (1995)
Koizumi (1995) argues for the scrambling approach on the basis of examples
involving quantifier floating. Let us first consider the following examples
(cl = classifier):
(14)	a. Sannin-no gakusei-ga piza-o tabeta.
three.CL-GEN student-NOM pizza-ACC ate
"Three students ate pizza?
b.	Gakusei-ga	sannin	piza-o	tabeta.
student-NOM	three.CL	pizza-ACC ate
c.	Gakusei-ga	piza-o	nikire	tabeta.
student-NOM	pizza-ACC two.cl	ate
'A student ate two slices of pizza?
In Japanese, if a numeral quantifier (NQ) occurs inside an NP, it necessarily has the
genitive case particle -no, as in (14a). The NQ sannin in (14b) does not have a
genitive case particle, which indicates that it is outside an NP. It is thus a floating
NQ construed with the subject NP. The NQ in (14c) is also a floating NQ; it is
construed with the object NP.
There is a locality restriction on the relation between a floating NQ and its host
NP (i.e., the NP with which it is construed). Consider the following:
43〇 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(15) a. *Gakusei-ga	piza-o	sannin	tabeta.
student-NOM	pizza-ACC	three.CL	ate
"Three students ate pizza.'			
b. Piza-o	gakusei-ga	nikire	tabeta.
pizza-ACC	student-NOM	two.CL	ate
"A student ate two slices of pizza/
As (15a) shows, an NQ construed with the subject cannot appear between the object
and the verb. This indicates that a floating NQ must be close enough to its host NP.
Defining the notion of locality relevant here is a matter of debate and does not
concern us here (see Koizumi 1995 for his own analysis of (15) and references cited
therein for earlier analyses). What matters is the fact that an argument phrase cannot
intervene between a floating NQ and its host NP. In this light, the grammaticality of
(15b) is interesting, given that the subject intervenes between the NQ nikire and its
host NP piza-o, which is the object. The standard analysis of this fact appeals to
scrambling (see Haig 1980 and Kuroda 1980,1983). Thus, (15b) is grammatical
because the object NP has scrambled from its base-generated position and hence the
NQ is close enough to the trace/copy of the object NP. Put differently, this analysis
connects the grammaticality of (15b) with that of (14c) by way of scrambling.
Koizumi (1995:108) extends this analysis to DCs, claiming that the grammati-
cality of (16a) is accounted for in terms of short scrambling of the theme over the goal.
(16)	a.	John-ga	piza-o	Mary-ni	nikire	ageta.
John-NOM	pizza-ACC	Mary-DAT	two.CL	gave
'John gave two slices of pizza to Mary?
b.	John-ga	Mary-ni	piza-o	nikire	ageta.
John-NOM	Mary-DAT	pizza-ACC	two.CL	gave
In (16a) the goal argument intervenes between the NQ nikire and its host piza-o,
which is the theme argument. Koizumi claims that the grammaticality of (16a) is to
be assimilated to that of (15b)一that is, he claims that (16a) receives the same
account as (16b) if the theme, generated lower than the goal, scrambles over the
goal to yield the theme-goal order. Koizumi's analysis of (16a) thus constitutes an
argument for the scrambling approach.
16.4.2	Takano (1998)
The next argument for the scrambling approach is provided by Takano (1998).
Takano supports the scrambling approach from the point of view of the generality
ofHojfs (1985) claim, arguing that short scrambling exists not only in Japanese but
also in English.
Recall that Hoji (1985) claims that the goal argument is base-generated
higher than the theme argument. In contrast, Larson (1988) advocates an opposite
thematic hierarchy in which the theme is higher than the goal. Larson put forth this
proposal to account for the properties of DCs in English.
DITRANSITIVE CONSTRUCTIONS
431
Takano (1998) points out that it is highly unlikely that the properties of the-
matic prominence differ from language to language and argues that Hoji's the-
matic hierarchy in fact holds for English as well. English has a double-complement
construction where the two complements are both PPs, as in (17a). Moreover, this
construction allows the order of the two PPs to be free, as shown by the alternation
between (17a) and (17b).
(17)	a. I talked to John about Mary.
b. I talked about Mary to John.
Takano claims that (17) is parallel to (1). Following Larson (1988), Takano assumes
that the 如-phrase is the goal and the obo以t-phrase is the theme. If so, and if Hoji
(1985) is correct, (17a) should be the base order and (17b) should involve scram-
bling of the about-phrase over the to-phrase, as shown in (18).
(18)	I talkedj-v [vp [about Mary]j [Vp to John な z)]].
Takano argues that this is the correct analysis by pointing out the examples in
(19)	(Takano 1998:837-838).
(19)	a. *1 talked to each other's mothers about the boys.
az. ?I talked about the boys to each other's mothers.
b. ?I talked about each other's mothers to the boys.
b‘. I talked to the boys about each other's mothers.
Particularly important here is the contrast between (19a) and (19b), which Takano
argues is exactly parallel to the contrast between (4a) and (4b) in Japanese. Ex-
tending Hoji's (1985) proposal, Takano argues that the property in (5a) is universal,
so that the order in (19a) reflects the base structure, whereas that in (19b) results
from short scrambling of the theme (the 白万〇〃t-phrase) over the goal (the t0-
phrase). On this view, (19a) violates condition A of the binding theory, but (19b)
satisfies it due to reconstruction.
On the basis of this analysis of the cases in (19), Takano (1998) concludes that
English, too, has scrambling of the theme over the goal, thus supporting the
scrambling approach from a cross-linguistic point of view.
The hypothesis that (5a) is universal also led Takano (1998) to propose a new
analysis of the English dative construction in (20).
(20)	John gave a picture to Mary.
Specifically, Takano proposes that the theme necessarily moves over the goal in
such cases, as shown in (21), contrary to Larson (1988), who argues that theme-goal
reflects the base order.11
(21)	John gave [a picture]i to Mary ら
One valuable consequence of this analysis is that it can treat the acceptable status of
cases such as (22), originally noted by Burzio (1986), in exactly the same way as that
of English (19b) and Japanese (4b).12
432 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(22)	?I gave each other's babies to the mothers.
Takano (1998) claims that the unification of (4b), (19b), and (22) lends
additional support to the scrambling approach, according to which the theme-
goal order is derived by short scrambling of the theme from a position lower
than the goal (thereby making backward binding possible through recon-
struction).
A further consequence of Takano's (1998) proposal concerns the impor-
tant difference between cases such as (17) and those such as (20): order between
the goal and the theme is free in the former but not in the latter (see (3)). Takano
provides a Case-theoretic account of this fact and also proposes to generalize
the English-internal difference between (17) and (20) to the cross-linguistic
difference between Japanese (1)and English (3) noted in section 16.2. His pro-
posal has nontrivial implications for parametric variation between English and
Japanese and for the nature of Universal Grammar (UG). I return to these issues
in section 16.7.
16.4.3	Yatsushiro (2003)
As previously discussed, one of Takano's (1998) contributions is to show the
generality of Hoji's (1985) claims in (5), by demonstrating that short scrambling
exists in English as well, thereby lending further support to the scrambling ap-
proach. Recall, however, that the fact shown in (11) that forward binding is pos-
sible in either order supports the base-generation approach. Takano leaves this
issue untouched, but it is squarely addressed by Yatsushiro (2003). Yatsushiro
argues that a close examination of Chain Condition effects with Japanese DCs in
fact leads us to conclude that the scrambling approach is correct.
Yatsushiro (2003) claims that the reciprocal anaphor, due to its semantics,
cannot be subject to the Chain Condition and that both the deviance in (8a) and
the lack of deviance in (11b) are due to special properties of the reciprocal ana-
phor instead of the Chain Condition. She provides an account of (8a) and
(11b) compatible with the scrambling approach by appealing to covert move-
ment of the 'each'-part of the reciprocal, in the spirit of the analysis of English each
other proposed by Heim, Lasnik, and May (1991a,b) (see Yatsushiro 2003 for
details).
Under the scrambling approach, Yatsushiro's claim about (ub) predicts that
the example should become deviant if the reciprocal is replaced by a reflexive,
which is clearly subject to the Chain Condition. Yatsushiro (2003:147,149)gives the
examples in (23) to show that the prediction is partially borne out.
(23)	a. (?*)Uli-o karezisin-ga hometa.
Uli-Acc himself^nom praised
"Himself praised Uli.'
DITRANSITIVE CONSTRUCTIONS
433
b.	(*)Uli-ga	Jonathan-o	karezisin-ni	miseta.
UH-nom	Jonathan-acc	himself-dat	showed
'Uli showed Jonathan to himself?
c.	?Uli-ga	Jonathan-ni	karezisin-o	miseta.
Uli-NOM	Jonathan-DAT	himself-ACC	showed
'Uli showed himself to Jonathan?
Example (23a) involves scrambling of the object over the subject, and (23b), given
the scrambling approach, involves scrambling of the theme over the goal, in
contrast to (23c), which is derived without scrambling. Yatsushiro reports that
speakers> judgments vary on (23a,!)) in such a way that whereas some speakers find
them to be deviant, others find them to be acceptable.13
So, to the extent that there are speakers who find a significant contrast be-
tween (23b) and (23c), the fact shows that the theme-goal order of the Japanese
DC exhibits Chain Condition effects, thereby supporting the scrambling
approach.
YatsushiroJs (2003) view on Chain Condition effects in Japanese is challenged
by Miyagawa and Tsujioka (2004). I return to this issue in section 16.6.
16.5	Arguments against Hoji's
(1985) Analysis
Let us turn now to arguments against Hoji's (1985) analysis of Japanese DCs. I take
up two proposals here一one by Matsuoka (2003) and the other by Miyagawa and
Tsujioka (2004).
16.5.1	Matsuoka (2003)
Matsuoka (2003) proposes that Japanese ditransitive verbs do not constitute a
uniform class but come in two types一the pass-type and the show-type一and that
pass-type verbs take a theme and a goal, whereas show-type verbs take a theme and
an experiencer. According to Matsuoka, the pass-type includes such verbs as wa-
tasu 'pass', kakeru 'put', and todokeru 'deliver', whereas the show-type includes
miseru 'show', abiseru 'pour', kasu 'lend', and kiseru 'put (clothes)'. Matsuoka
moreover claims that with the pass-type, the theme phrase is higher than the goal
phrase in the base structure, which is exactly opposite to Hoji's (1985) view.14
Among the arguments Matsuoka presents for this view, I discuss two here一one
relating to variable binding and the other relating to a pattern of alternation seen
between DCs and their inchoative counterparts.
434 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Matsuoka (2003:183) observes that the following example allows bound-
variable interpretation (the judgment is Matsuoka's):
(24)	?John-ga [[^i proj tyuumonsita] seitoj-ni	[subete-no hon]j-o watasita.
John-NOM	ordered	student-DAT all-GEN	book-ACC passed
"John passed every book to the student who ordered it.'
The availability of the bound-variable interpretation is unexpected under Hoji's
(1985) view, according to which goal-theme reflects the base order. Given that the
sentence in (24) has the goal-theme order, no movement should be involved and
the bound-variable reading should be disallowed. If this sentence allows the
bound-variable reading, as Matsuoka claims, then it is a counterexample to Hoji's
approach. On the basis of the judgment indicated in (24), Matsuoka proposes that
the base position of the theme is higher than that of the goal and that the goal-
theme order in (24) is derived by scrambling of the goal over the theme, which
makes binding possible through reconstruction.
Matsuoka (2003) also argues for the theme being higher than the goal on the
basis of the sentence pattern of inchoative variants of pass-type verbs. The basic
pattern of interest is illustrated in (25) (Matsuoka 2003:173).
(25)	a. John-ga {Mary-ni hanataba-o/ hanataba-o Mary-ni}
John-NOM Mary-DAT bouquet-ACC bouquet-ACC Mary-DAT
watasita.
passed
'John passed a bouquet to Mary?
b.	Hanataba-ga	Mary-ni	watatta.
bouquet-NOM	Mary-DAT	passed
'A bouquet passed to Mary?
c.	*Mary-ga	hanataba-o	watatta.
Mary-NOM	bouquet-ACC	passed
"Mary got a bouquet passed to her?
The ditransitive verb watas^ii) and its inchoative counterpart watar(u) are mor-
phologically related. The interesting facts in (25) are that the (accusative) theme
object of the ditransitive sentence in (25a) becomes the (nominative) subject of the
inchoative sentence in (25b) and that the (dative) goal of the ditransitive can never
become the subject of the inchoative, as shown in (25c). Following the spirit of
Baker's (1993,1995) original proposal for similar cases in English, Matsuoka argues
that this alternation pattern is explained in syntactic terms. More specifically, he
claims that the theme is higher than the goal in the base and hence that in the in-
choative, the theme, which is closer to T than the goal, is attracted by T in accordance
with the Minimal Link Condition.
Both of Matsuoka's (2003) arguments are intended to show that the theme
is higher than the goal in the base structure, contrary to Hojfs (1985) pro-
posal. However, there are problems with his arguments. I return to this point in
section 16.6.
DITRANSITIVE CONSTRUCTIONS
435
16.5.2	Miyagawa and Tsujioka (2004)
Miyagawa and Tsujioka (2004) argue against Hoji's (1985) view on Japanese DCs
from a new perspective, making several new claims about Japanese DCs. First, they
claim that Japanese, just like English, has both the double-object and the dative
constructions.15 It is well known that the double-object construction has prop-
erties that its dative counterpart does not have. Miyagawa and Tsujioka take up
two such properties一the effects of causation and those of possession (see Oerhle
1976; Bresnan 1978,1982; and references cited in Miyagawa and Tsujioka 2004).
Consider (26) and (27).
(26)	a. The article gave me a headache.
b. *The article gave a headache to me.
(27)	a. I sent the boarder/*the border a package.
b. I sent a package to the boarder/the border.
The contrast in (26) shows that the verb of the double-object construction can
carry a causative meaning, whereas that of the dative construction cannot. The
examples in (27) show that whereas the first object of the double-object con-
struction is necessarily construed as a possessor of the theme and hence must be
animate, the same does not hold for the object of the preposition in the dative.
Miyagawa and Tsujioka regard the object of the preposition in the dative con-
struction as a location rather than a possessor.
This means that there are two kinds of goal. Miyagawa and Tsujioka (2004) call
the goal interpreted as a possessor the "high goal" and the goal interpreted as a
location the "low goal." As these names suggest, the high goal appears in a high
position, and the low goal appears in a low position.
The fact that the double-object construction (with the high goal) and the
dative construction (with the low goal) have different properties strongly suggests
that they have different structures. To account for the properties of the double-
object construction, Miyagawa and Tsujioka (2004) adopt the structure in (28)
proposed by Marantz (1993).16
(28)	vP
John
v VP.
Mary
V、 VP2
XX
V2 a package
send
436 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
In this structure, V】is regarded as an applicative head that relates the event in the
VP2 to the DP in its specifier, namely, the high goal. This applicative head is assumed
to give rise to the causative interpretation in (26a). It is also considered to be the
source of the animacy restriction on the goal argument seen in (27a): the applicative
head, due to its semantics, forces the argument in its specifier to be interpreted as a
possessor of the theme and so the inanimate goal is impossible in (27a).
The dative construction, in contrast, is claimed to lack the applicative head in
its structure. Therefore, both the theme and the low goal appear in the same VP, as
shown in (29).
(29)	vP
John
v VP
a package
V PP
I
send P Mary
The absence of the applicative head is argued to derive the facts in (26b) and (27b).
That is, (26b) is ungrammatical because the sentence cannot receive a causative
interpretation due to the lack of the applicative head, and (27b) can have an
inanimate goal because its structure does not have the applicative head, which
forces a possessor interpretation on the argument in its specifier.
Miyagawa and Tsujioka (2004) extend this analysis to Japanese DCs. They
propose that there are two kinds of goals in Japanese DCs as well and that the high
goal is generated in the specifier of the applicative head in the same structure as
that in (28) (modulo the complement-head order), whereas the low goal is gen-
erated in the (lower) VP, as in (29). They also propose that when both the low goal
and the theme are present, they are generated freely within the same VP, in the
spirit of the base-generation approach. On this view, then, the high goal is always
generated in the specifier of the applicative head and so its position is fixed,
whereas the low goal is subject to free generation inside VP. As is discussed later,
scrambling of the theme over the high goal is blocked. As a result, in this new
theory, word-order permutation occurs only between the theme and the low goal
(through base generation).
Note that Japanese DCs, unlike the English equivalents, do not have two
morphologically distinct ways of marking the goal argument. Thus, Japanese has
only one morphosyntactic form, as in (31), for the two English sentences in (30).
(30)	a. John sent Mary a package.
b. John sent a package to Mary.
DITRANSITIVE CONSTRUCTIONS
437
(31)	John-ga	{Mary-ni nimotu-o/ nimotu-o	Mary-ni} okutta.
John-NOM Mary-DAT package-ACC package-ACC Mary-DAT sent
As a result, it is not clear which of the two variants in (30) the sentence in (31)
corresponds to. Recall that whereas the high goal is interpreted as a possessor, the
low goal is interpreted as a location. On Miyagawa and Tsujioka's (2004) analysis,
Mary-ni in (31), being animate, can be a high goal as well as a low goal, and hence
the sentence is structurally ambiguous: it can involve the double-object structure
(with the applicative head) or the dative structure (without the applicative head).
However, if the goal is inanimate, as in (32), the sentence is unambiguously of the
(32)	John-ga	{Tokyo-ni nimotu-o/ nimotu-o	Tokyo-ni} okutta.
John-NOM Tokyo-DAT package-ACC package-ACC Tokyo-DAT sent
To support their two-goal analysis of Japanese DCs, Miyagawa and
Tsujioka (2004:5-6) point out that there is a difference in scope interpretation
between (33a), which has an animate goal, and (33b), which has an inanimate
(33)	a.	Taroo-ga	dareka-ni	dono nimotumo	okutta.
Taro-NOM	someone-DAT	every package	sent
b.	Taroo-ga	dokoka-ni	dono nimotumo	okutta.
Taro-NOM	some.place-DAT	every package	sent
'Taro sent every package to some place/
They observe that whereas (33a) is unambiguous, permitting only a 'some’>’every'
reading, (33b) is ambiguous, permitting both a 'some' > 'every' reading and an
'every'>'some' reading.17 They then assimilate the contrast to the well-known
(34)	a. John sent some student every article.	some > every, *every > some
b. John sent some article to every student, some > every, every > some
Marantz (1993) attributes the lack of ambiguity in (34a) to the existence of
the complex VP structure in the double-object construction (see (28)) and the
presence of ambiguity in (34b) to the absence of the complex VP structure in the
dative (see (29)). Miyagawa and Tsujioka adopt this analysis for the Japanese cases in
(33), arguing that (33a,b) have different structures, as predicted by the two-goal
Miyagawa and Tsujioka (2004) also claim that the high goal (in the double-
object construction) and the low goal (in the dative construction) differ in cate-
gorial status, even though they look identical superficially, in such a way that the
former is a DP, whereas the latter is a PP. They provide evidence for this claim from
floating numeral quantifiers (NQs). Consider (35).
4Z8 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(35)	a.	Taroo-ga	mati-o	hutatu	otozureta.
Taro-NOM	town-ACC	two.cl	visited
£Taro visited	two towns?
b.	*Hito-ga	mati-kara	hutatu	kita.
people-NOM	town-from	two.cl	came
'People came from two towns?
Both examples in (35) contain floating NQs (see section 16.4.1). The contrast in (35)
illustrates that an NQ can float off its host if the host is a DP but not if the host is a
PP (Shibatani 1978:59-60).
Now consider (36).
(36)	a.	Taroo-ga	gakusei-ni	hutari	nimotu-o	okutta.
Taro-NOM	student-DAT	two.CL	package-ACC	sent
'Taro sent two students a package?
b.	*Daitooryoo-ga	kokkyoo-ni	hutatu	heitai-o	okutta.
president-NOm	border-to	two.CL	soldier-ACC	sent
'The President sent two borders soldiers?
The goal is animate in (36a) but inanimate in (36b), which indicates, given
Miyagawa and Tsujioka's theory, that (36a) can be a double-object construction,
whereas (36b) must be a dative construction. On the basis of their observation
that the NQ can float in (36a) but not in (36b), Miyagawa and Tsujioka conclude
that the high goal is a DP, whereas the low goal is a PP. This is another argument
for their two-goal analysis.
Furthermore, Miyagawa and Tsujioka (2004) present what they consider to be
the clearest evidence for their claim that there are two goal positions—it is possible
for both goals to appear in the same sentence (Miyagawa and Tsujioka 2004:9):"
(37)	Taroo-ga Hanako-ni Tokyo-ni nimotu-o	okutta.
Taro-NOM Hanako-DAT Tokyo-to package-ACC sent
'Taro sent Hanako a package to Tokyo?
According to Miyagawa and Tsujioka, (37) means that Taro sent a package to
Tokyo, which is a location, with the intention that Hanako, who may not be in
Tokyo, will come to possess it. This sentence, with the interpretation just given,
shows that we need to have two positions for the nr-marked objects, one for the
possessor (high goal) and another for the location (low goal). Moreover, the po-
sition for the possessor must be higher than that for the location, given the un-
grammaticality of (38), according to Miyagawa and Tsujioka (2004:9).
(38)	*Taroo-ga Tokyo-ni Hanako-ni nimotu-o	okutta.
Taro-NOM Tokyo-to Hanako-DAT package-ACC sent
The ungrammaticality of (38) also indicates that the low goal cannot scramble over
the high goal. Similarly, (39) shows that the theme cannot scramble over the high
goal (Miyagawa and Tsujioka 2004:9).
DITRANSITIVE CONSTRUCTIONS
439
(39)	*/?Taroo-ga nimotu-o	Hanako-ni Tokyo-ni okutta.
Taro-NOM package-ACC Hanako-DAT Tokyo-to sent
The ungrammaticality of (38) and (39) supports the hypothesis that scrambling is
not a free operation (Miyagawa 1996,1997). Miyagawa and Tsujioka suggest that
the applicative head is not a phase and therefore never bears an EPP-feature, the
assumption here being that movement is triggered by an EPP-feature (Chomsky
2000). This is why neither the low goal nor the theme can move to the domain of
the applicative head. If scrambling were a free operation, taking place without any
driving force, (38) and (39) would be possible.
Notice that (39) also shows that the theme cannot move across the high goal to
vP. To account for this, Miyagawa and Tsujioka appeal to locality, claiming that if
v has an EPP-feature, it should attract the closest phrase, which is not the theme
but the high goal. Thus, the theme can never be attracted by v.
Unlike the order between the high goal and the theme/low goal, the order
between the low goal and the theme is free, so that the acceptability of (37) does not
change if the low goal and the theme are switched around, as in (40) (Miyagawa
and Tsujioka 2004:10).
(40)	Taroo-ga Hanako-ni nimotu-o	Tokyo-ni okutta.
Taro-NOM Hanako-DAT package-ACC Tokyo-to sent
Miyagawa and Tsujioka claim that this fact follows under their analysis, according
to which the low goal and the theme are freely base-generated within VP. Thus, on
their view, the word-order alternation between (37) and (40) arises from base
generation.
Finally, Miyagawa and Tsujioka (2004) provide a new argument for the base-
generation approach based on idioms. Larson (1988:340) claims that the existence
of "discontinuous idioms" such as those in (41) supports the idea that a verb and
its outer complements can form a single thematic complex.
(41)	a. Lasorda sent his starting pitcher to the showers.
b.	Mary took Felix to the cleaners/to task/into consideration.
c.	Felix threw Oscar to the wolves.
Larson observes that in each case in (41), the verb and its PP complement form a
single thematic complex that assigns a 0-role to the DP object. To account for these
idioms, Larson argues that in the English V-DP-PP constructions, the PP is base-
generated in the complement ofV, so that the verb and the PP complement form an
underlying constituent excluding the DP object, which he claims occupies Spec,V.
Miyagawa and Tsujioka (2004:20-21) observe that Japanese has idioms of
both the dative-V type and the accusative-V type, as illustrated in (42) and (43).
(42)	a. Taroo-wa omotta koto-o	kuti-ni	dasu.
Taro-Top thought thing-ACC mouth-DAT let.out
'Taro says what's on his mind.'
440 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
b.	Taroo-wa hito-no	koto-ni	kuti-o	dasu.
Taro-Top person-GEN thing-DAT mouth-ACC let.out
'Taro cuts in on others' business.'
(43)	a.	Taroo-wa	kuruma-o	te-ni	ireta.
Taro-Top	car-ACC	hand-DAT	put.in
'Taro acquired a car.'
b.	Taroo-wa	genkoo-ni	te-o	ireta.
Taro-Top	draft-dat	hand-ACC	put.in
'Taro revised the draft.'
These examples show that the same verb can appear in both dative-V and accu-
sative-V idioms. On Larson's (1988) reasoning, this fact indicates that Japanese
allows both the dative phrase and the accusative phrase to form an underlying
constituent with the verb. Miyagawa and Tsujioka take this to be independent
evidence that both the goal and the theme can be base-generated in the comple-
ment of V.
16.6	Prospects for Unification
So far, I have discussed studies arguing for Hoji's (1985) original approach to
Japanese DCs and those arguing against it. These previous studies have produced
many interesting, and sometimes conflicting, empirical discoveries and theoretical
proposals. Given this state of affairs, it is important to consider how things stand
now regarding the study of Japanese DCs and to ask if we can imagine a way of
unifying the results of these previous studies, despite the fact that some of the
proposals are incompatible with each other. In this section, I attempt to do this and
suggest a possible direction in which such unification might be achieved.
16.6.1	Reexamination of Yatsushiro's (2003)
and MatsuoKa's (2003) Proposals
To this end, we first need to resolve conflicts arising from some of the claims made
in the previous studies. For this purpose, I reexamine the proposals of Yatsushiro
(2003) and Matsuoka (2003) and show that their original claims cannot be upheld.
Let us consider Yatsushiro's (2003) proposal again. Recall that her proposal
rests on the claim that the reciprocal anaphor cannot be subject to the Chain
Condition. She bases this claim on the idea that the relation between the reciprocal
and its antecedent is strictly speaking not one of coreference, so that the Chain
Condition does not apply to the reciprocal if it is relevant only to coreferential
DITRANSITIVE CONSTRUCTIONS
441
phrases (see Yatsushiro 2003：sect. 3.2). She then argues that Japanese karezisin
'he.self', unlike otagai 'each.other', does obey the Chain Condition, as we have
reviewed. This part of her claim has been challenged by Miyagawa and Tsujioka
(2004), however. Miyagawa and Tsujioka (2004:24-27) point out that karezisin can
never function as a bound variable and hence cannot enter into binding.20 Given
that the Chain Condition is couched in terms of binding, they argue that karezisin
cannot be subject to the Chain Condition, contrary to Yatsushiro's proposal.
I add nothing to this debate here but instead focus on an empirical argument
Yatsushiro (2003) provides against treating the lack of deviance in (11b) by recourse
to base generation. Consider (44) (from Yatsushiro 2003:152).
(44)	?Uli-ga Jonathan-to Susi-o otagai-ni	hihans-ase-ta.
Uli-NOM Jonathan-and Susi-Acc each.other-DAT criticize-make-PAST
'Uli made each other criticize Jonathan and Susi.'
The example in (44) is a causative construction where otagai-ni 'each.other-DAT' is
a causee and Jonathan-to Susi-o 'Jonathan-and Susi-Acc' is an object of the em-
bedded verb hihans 'criticize.' Assuming that the dative causee is the subject of the
embedded clause and that the object cannot be base-generated higher than the
subject, Yatsushiro points out that (44) cannot be derived by base generation but
should involve scrambling of the embedded object over the embedded subject.
Yatsushiro judges (44) to be better than (8a) even though (44), like (8a), involves
movement of the kind prohibited by the Chain Condition. Yatsushiro argues that
this constitutes a problem for the analysis that attributes the grammaticality of
(11b) to base generation of the theme higher than the goal.
This argument based on (44) is not as convincing as it appears. First of all,I am
not sure how much better (44) is than (8a). In fact, examination of similar cases
involving a control complement clause seems to show that otagai does induce
Chain Condition effects:
(45)	Yumi-ga Masao-to Ken-o	otagai-no	tomodati-ni hihansuru
Yumi-NOM Masao-and Ken-Acc each.other-GEN friend-dat criticize
yooni meezita.
that ordered
'Yumi ordered each other's friends to criticize Masao and Ken.'
In (45) Masao-to Ken-o is an object of the embedded verb hihansuru 'criticize' and
otagai-no tomodati-ni 'each.other-GEN friend-dat' is an object of the matrix verb
meezita 'ordered.' Thus, the former has clearly been scrambled from within the
embedded control clause. In this context, the scrambled object can license otagai,
as evidenced by the grammaticality of (45) (see Nemoto 1993 for much relevant
discussion). If the matrix object is replaced by otagai-ni 'each.other-DAT', however,
the sentence becomes as deviant as (8a), in my judgment:
(46)	??Yumi-ga Masao-to Ken-o	otagai-ni	hihansuru yooni meezita.
Yumi-NOM Masao-and Ken-Acc each.other-DAT criticize that ordered
'Yumi ordered each other to criticize Masao and Ken.'
442 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
These observations strongly suggest that otagai is subject to the Chain Con-
dition, contrary to Yatsushiro's (2003) claim.21 If so, the acceptability of (11b),
which is unexpected under the scrambling approach, does seem to require an
analysis invoking base generation of the theme higher than the (low) goal,a con-
clusion backed up by the idiom facts discovered by Miyagawa and Tsujioka (2004).
Let us return next to Matsuoka's (2003) proposal that the theme is generated
higher than the goal. He presents (24) as evidence in favor of this proposal. This
argument, however, seems weak. First of all, it is not clear that (24) allows the
intended bound-variable interpretation. Matsuoka (2003:61.11)even notes that half
of the speakers he consulted rejected the bound-variable interpretation in (24). I
find (24) quite unacceptable on the bound-variable reading and see a clear contrast
between (24) and (47).
(47)	John-ga [[proi
John-NOM
[subete-no
all-GEN
rirekisyo-o okutta]
CV-acc sent
gakusei]i-ni iku
student-dat go
kaisyaj]-ni
company-dat
yooni	meezita.
that	ordered
"John ordered every student to go to the company to which he sent
his CV.'
In (47) the dative phrase that belongs to a control complement clause is placed in
front of the dative object of the matrix verb. Thus, the first dative phrase has clearly
been scrambled from within the embedded clause. The intended bound-variable
interpretation is much more readily available in (47) than in (24), in my judgment.
This suggests that (24) does not involve scrambling of the dative phrase over the
accusative phrase, contrary to Matsuoka's analysis.
One factor that makes judgment obscure in (24) is the use of pro as a bound
element. Hoji (2003) claims that examples containing pro cannot be reliable data
showing the presence of a bound-variable interpretation in Japanese because
Japanese pro can be plural-denoting. Another potential factor that may affect
judgment in (24) is the QP subete-no hon "all-GEN book'. Hoji (2003) points out,
citing Ueyama (1998), that QPs such as subete-no hon can be used to refer to a
specific group of entities and that this obscures judgment on the bound-variable
interpretation. Thus, in (24) pro can be understood to refer to the entire group of
books under discussion, in which case pro is not interpreted as a variable bound by
the QP (but instead as coreferential with the QP). To avoid these interfering
factors, we should use an overt element, in place of pro, and a QP that is not (easily)
interpretable as referring to a specific group of individuals. So let us change (24) to
(48a).
(48) a.リohn-ga [[^	sore『o	tyuumonsita]	seitOj]-ni
John-NOM	it-ACC	ordered	student-DAT
[sansatu-izyoo-no	hon]j-o	watasita.
three.CL-or.more-GEN	book-ACC	passed
"John passed three or more books to the students who ordered them.'
DITRANSITIVE CONSTRUCTIONS
443
b. John-ga [sansatu-izyoo-no hon]j-o
John-NOM three.CL-or.more-GEN book-Acc
[[ej sorej-o tyuumonsita] seitoj-ni watasita.
it-ACC ordered student-dat passed
I believe that (48a) does not have a reading on which sore 'it' is bound by the QP
sansatu-izyoo-no hon 'three.CL-or.more-GEN books', in contrast to its variant in
(48b), which does have this reading. I also believe that the judgment is clearer here
than in (24), consistent with Hoji's (2003) observations.
Incidentally, Hoji's (1985) contrast in (4) can be reproduced in the same way.
Thus, (49) contrasts with (48a).22
(49)	?John-ga [ [soitui-ga tyuumonsita] hon-o]
John-NOM that.person-NOM ordered book-Acc
[sannin-izyoo-no seito]i-ni watasita.
three.CL-or.more-GEN student-DAT passed
'John passed the books that they ordered to three or more students.'
These considerations undermine Matsuoka's (2003) argument based on
pronominal variable binding in favor of theme being higher than goal. What about
his other argument based on the behavior of the inchoative variants of pass-
type verbs? Recall that his argument is built on the facts in (25): only the
theme/accusative object of the ditransitive sentence becomes the nominative
subject of the inchoative sentence. From this fact, Matsuoka concludes that the
theme is necessarily higher (and hence closer to T) than the goal in the base
structure.
This argument is also not conclusive. On Matsuoka's (2003) analysis, the goal
phrase can never be higher than the theme phrase in the base structure of in-
choative sentences. However, evidence suggests the contrary. Consider (50).
(50)	Kenj-ga Yumij-ni zibun/j-no syasin-o	todoketa.
Ken-NOM Yumi-DAT self^GEN	picture-ACC delivered
'Ken delivered a picture of himself to Yumi.'
As is well known, Japanese zibun 'self' is subject-oriented. In (50) the agent argu-
ment is the subject, so only Ken can be the antecedent of zibun. Interestingly, in the
inchoative counterpart of (50), zibun can be bound by the goal phrase:
(51)	a.	Zibunj-no	syasin-ga	Yumi「ni	todoita.
self^GEN	picture-NOM Yumi-DAT	reached
'A picture of herself reached Yumi.'
b.	Yumij-ni	zibunj-no	syasin-ga	todoita.
Yumi-DAT	self-GEN	picture-NOM	reached
On the basis of this fact, one might claim that the dative phrase is the subject of
these sentences. But this does not seem correct, given that the dative phrase in this
construction does not license subject honorification:
444 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(52)	a. #Nimotu-ga Yamada-sensei-ni o-todoki-ninzatta.
package-NOM Yamada-teacher-DAT reach(honorific form)
'A package reached Prof. Yamada/
b. #Yamada-sensei-ni nimotu-ga o-todoki-ninatta.
Yamada-teacher-DAT package-NOM reach(honorific form)
We thus have apparently conflicting results: the facts in (51) and (52) show that
in the inchoative construction in question, the dative phrase can antecede zibun,
which is usually subject-oriented, but is not the subject of the sentence.23 We might
resolve this problem by interpreting subject-orientation in terms of thematic
prominence, along the lines of Giorgi (1983).24 On this view, the antecedent of zibun
is an element bearing the most prominent 0-role in the same sentence. Then (50)
shows that agent is more prominent than goal and theme, and (51) shows that goal
is more prominent than theme.25 If thematic prominence is reflected in structural
prominence, as is standardly assumed in current literature, then the base position of
the (high/low) goal argument can be higher than that of the theme argument. The
conclusion is consistent with Hoji's (1985) view but not with Matsuoka's (2003).
This view leaves open the question of why the theme, not the goal, becomes the
nominative phrase in the inchoative. Whatever the ultimate explanation, it is clear,
if the above argument is correct, that it cannot be due to the theme being higher
than the goal.
16.6.2	Toward a Unified Approach
Given these results, let us now explore a possible direction in which the discoveries
of the previous studies on Japanese DCs could be unified. We have seen that free
base generation of the theme and the low goal is necessary and that there is no
strong syntactic evidence that the theme must be higher than the goal. We can then
summarize the results obtained so far as follows:
(53)	a. The high goal is generated in the specifier of the applicative head,
whereas the low goal and the theme can be freely generated within VP.
b.	Scrambling cannot take place to the domain of the applicative head.
c.	The theme can scramble over the low goal.
d.	The low goal cannot scramble over the theme.
The proposals in (53a,b) are due to Miyagawa and Tsujioka (2004). The claim in
(53c) is necessary to explain the binding facts (in (4), (19)7(22), (48)7(49), and (i) of
note 1)and the quantifier floating facts (in (16)). Miyagawa and Tsujioka (2004:61.
28) are also aware of the necessity of movement of the theme over the low goal, citing
the following example, where the floating NQ is construed with the theme phrase:
(54)	Taroo-ga nimotu-o Hanako-ni futatu okutta.
Taro-NOM package-ACC Hanako-to two.cl sent
'Taro sent two packages to Hanako.'
DITRANSITIVE CONSTRUCTIONS
445
Recall that the theme cannot scramble over the high goal. Given this,(54)must
involve movement over the low goal. We can make the point even clearer by using
the two-goal sentence in (55).
(55)	Taroo-ga Hanako-ni nimotu-o	Tokyo-ni fiitatu okutta.
Taro-NOM Hanako-DAT package-ACC Tokyo-to two.CL sent
'Taro sent Hanako two packages to Tokyo?
In (55) the NQ is construed with the theme phrase that occurs between the high goal
and the low goal. This sentence seems to have the same grammatical status as its
variant without the NQ. The position of the theme phrase unambiguously indicates
that it can scramble over the low goal and land in a position below the high goal.
Note that although the theme can move over the low goal, the low goal cannot
move over the theme, given the contrasts between (4a) and (4b), between (19a) and
(19b), between (48a) and (49), and between (ia) and (ib) of note 1.Hence we need
to ensure (53d) as well.
A unified approach thus needs to derive the properties in (53c,d) while
maintaining (53a,b). To do this, I suggest the following:
(56)	a. There is a functional head F between V and the applicative head.
b.	There is no VP-internal scrambling; short scrambling is movement to
Spec,F.
c.	Although the theme is necessarily interpreted within VP, the low goal can
be interpreted either within VP or in Spec,F.
The claim in (56a) is not new. F may be Agro> as proposed by Koizumi (1995), or
Asp(ect), as proposed by Travis (1991).26 The proposal in (56b) follows straight-
forwardly if scrambling is feature-driven, as argued for by Miyagawa (1996,1997)
and Miyagawa and Tsujioka (2004), on the standard assumption that only func-
tional heads can bear formal features inducing movement. What is new is the
second half of (56c), which in effect states that the low goal is an argument that has
an adjunctlike property, in the sense that it can be interpreted in more than one
position. That this is not totally inconceivable is shown by the fact that the low goal
can sometimes be left out, whereas the theme can never be, as shown in (57) and
(58)	(cf. Kitagawa 1994).
(57)	a. John sent *(a letter) to Mary.
b. John bought *(a dress) for Mary.
(58)	a. John sent a letter (to Mary).
b. John bought a dress (for Mary).
On this view, scrambling of the theme over the low goal occurs as illustrated in
(59)	-27
(59)	[fp theme [vp low goal [「theme V]] F]
In contrast, scrambling of the low goal over the theme, as shown in (60), cannot
occur.
446 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(60)	*[fp low goal[vp theme [^ow goai V]] F]
This is because the low goal can be base-generated in Spec,F, so the move-
ment option in (60) is excluded. The absence of scrambling of this kind is
independently motivated by the following considerations. Consider first the ex-
ample in (61).
(61)	*Ken-ga sokoj-no syatyoo-o
Ken-NOM that.place-GEN president-ACC
[mittu-izyoo-no kaisya]「de hihansita.
three.CL-or.more-GEN company-at criticized
'Ken criticized their presidents at three or more companies?
cf. Ken-ga [mittu-izyoo-no kaisya]「de
Ken-NOM three.CL-or.more-GEN company-at
sokoj-no syatyoo-o hihansita.
that.place-GEN president-ACC criticized
Example (61) does not permit a bound-variable reading. This fact shows two
things: first, the locative adjunct mittu-izyoo-no kaisya-de 'at three or more com-
panies' can be base-generated lower than the theme, consistent with Larson's
(1988) proposal; and second, (61) cannot have a derivation in which the theme is
generated lower than the adjunct and moved past the adjunct to a higher position.
Consider now (62).
(62)	*John-ga sokoj-no syatyoo-no mae-de
John-NOM that.place-GEN president-GEN front-at
[mittu-izyoo-no kaisya]「。 hihansita.
three.CL-or.more-GEN company-ACC criticized
'John criticized three or more companies in front of their presidents.'
cf. John-ga [mittu-izyoo-no kaisya]「o
John-NOM three.CL-or.more-GEN company-ACC
sokoj-no syatyoo-no mae-de hihansita.
that.place-GEN president-GEN front-at criticized
The lack of the intended bound-variable reading in (62) shows that the locative
adjunct soko-no syatyoo-no mae-de 'it-GEN president-GEN front-at' is interpreted in
the position where it appears and cannot be interpreted as scrambled from a lower
position (see Takano 1998:833 for original discussion of this effect). Given that the
locative adjunct can be base-generated lower than the theme, as evidenced by (61),
the absence of scrambling of the low goal in (60) can be attributed to the same
property that prevents the adjunct from scrambling in (62).28
In this way, we might be able to achieve a unified theory of Japanese DCs,
incorporating the insights of the scrambling approach into the theory of Japanese
DCs proposed by Miyagawa and Tsujioka (2004).
DITRANSITIVE CONSTRUCTIONS
447
16.7	Implications for Linguistic
Theory
I began this chapter by questioning the possible structures and derivations of the
two variants in (1)and wondering how to account for the free order of the two
objects. I have investigated how these questions have been addressed and have just
suggested one possible way of unifying the results of the previous studies. Let me
address now the final, broader question: How does the study of Japanese DCs
contribute to the development of linguistic theory?
In fact, the results of the previous studies (including the suggestions made in
section 16.6) of Japanese DCs have many consequences and implications for lin-
guistic theory in general.I briefly discuss the following areas:
•	Scrambling
•	0-marking/argument licensing
•	The nature of reconstruction
•	Chain Condition
•	Case-licensing mechanisms
•	Psycholinguistic experimental research
First, an important implication follows regarding the nature of scrambling
from the work by Miyagawa and Tsujioka (2004), who have shown that neither the
low goal nor the theme can scramble over the high goal (recall (38) and (39)). This
implies that scrambling is not an optional operation, which has a great impact on
the general theory of movement. The same conclusion follows from the unified
approach suggested in section 16.6, according to which short scrambling is nec-
essarily movement to Spec,F rather than movement inside VP (see (56b)).
Another consequence derives from Takano's (1988) work on short scrambling
in Japanese and English DCs. The traditional view on scrambling in Japanese and
English一that Japanese has it but English lacks it一has been challenged by various
researchers. For instance, Fukui (1993) and Saito and Fukui (1998) argue that
English has scrambling though it is necessarily rightward (more specifically, they
identify English heavy NP shift, analyzed as rightward movement, with scram-
bling). However, Takano claims, on the basis of close examination of Japanese and
English DCs, that both Japanese and English have leftward short scrambling (recall
the discussion in section 16.4.2), though only Japanese has longer scrambling.
These results make clear the necessity of constructing a general theory of scram-
bling and parametric variation that accounts for the availability of scrambling both
in terms of languages and in terms of structural domains. This is an important
topic for future research.
Next, recall that the study of Japanese DCs has discovered that the theme can
scramble over the low goal, but not vice versa (see (53c,d)). This is a striking
property, given that the theme and the low goal can be base-generated in either
448 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
hierarchical order (see (53a)). It implies a fundamental asymmetry between the
theme and the low goal with respect to how they are 0-marked or licensed, thereby
calling for a principled explanation in terms of UG mechanisms. The traditional
intuition about this is Hojfs (1985) thematic hierarchy (goal higher than theme). A
new way of looking at the issue in the context of a unified theory of Japanese DCs is
suggested in section 16.6. However, there have also been proposals based on studies
on languages other than Japanese that argue for a different structural relationship
between the theme and the goal (see, e.g., Larson 1988 and Baker 1993 and refer-
ences cited there). Given this state of affairs, an important issue for linguistic
theory is whether there is parametric variation regarding this property, and if there
is, how such variation arises.
The investigation of Japanese DCs has also discovered an important property
of reconstruction. As is evident in Hoji's (1985) work, close examination of re-
construction effects plays an essential role in determining the structure and deri-
vation of Japanese DCs; the theme-goal order is derived by movement of the theme
because reconstruction effects are found with the theme in this order, but the goal-
theme order involves no movement because no reconstruction effects are found
with the goal in this order. In addition to this result, Hojfs work also reveals an
interesting property of reconstruction. As mentioned in notes 1 and 3, the effects of
reconstruction are weaker with short scrambling than with longer scrambling. The
examples in (63) show the relevant contrast.
(63)	a. Soko「no	syatyoo-no	syasin-o
that.place-GEN	president-GEN	picture-ACC
[mittu-izyoo-no	kaisya]「ga	Ken-ni	okutta.
three.CL-or.more-GEN company-NOM	Ken-DAT	sent
"Three or more companies sent pictures of their presidents to Ken.'
b. Ken-ga	soko.-no	syatyoo-no	syasin-o
Ken-NOM	that.place-GEN president-GEN picture-ACC
[mittu-izyoo-no kaisya]「ni okutta.
three.CL-or.more-GEN company-DAT sent
'Ken sent pictures of their presidents to three or more companies.'
Example (63a) involves scrambling of the theme/accusative phrase past the subject,
whereas (63b) involves short scrambling of the theme/accusative phrase. In both
cases the scrambled phrase contains soko 'that.place', which is to be bound by a QP
through reconstruction. Although both examples allow soko to be bound by the
QP, the intended bound-variable reading is less acceptable in (63b) than in (63a),
as originally pointed out by Hoji (1985) (recall (4b) of section 16.3). Whereas it is
significant both for Hoji and for the discussion of this chapter that cases such as
(63b) do allow a bound-variable reading, it is also an important question why they
allow that reading only weakly, as compared with cases such as (63a). This question
is left open in Hoji 1985 and is briefly discussed in Takano 1998, with some sug-
gestions about possible accounts. The issue is not settled, however. The situation
reminds us of another issue related to reconstruction effects一namely, whether
both A7- and A-movement induce reconstruction effects. Addressing these issues
DITRANSITIVE CONSTRUCTIONS
449
requires more careful and systematic investigation of the relationship between
movement and reconstruction effects, as well as of the exact mechanisms of re-
construction.
The study of Japanese DCs also sheds new light on the nature of the Chain
Condition. Recall that the Japanese data discussed by Miyagawa (1997) and in
section 16.6 strongly suggest that the Chain Condition effects arise with otagai "each
other\ This means that the Chain Condition applies not only to reflexives but also
to reciprocals, as Miyagawa and Tsujioka (2004) claim. The debate between Yat-
sushiro (2003) and Miyagawa and Tsujioka (briefly reviewed in section 16.6) also
raises the important question of whether the Chain Condition is a condition on
(variable) binding. These results thus have a direct bearing on the issue of exactly
how the Chain Condition is to be formulated.29
The properties of Japanese DCs revealed through the previous studies have an
implication for mechanisms of licensing Case as well. Recall from section 16.2 that
Japanese DCs contrast sharply with English DCs in that they allow word order
between the two objects to be free (see (1)-(3)). Given Miyagawa and Tsujioka's
(2004) proposal, we can be more specific about this: the order between the high goal
and the theme is fixed (high goal-theme, that is) in both English and Japanese;
however, the flexibility of the order between the low goal and the theme differs in the
two languages—fixed in English but free in Japanese. To account for this difference,
Miyagawa and Tsujioka adopt an idea put forth in Takano 1998一namely, that the
accusative DP is licensed in different ways in English and Japanese. More specifically,
Takano argues that the necessity of Case checking requires the accusative DP to
always be higher than the PP in English and that the lack of this effect is an indication
that Japanese employs a mechanism of licensing accusative DPs that does not appeal
to feature checking (see Kuroda 1978 for an earlier proposal of this nature).30 If
correct, this leads to the claim that UG has two mechanisms of licensing Case.
Finally, let us discuss the influence of the study of Japanese DCs on psycho-
linguistic research. The fact that competing hypotheses exist on the structure and
derivation of Japanese DCs has prompted researchers to conduct psycholinguistic
experiments to find new evidence in favor of one hypothesis over the others. As a
result, a number of experimental studies have been reported. Sugisaki and Isobe
(2001)report on language-acquisition experiments showing that children have
more difficulty comprehending sentences with theme-goal order than those with
goal-theme order. They interpret this result as indicating that the theme-goal order
involves short scrambling (more specifically, A-movement) of the theme, whereas
the other order results from base generation. Miyamoto and Takahashi (2002)
report on sentence-processing experiments showing sentences with theme-goal
order require longer reading time than those with goal-theme order. They propose
that the difficulty of processing with theme-goal sentences is due to the necessity of
associating a displaced element with its gap, thus supporting the hypothesis that
theme-goal order results from movement of the theme, whereas the other order
involves no movement. Koizumi (2005) also reports on experiments on sentence
processing and brain imaging where all the results point to the conclusion that
the goal-theme order is basic, with the theme-goal order derived by movement of
45〇 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
the theme. The authors of these experimental studies thus all support Hoji's (1985)
scrambling approach over the other alternatives proposed by Miyagawa (1996)
1997), Matsuoka (2003), and Miyagawa and Tsujioka (2004).31
Given that the unified approach suggested in section 16.6 adopts the idea of
free base generation of the theme and the low goal, it is necessary to consider how
the results of these experiments can be interpreted under this approach. Here I can
only speculate. Under the approach presented here, the crucial difference between
the goal-theme and theme-goal orders is that the former is associated only with
derivational possibilities involving base generation, whereas the latter is associated
with a derivation involving base generation and one involving short scrambling of
the theme over the low goal. Should the existence of the movement option among
derivational possibilities for sentences with the theme-goal order affect processing
and comprehension of those sentences, the results of the experiments will be seen
as compatible with the unified approach.
These comments are tentative and speculative. What is more important in this
connection is the clear influence that the study of Japanese DCs has had on psy-
cholinguistic research. The results of the study of Japanese DCs have driven in-
teresting experimental studies that produced new evidence bearing on the issues
in syntactic theory. These studies also show us how psycholinguistic evidence can
relate to syntactic theory, which shows another way in which the study of Japanese
DCs influences research in a broader context.
In this way, the study of Japanese DCs has contributed to revealing many
interesting, and sometimes surprising, properties that lead us to a better under-
standing of language and linguistic theory. Although many issues still remain to be
settled, it is hoped that future research will resolve the remaining questions and
further deepen our understanding of the nature of Japanese syntax and UG.
NOTES FOR CHAPTER 16
Parts of this chapter were presented at the Workshop on Linguistic Theory and the Jap-
anese Language, held at Harvard University on July 29-30, 2005. I am grateful to the
audience there for comments and questions. I am also grateful to an anonymous reviewer
for very helpful comments on a draft version of this chapter. Finally, I would like to thank
Shigeru Miyagawa and Mamoru Saito for valuable suggestions and discussion at various
stages of this work.
1.The same pattern as that shown in (4) can be reproduced by using a quantifier,
instead of a w/z-phrase, as a binder and an overt element, instead of pro, as a bindee:
(i)	a. *Ken-wa [NP [s e； sore「o okuttekita] hitoj-ni
Ken-TOP	it-ACC sent.over person-dat
sansatu-izyoo-no	honj-o	okurikaesita.
three.cL-or.more-GEN	book-ACC	sent.back
'Ken sent back three or more books to the persons that had sent them
to him?
DITRANSITIVE CONSTRUCTIONS
451
a'. Ken-wa sansatu-izyoo-no horij-o
Ken-TOP three.CL-or. more-GEN book-ACC
[np [s e\ sorej-o okuttekita] hitoj-ni okurikaesita.
it-ACC sent.over person-dat sent.back
b. Ken-wa [NP [s soko「ga q okuttekita] hon'-o
you-TOP that.place-NOM sent.over book-ACC
mittu-izyoo-no syuppansya.-ni okurikaesita.
three.CL-or.more-GEN publisher-DAT sent.back
'Ken sent back the books that they had sent to him to three or more
publishers/
bz Ken-wa mittu-izyoo-no syuppansyai-ni
you-TOP three.CL-or.more-GEN publisher-DAT
[NP [s sokoi-ga	okuttekita] hoiij]-o okurikaesita.
that.place-NOM sent.over book-ACC	sent.back
In my judgment, (Lb) is not fully acceptable but is much better than (ia). The contrast exists
and it is important. The same holds for Hoji's examples in (4a,b). See also note 3. Perhaps
the contrast between (ia) and (ib) is clearer than that between (4a) and (4b). See Hoji 2003
for an important discussion of factors that affect judgment on data involving variable
binding in Japanese. See also section 16.6 on this.
2.	Hoji (1985) assumes that the w/i-phrase in situ moves covertly to its scope position.
However, it is also assumed that covert movement does not affect possible binding relations.
3.	Hoji (1985:125) notes that the bound-variable reading in (4b) is not perfect but, im-
portantly, it is better than that in (4a). See Takano 1998 for a possible account of the slightly
degraded status of binding in cases such as (4b) that is compatible with Hoji's analysis.
4.	Miyagawa (1995) originally presented arguments for the base-generation approach.
5.	That Chain Condition effects can be found with Japanese otagai was originally
pointed out by Snyder (1992) and Koizumi (1995).
6.	Koizumi (1995) judges an example such as (11b) to be deviant. I find (na,b) to be
equally acceptable.
7.	Miyagawa (1997) puts "(?)" in front of the wide-scope reading of daremo in (13a) but
considers it to be basically acceptable. Contrary to Miyagawa (1997), Miyagawa and Tsujioka
(2004) report the same judgments as Hoji's (1985) but point out that animacy of the goal
phrase affects scope interpretation. See the discussion of the examples in (33) in section
16.5.2. See also Kitagawa 1994 for possible factors that affect judgment on scope interpre-
tation.
8.	Ishii (1998) also argues for an analysis of Japanese DCs in which both base-gener-
ation and scrambling are possible.
9.	It is important to note, however, that the base-generation analysis originally argued
for in Miyagawa 1995 (see note 4) and developed in Miyagawa 1996,1997 was proposed
independently of Kitagawa's (1994) work.
10.	It may be misleading, as a reviewer points out, to say that Hoji (1985) and Miyagawa
(1997) report different judgments here, given that the examples they consider (i.e., Hoji's (7)
and Miyagawa's (13)) contain different scope-taking elements. If the choice of scope-taking
elements affects judgment on scope interpretation, their observations simply mean that
different phenomena support different conclusions. See note 7 as well for a related issue.
11.On grounds independent of Takano's (1998) argument, several researchers have
suggested the opposite derivation for DCs from Larson (1988). See works cited in Larson
1988 (note 18) for such proposals. See also Aoun and Li 1989 for another proposal of the
same nature.

452 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
12.	See Takano 1998 for other approaches to cases such as (22).
13.	The examples in (23) are all fairly acceptable to me. The factor that affects judgment
here is that karezisin can be used as an emphatic variant of kare 'he' rather than as a reflexive.
Given that the emphatic reading of karezisin is always available, it is very hard (for me at
least) to exclude this reading when judging sentences containing karezisin. See also note 7 in
Yatsushiro 2003 for this and other possible factors that may affect judgment on (23).
14-	For show-type verbs, Matsuoka claims that the experiencer is higher than the theme.
15-	As mentioned in section 16.3.2, Kitagawa (1994) makes the same claim, though
his theoretical implementation is different from Miyagawa and Tsujioka's. Kishimoto
(2001)also argues for the existence of the two constructions in Japanese. However, he
proposes that in Japanese, the semantics of verbs determines whether they can take the
double-object construction or the dative construction, so that only verbs with certain
semantic properties license double objects.
16. See Harley 1995, 2002 and Pesetsky 1995 for other proposals that assign different
structures to the double-object and dative constructions.
17- Two remarks on the judgments reported here are in order. First, recall that Miyagawa
(1997)judges (13a) to be ambiguous, contrary to Hoji's (1985) observation, and attributes the
inverse scope reading to focus movement. However, Miyagawa and Tsujioka's (2004)
judgment on (33a) is identical to Hoji's. Second, the reported contrast in (33) does not seem
to exist for all speakers. Miyagawa and Tsujioka (2004:6) note that there are speakers who do
not get ambiguity in (33b). I find it hard to see a contrast between (33a) and (33b).
18. There is a problem with Miyagawa andrFsujioka's analysis of the contrast in (33). In
(33a) the goal is animate, so it can be a possessor in the double-object construction.
But nothing excludes the possibility that it is a location in the dative construction.
Then (33a) should be ambiguous, contrary to their judgment. Miyagawa and Tsujioka
(2004:12) are aware of this problem and suggest that there is a preference to interpret an
animate goal in the goal-theme order to be a possessor and not a location.
19- Miyagawa and Tsujioka (2004:61.8) observe that the two-goal sentences are ac-
ceptable only with verbs that are associated with some sort of a "path." They also re-
port (Miyagawa and Tsujioka 2004:61.9) that there are speakers who reject two-goal
sentences. I find them marginal at best.
2〇, The following example (from Miyagawa and Tsujioka 2004:26) shows that karezisin
cannot be a bound variable:
(ii)	Taroo「ga/*Darekai-ga kare,-no kodomo-o sikatta.
Taro-NOM/someone-NOM he-GEN child-ACC scolded
aro/Someone scolded his child.'
21.	Note also that otagai, unlike karezisin, can be used as a bound variable:
(iii)	Dono hitotati-ga otagai-o	hihansita no?
which people-NOM each.other-ACC criticized q
"Which people criticized each other?'
22.	The "?" in front of the sentence in (49) indicates that the bound-variable reading is
less than perfect. The status of (49) is the same as that of (4b). See notes 1 and 3.
23.	One might wonder if the theme argument in this construction can antecede zibun
and also if it can trigger subject honorification. Unfortunately, we cannot test for these
questions for an independent reason: although the antecedent of zibun and the target of
subject honorification must be an animate DP, verbs of this construction, including the
verbs in (51) and (52), cannot take an animate DP for the theme argument.

DITRANSITIVE CONSTRUCTIONS 4ZZ
24.	Thanks to Jun Abe for suggesting this possibility to me.
25.	A question arises for cases such as (iv).
(iv)	Yumij-ga Kenj-ni(yotte) zibun/j-no heya-de sikarareta.
Yumi-NOM Ken-by	self^GEN	room-in was.scolded
"Yumi was scolded by Ken in her room.'
In (iv) the antecedent of zibun is the theme argument of the passivized verb sikarareta
was scolded' despite the presence of the agent argument of the verb. So this is a coun-
terexample to the themetic prominence theory suggested in the text. There are at least two
fectors that may account for this case. For one thing, (iv) is a passive sentence and Japanese
passives may involve biclausal structures (see Kitagawa and Kuroda 1992 and Huang 1999
for different proposals that assign biclausal structures to Japanese passives). If so, Yumi and
Ken belong to different sentences (they are not arguments of the same verb). Another
factor that may be relevant here is the fact that Ken in (iv) can never c-command outside
the ni(yotte) phrase, as is evidenced by the quantifier floating fact in (v).
(v)	*Yumi-ga sensei-ni(yotte) hutari sikarareta.
Yumi-NOM teacher-by two.CL was.scolded
'Yumi was scolded by two teachers.'
c£ Yumi-ga hutari-no sensei-ni(yotte) sikarareta.
Yumi-NOM two-GEN teacher-by was.scolded
Given that Ken is not a possible binder of zibun in (iv), it may be disregarded for the
purpose of determining the antecedent of zibun in terms of thematic prominency. I thank
Mamoru Saito for bringing cases such as (iv) to my attention.
26.	In fact, Koizumi (1995) proposes that short scrambling is movement to Spec,Agro.
27.	Given (56c), the low goal can also be a lower Spec,F, with the scrambled theme
being a higher Spec,F.
28.	The effect has a flavor of economy (derivations with fewer operations are preferred)
and may be extended to the second conclusion drawn from (61) (that in (61) the theme
cannot be generated lower than the adjunct and moved past the adjunct). But the exact
nature of this property is left open here.
29.	See McGinnis 2004 for a new approach to Chain Condition effects.
3〇. Recall from section 16.4.2 that Takano proposes to analyze Japanese DCs and
English double PP constructions on a par.
31.One point worth mentioning here, brought to my attention by Shigeru Miyagawa,
is that these experimental studies do not control for animacy of a goal argument (their
examples involve animate goals). Given the results in Miyagawa and Tsujioka 2004, we might
want to know if there are any differences between cases involving animate versus inanimate
goals. This is yet another issue that needs to be addressed in future research.
REFERENCES
Aoun, Joseph, and Yen-hui Audrey Li.1989. Constituency and scope. Linguistic Inquiry
20:141-172.
Baker, Mark.1993. Why unaccusative verbs cannot dative-shift. In Proceedings of NELS 23,
ed. Amy J. Schafer, 33-47. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA Publications.
454 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Baker, Mark.1995. On the structural positions of themes and goals. In Phrase structure and
the lexicon, ed. Johan Rooryck and Laurie Zaring, 7-34. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Bresnan, Joan.1978. Computational psycholinguistics. Course taught at MIT, Fall semester.
[Lecture notes dated October 12,1978; initially cited in Gropen et al.1989.1
Bresnan, Joan.1982. The mental representation of grammatical relations. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Burzio, Luigi.1986. Italian syntax. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Chomsky, Noam. 200〇. Minimalist inquiries: The framework. In Step by step: Essays on
minimalist syntax in honor of Howard Lasnik, ed. Roger Martin, David Michaels, and
Juan Uriagereka, 89-155. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Fukui, Naoki.1993. Parameters and optionality. Linguistic Inquiry 24:399-42〇.
Giorgi, Alessandra.1983. Toward a theory of long distance anaphors: A GB approach. The
Linguistic Review 3:307-361.
Gropen, Jess, Steven Pinker, Michelle Hollander, Richard Goldberg, and Ronald Wilson.
1989. The learnability and acquisition of the dative alternation in English. Language
65:203-257.
Haig, John H.198〇• Some observations on quantifier floating in Japanese. Linguistics
18:1065-1083.
Harley, Heidi.1995. Subjects, events, and licensing. Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge,
Mass.
Harley, Heidi. 2002. Possession and the double-object construction. Linguistic Variation
Yearbook 2:31-7〇.
Heim, Irene, Howard Lasnik, and Robert May. 1991a. On ureciprocal scope." Linguistic
Inquiry 22:173-192.
Heim, Irene, Howard Lasnik, and Robert May. 1991b. Reciprocity and plurality. Linguistic
Inquiry 22:63-101.
Hoji, Hajime.1985. Logical Form constraints and configurational structures in Japanese.
Doctoral dissertation, University of Washington, Seattle.
Hoji, Hajime. 2003. Falsifiability and repeatability in generative grammar: A case study of
anaphora and scope dependency in Japanese. Lingua 113:377-446.
Huang, C.-T. James.1999. Chinese passives in comparative perspective. Tsing Hua Journal
of Chinese Studies 29:423-509.
Ishii, Yasuo.1998. Scrambling of weak NPs in Japanese. In Japanese/Korean linguistics 8,
431-444. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI Publications.
Kishimoto, Hideki. 2001.The role of lexical meanings in argument encoding: Double
object verbs in Japanese. Gengo Kenkyu 120:35-65.
Kitagawa, Yoshihisa.1994. Shells, Yolks, and scrambled e.g.s. In Proceedings of NELS 24, ed.
Merce Gonzalez, 221-239. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA Publications.
Kitagawa, Yoshihisa, and S.-Y. Kuroda.1992. Passive in Japanese. Ms., University of Ro-
chester and University of California, San Diego.
Koizumi, Masatoshi.1995. Phrase structure in minimalist syntax. Doctoral dissertation,
MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Koizumi, Masatoshi. 2005. Syntactic structure of ditransitive constructions in Japanese:
Behavioral and imaging studies. In The proceedings of the sixth Tokyo Conference on
Psycholinguistics, ed Yukio Otsu, 1-25. Tokyo: Hituzi Syobo.
Kuroda, S.-Y.197〇• Remarks on the notion of subject with reference to words like also,
even, and only: Part I. In Annual Bulletin 3,111-129. Tokyo: Research Institute of
Logopedics and Phoniatrics, University of Tokyo.
Kuroda, S.-Y.1978. Case-marking, canonical sentence patterns, and Counter Equi in
Japanese (a preliminary survey). In Problems in Japanese syntax and semantics, ed.
John Hinds and Irwin Howard, 30-51. Tokyo: Kaitakusha.
DITRANSITIVE CONSTRUCTIONS
455
Kuroda, S.-Y.198〇• Bunkoozoo-no hikaku [Comparison of sentence structures]. In Ni-
tieigo hikakukooza 2: Bunpoo, ed. Tetsuya Kunihiro, 23-61. Tokyo: Taishukan.
Kuroda, S.-Y.1983. What can Japanese say about government and binding? In Proceedings
of the WCCFL 2, ed. Michael Barlow, Daniel P. Flickinger, and Michael T. Wescoat,
153-164. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Linguistics Association.
Larson, Richard.1988. On the double object construction. Linguistic Inquiry 19:335—391.
Marantz, Alec.1993. Implications of asymmetries in double object constructions. In
Theoretical aspects of Bantu grammar, ed. Sam A. Mchombo, 113-15 〇. Stanford, Calif:
CSLI Publications.
Matsuoka, Mikinari. 2003. Two types of ditransitive constructions in Japanese. Journal of
East Asian Linguistics 12:171-203.
McGinnis, Martha. 2004. Lethal ambiguity. Linguistic Inquiry 35:47-95.
Miyagawa, Shigeru.1995. Scrambling as an obligatory movement. In Proceedings of the
Nanzan University International Symposium on Japanese Language Education and
Japanese Language Studies, 81-92. Nagoya, Japan: Nanzan University.
Miyagawa, Shigeru.1996. Word order restrictions and nonconfigurationality. In MITWPL
29: Proceedings of FAJL 2,117-141. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working Papers in Lin-
guistics.
Miyagawa, Shigeru.1997. Against optional scrambling. Linguistic Inquiry 28:1-26.
Miyagawa, Shigeru, and Takae Tsujioka. 2004. Argument structure and ditransitive verbs
in Japanese. Journal of East Asian Linguistics 13:1-38.
Miyamoto, Edson T., and Shoichi Takahashi. 2002. Sources of difficulty in processing
scrambling in Japanese. In Sentence processing in East Asian languages, ed. Mineharu
Nakayama, 167-188. Stanford, Calif: CSLI Publications.
Nemoto, Naoko.1993. Chains and Case positions: A study from scrambling in Japanese.
Doctoral dissertation, University of Connecticut, Storrs.
Oerhle, Richard.1976. The grammatical status of the English dative alternation. Doctoral
dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Pesetsky, David.1995. Zero syntax. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Rizzi, Luigi.1986. On chain formation. In Syntax and semantics 19: The syntax of pro-
nominal clitics, ed. Hagit Borer, 65-95. New York: Academic Press.
Saito, Mamoru, and Naoki Fukui.1998. Order in phrase structure and movement. Lin-
guistic Inquiry 29:439-474.
Shibatani, Masayoshi.1978. Mikami Akira and the notion of "subject' in Japanese
grammar. In Problems in Japanese syntax and semantics, ed. John Hinds and Irwin
Howard, 52-67. Tokyo: Kaitakusha.
Snyder, William.1992. Chain-formation and crossover. Ms., MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Sugisaki, Koji, and Miwa Isobe. 2001.What can child Japanese tell us about the syntax of
scrambling? In Proceedings of the West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics 20, 538-
551.Somerville, Mass.: Cascadilla Press.
Takano, Yuji.1998. Object shift and scrambling. Natural Language & Linguistic Theory
16:817-889.
Travis, Lisa deMena.1991.Derived objects, inner aspect, and the structure of VP. Ms.,
McGill University, Montreal.
Ueyama, Ayumi.1998. Two types of dependency. Doctoral dissertation, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles.
Yatsushiro, Kazuko. 2003. VP internal scrambling. Journal of East Asian Linguistics 12:141-
17〇.
CHAPTER 1 7
PROMINENCE MARKING
IN THE JAPANESE
INTONATION SYSTEM
JENNIFER J. VENDITTI, KIKUO
MAEKAWA, AND MARY E. BECKMAN
17.1	Introduction
Beginning at least as early as Trubetskoi 1939, Arisaka 1941,and Hattori 1961,Jap-
anese has played an important role in developing our understanding of prosodic
structure and its function in the grammar of all human languages. In much of this
literature, the primary consideration has been to account for apparent similarities
between the culminative distribution of lexical stress in the lexicon of languages
such as English and the distribution of pitch accents in simple and derived words of
Japanese. For example, McCawley (1970) and Hyman (2001)both cite Japanese in
rejecting an older typology of word-level prosodic systems in which languages are
categorized by a simple dichotomy between stress languages (such as English or
Catalan) and tone languages (such as Yoruba or Cantonese). More recently, the
analysis of Japanese has played a critical role in the development of computationally
explicit compositional theories of the elements of intonation contours and their
relationship to the prosodic organization of utterances. For example, Fujisaki and
Sudo (1971)and Pierrehumbert and Beckman (1988) provide two different accounts
of Japanese intonation patterns in which phrase-level pitch range is specified by
continuous phonological control parameters that are independent of the categor-
ical specification of more local tone shapes in the lexicon. This incorporation of
continuous (or "paralinguistic”)specifications of phrasal pitch range directly into
the phonological description was a critical element in the development of what
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 457
Ladd (1996) named the Autosegmental-Metrical (AM) framework. Beginning with
Pierrehumbert's (1980) model of the grammar of English intonation contours, the
AM framework has been widely adopted in descriptions of intonation systems and
in comparisons of prosodic organization across languages. (See Jun 2005 for a
recent collection of such descriptions and Gussenhoven 2004 for a review of work in
this framework since Ladd 1996.)
Such cross-language comparisons, in turn, are critical for our understanding
of prominence marking and of the ways in which prosody is used in the articulation
of discourse-level categories such as topic and focus. Japanese is widely cited as a
language that has a morphological marker for topic. Work on other languages,
including English, Catalan, and Hungarian (e.g., Vallduvi 1992, Roberts 1996),
strongly suggests that the morphosyntactic articulation of topic and focus is re-
lated, at least in part, to phonological constraints on the prosodic marking of
prominence contrasts. For Japanese, too, we see reference to contrasting degrees of
prosodic prominence as a necessary condition on some interpretations of phrases
marked for topic (see, e.g., Kuno 1973; Nakanishi 2007; Heycock, this volume). To
fully understand how such categories as topic and focus are realized in Japanese,
therefore, it is critical to understand how the prosodic marking of contrasts be-
tween prominent versus nonprominent elements works in the language.
In this chapter, we review the currently standard AM framework account of
how the prosodic marking of prominence works in the Japanese system (section
17.3). We show that, just as in the English prosodic system, there are several
different prosodic mechanisms in Japanese for marking some constituents as
having focal prominence and others as being relatively reduced and out of focus. In
section 17.4, we then describe four phenomena that are the locus of lively dis-
cussion and controversy in the further development of this AM framework ac-
count, before discussing the larger implications that these phenomena have for the
development of a tenable general theory of the role of prosody in the marking of
discourse prominence (section 17.5). Before we begin this description, however, we
need to make explicit some assumptions about what prosody is and about the
nature of phonetic representations that we use to study it. An understanding of
these assumptions is essential background for understanding the AM framework
description of Japanese. Section 17.2 lays out this background.
17.2 Elements of an AM
Description of Japanese
Intonation
In describing the prominence-marking mechanisms of Japanese, we use the ac-
count of the Japanese intonation system that is encoded in the X-JToBI labeling
conventions (Maekawa et al.2002). These conventions build on the earlier J_ToBI
458 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
conventions described by Venditti (1997, 2005), adding tags for elements of into-
nation contours that have not been noted in the previous literature in English,
although they are observed even in relatively formal spontaneous speech such as the
conference presentations in the Corpus of Spontaneous Japanese (henceforth CSJ;
Maekawa 2003, Kokuritsu Kokugo Kenkyuujo [National Institute for Japanese
Language] 2006). Both the original and expanded tag sets are intended to describe
intonation contours for standard (Tokyo) Japanese. The intonation systems of
other dialects are known to differ, some rather dramatically. However, they either
have not been studied at all (most regional dialects) or have been studied less
extensively (e.g., the Osaka system, as described by Kori [1987] and others). Both tag
sets also assume a description couched in the AM framework.
17.2.1	The AM framework
As already noted, the term Autosegmental-Metrical was coined by Ladd (1996) to
refer to a class of models of phonological structure that emerged in work on
intonation in the 1980s, beginning with Pierrehumbert's (1980) incorporation of
Bruce's (1977) seminal insights about the composition of Swedish tone patterns
into a grammar for English intonation contours. All AM models are deeply
compositional, analyzing sound patterns into different types of elements at several
different levels. The most fundamental level is the separation of autosegmental
content features from the metrical positions that license them. This is roughly
comparable to the separation of lexis from phrase structure in a description of the
rest of the language's grammar.
More specifically, the "A" (Autosegmental) part of an AM description refers
to the specification of content features that are autonomously segmented一that is,
that project as strings of discrete categories specified on independent tiers
rather than being bundled together at different positions in the word-forms that
they contrast. For example, in Japanese, changing specifications of stricture degree
for different articulators can define as many as six different manner autosegments
within a disyllabic word-form, as in the word sanpun [sampuN] '3 minutes', where
there is a sequence of stricture gestures for sibilant airflow, for vowel resonances, for
nasal airflow, for a complete stopping of air, and then a vowel and a nasal again.
However, there are constraints on which oral articulators can be involved in making
these different airflow conditions, so that only one place feature can be specified for
the middle two stricture specifications in a word of this shape. Therefore, in the
grammar of Japanese (as in many other languages), place features should be pro-
jected onto a different autosegmental tier from the manner features. This projection
allows for a maximally general description of the alternation among labial nasal[m]
in sanpun, dental nasal[n] in sandan '3 steps', velar nasal[g] in sangai'3rd floor',
and uvular nasal[n] in the citation form san '3'. That is, the projection of consonant
place features onto a separate autosegmental tier from the manner features ac-
counts for the derivational alternation in these Sino-Japanese forms in terms of the
same general phonological constraints that govern how postvocalic nasals are
adapted into the language in monomorphemic loanwords such as konpyuuta
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 459
'computer' or hamu 'ham' (where the [m] corresponds to a postvocalic [m] in the
English source word), handoru "steering wheel' (where the [n] corresponds to a
postvocalic [n]), hankachi 'handkerchief' (where [rj] < [n]), and koon 'corn'
(where [n] V [n]). A key insight of Firth (1957), which has been translated into
Autosegmental Phonology by North American interpreters such as Langendoen
(1968), Haraguchi (1977), and Goldsmith (1979), is that the traditional consonant
and vowel "segments" that are named by symbols such the [s], [a], [m], [p], [u],
and [n] in sanpun are not primitive elements in the phonological grammar. Rather,
they are complex categories defined by the intersection of place and manner
specifications for the word-form when the array of parallel streams of autosegments
on different tiers is collapsed into a one-dimensional string.
These traditional "segments" are also the names for the C or V leaf nodes in
the other part of an AM description of a spoken utterance. More generally, the
UM" (Metrical) part specifies the hierarchy of prosodic constituents that defines
the meter or rhythm of an utterance containing the word-form. For example,
in Japanese, there is a low-level prosodic constituent syllable (typically abbreviated
a) that coordinates the place and manner features of words to alternate between
more sonorant manners licensed to occur at the head and less sonorant manners
licensed to occur only at the edges. In an utterance of sanpun, this syllable-
level meter is CVC.CVC. In many other words, there is a more regular rhythmic
alternation between C and V leaf-node types, as illustrated by the utterances in
figure 17.1.
All but five of the thirty-three syllables in these utterances have a perfectly
alternating CV structure. The exceptional cases are of two types. The first is the bare
V at the beginning of the verbs oyoideru and utatteru in figures 17.1a and 17.1c. These
two V-shape syllables, like the twenty-eight CV-shape syllables, are short. That is,
each contains just one mora (abbreviated 卩),a constituent between the syllable and
the CV leaf nodes that licenses the specification of vowel place and height features as
the head of the syllable.
The other three exceptional syllables are long. A long syllable contains at least
one extra mora after the head V that is the sole obligatory leaf constituent. This
following mora can be either a V or a C. If it is a V, it can be the second part of a
geminate vowel or it can be a less sonorous vowel than the head vowel, as in figure
17.1a, where the [i] in the second syllable of oyoideru has lesser sonority than the
preceding head vowel[〇]. If the following mora is a C, it can be a moraic nasal, as
in each of the two syllables of sanpun, or it can be the first part of a geminate
obstruent, as in the second syllables of the verbs hasitteru and utatteru in figures
17.1b and 17.1c.
As sanpun shows, a long syllable that is closed by the moraic nasal can be word
final. By contrast, a long syllable that is closed by an obstruent must have a
following syllable to provide the second C position for the necessarily gemi-
nate consonant. This constraint is one of the motivations for positing prosodic
constituents above the syllable as well as below. That is, the place and manner
autosegments for a geminate consonant necessarily associate to a sequence of C
nodes that is medial to a prosodic word (abbreviated 〇)).
460 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Figure 17.1 Spectrograms and fundamental frequency (FO) contours for utterances of four
sentences with the structure [proper noun-NOM]NP [V (cont.)]Vp： (a) and (b) contain two
accented words, and (c) and (d) contain two unaccented words.
To recap, then, the hierarchy of prosodic constituents in the phonological de-
scription of an utterance is analogous to the hierarchy of syntactic constituents in its
syntactic description. By this analogy, the prosodic constraint that each syllable must
have a V (vowel) category autosegment positioned to be its head is comparable to the
syntactic constraint that a verb phrase must have a V (verb) category word positioned
to be its head. It is in this sense that we say that the inventory of segments for a
language is analogous to the lexis of the language. One argument in fovor of this
analogy is that the prosodic category of a segment such as [i] is inherently ambiguous
in the same way that the syntactic category of a word such as happyoo is inherently
ambiguous. That is, happyoo can be parsed either as the verb 'to announce, present' or
as the noun 'announcement, presentation' in different morphosyntactic contexts.
Similarly, the palatal constriction that gives rise to the low first formant and high
second formant on either side of the medial[〇] in the word oyoideru in figure 17.1 can
be parsed either as a C (written *y') in the syllable onset or as a V (written 'i') in the
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 461
Figure 17.2 Annotated fundamental frequency contours for utterances of three sentences
with the structure [[ ]NP [[Noud-gen Noun-ACc]NP Verb-PAST]Vp] containing (a) two
accented words, (b) one accented word, and (c) no accented words.
second mora of the syllable. A second argument in favor of this analogy is the way that
empty structural positions are interpreted. That is, the implicit but unrealized subject
noun phrase in sentences shown in figure 17.2 can be recovered from the syntactic
parse of the rest of the sentence.
Similarly, the implicit head vowel in the second syllable of hashitteru in figure
17.1b and third syllable of kurashiteru in figure 17.id can be recovered from the
prosodic parse of the syllable structure even though there is no interval containing
the usual acoustic traces of the vowel manner specification in the signal. These two
462 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
tokens of the segment are "devoiced" and so cannot show the vowel formant values
that cue the explicit [i] in oyoideru. Nonetheless, the listener parses the presence
of some implicit head V for the second syllable of hashitteru and third syllable
of kurashiteru from the fact that [ft:] and [Jt] are not grammatical sequences of
segments for any position in a prosodic word of the language. A good grasp ofhow
listeners resolve prosodic ambiguities and of how they recover the intended au-
tosegmental features of an implicit prosodic node in phonological ellipsis is critical
for understanding the ways in which phonological structures above the word are
manipulated to mark discourse prominence.
In introducing the prosodic constituents mora, syllable, and prosodic word in
this section, we have defined them primarily in terms of the distribution of place
and manner autosegments for consonants and vowels. In describing what listeners
do to parse the prosodic categories of ambiguous segments or to recover elided
segments, we have made passing reference to their phonetic interpretation, using
the spectrograms in figure 17.1 as a convenient representation of the place and
manner autosegments. We use the fundamental frequency (Fo) contours that are
displayed below the spectrograms as a convenient phonetic representation of an-
other type of autosegment that is critical for understanding prosodic structures
above the word.
17.2.2	Tone Features and Prosodic Constituents
above the Word
In addition to word-internal constituents such as the syllable, Japanese also has
larger constituents above the word: various types of prosodic phrases. The X-JToBI
model describes two levels of prosodic phrasing: the accentual phrase (AP) and the
intonation phrase (IP). When our speaker produced the fluent utterances of the
sentences in figures 17.1a and 17.1b, he grouped the prosodic words in each ut-
terance into two APs, which in turn were grouped together to form a single IP
for the utterance as a whole. To define these two larger groupings, we must refer to
the distribution of another type of autosegment besides the place and manner
autosegments that defined the C and V nodes of the prosodic tree. This third
autosegmental tier is the string of low (L) and high (H) tones that correspond to
the target pitch values that the speaker produces at different prosodic positions in
the utterance.
The Fo contours below the spectrograms in figure 17.1 are a convenient
phonetic representation of these target pitch values, and we have annotated each
of them for some of the C and V autosegmental targets that also affect the pitch
pattern in ways that can make Fo contours difficult for the uninitiated to read.
In particular, there is a discontinuity in the Fo representation at each interval
where the [-voice] autosegment is in effect. For example, there is a break in
the Fo contour during the [J] of Kashino and during the [h] and the [Jt:] sequence
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 463
in the first three syllables of hashitteru in figure 17.1b. Also, [+voice] consonants,
such as the [d] and [r] in oyoideiru in figure 17.1a, can cause sharp dips in the pitch,
because the speed of opening and closing of the glottis depends in part on the
difference in air pressure below and above the glottis, which in turn depends on a
steady venting of air through the mouth. Experienced readers of Fo contours
automatically parse these effects as cues to the consonant or vowel segments rather
than cues to the tones and see that the tone sequences in utterances figures 17.1a
and 17.1b are essentially identical. There is a high tone target near the beginning of
the subject NP, then a sudden fall to a low tone target, then a rise to a second high
target on the second syllable of the VP, followed by another fall to a low target. The
pitch rise at the beginning of the VP, which is especially apparent in figure 17.1a,
marks the boundary between the first and the second AP.
In the previous section, we described how constriction targets can be called by
their metrical functions as well as by their actual content, so that a close palatal
constriction is symbolized differently depending on whether it marks a syllable
boundary (C — [y]) or a syllable head (V — [i]). All tone targets, too, can be called by
their metrical functions as well as by their pitch levels. For example, in the X-JToBI
model, the low target at the AP boundary between the NP and the VP in figures 17.1a
and 17.1b is analyzed as a boundary tone, which is aligned to the phrase edge.
Following the usual AM conventions for indicating the demarcative prosodic
function directly in the symbol for the category, this boundary tone is symbolized as
[L%] in an X-JToBI tagging of the utterance. Given that the start of the utterance as a
whole is also necessarily the start of a new AP, there is another instance of this low
boundary tone marking the beginning of these two utterances as well as the be-
ginning of the utterances in figures 17.1c and v.id. Following common practice in
the AM literature, the X-JToBI conventions tag this boundary tone as [%L], using
the function marker as a prefix to indicate that this boundary tone marks an initial
boundary after a silent pause. Of course, this utterance-initial [%L] target is ex-
plicitly realized only when the text of the phrase begins with a sequence of [+voice]
consonant and vowel autosegments on which the Fo can be realized, as in figures
17.1a and 17.1c. However, even when the phrase begins with a [-voice] segment, as in
figures 17.1b and i7,id, the [%L] can be recovered from the prosodic parse in the
same way that the implicit [i] in the second syllable of hashitteru is recovered in
figure 17.1b. In both figures 17.1a and 17.1c, the explicit low tone defines the start of a
rise in Fo. The high tone target that defines the end of this rise is also explicitly
realized in figures 17.1b and i7,id, providing part of the context for positing an elided
[%L]. In figures 17.1a and 17.1b, this high tone is the first tone target in a [H*+L]
falling sequence that is specified in the lexicon, whereas in figures 17.1c and i7,id it is
an AP-level phrasal tone, symbolized with [H-]. These tone sequences and their
metrical affiliations are shown in (ia,b) for the utterances in figures 17.1a and 17.1c.1
(1) Metrical structure and associated tone targets for (a) Ya'mano-ga \ oyo'ideru
(see figure 17.1a), (b) Yamada-ga uttateru (see figure 17.1c), and (c) Yamano-
wa || oyo'ideru (see figure 17.3a, black line).
464 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
AP AP
co
~ ~ g a
Ya ma no ga
%L H*+L L%
〇 a
co
a ■:
〇 yo i de ru
H*+L L%
r.'
Ya ma no wa
c- L
IP
I
AP
%L H*+L L%
co
a 〇 〇 a
Iへり
〇 yo i de ru
H*+L L%
Each of the utterances in figure 17.1 constitutes a single IP, and the second [L%]
boundary tone at the end of the utterance marks the final boundary of this IP as well
as the final boundary of the second AP. By contrast, the utterance of Ya'mano-wa
oyo'ideru in figure 17.3a (black line) is two IPs, so that the medial [L%] boundary
tone here marks an IP boundary as well as an AP boundary. (The phonetic markers
to the strength of this medial disjuncture include the noticeable phrase-final
lengthening on the -wa as well as other less well-documented hiatus markers, such
as a possible change in voice quality or glottal stop. However, they do not include
a silent pause, so there is no separate initial [%L] boundary tone marking the be-
ginning of the second IP.) There are many other tone sequences besides simple [L%]
that can mark the end of a prosodic phrase, giving rise to a variety of boundary
pitch movements (BPMs) with contrasting pragmatic functions.
We discuss the inventory of BPMs that can mark the end of a phrase in the next
section, but first we must describe one more element that can occur in the tone
sequence for some APs. This other AP-level element is the akusento-kaku, a sequence
of tones that is tagged in Japanese ToBI as [H*+L]. This tone sequence is what
results in the steep fall in each AP in figure 17.1a and the first AP in figure 17.1b.'The
APs Ya'mano-ga and Ka'shino-ga contrast with Yamada-ga and Kushida-ga in that
each of the former has an akusento-kaku on its first syllable. The APs oyo ideru and
hashitteru similarly contrast with utatteru and kurashiteru in that each of the former
has an akusento-kaku on its second syllable, and there would be a steep fall after the
second syllable in hashitteru in figure 17.1b if the vowel in this syllable were not
effectively deleted. That is, the listener parses the implicit high target for a [H*+L]
from the surrounding pitch dynamics and from the relationship between the low-
tone pitch targets on the first and the third syllables, even though the syllable bearing
the high tone of the akusento-kaku is completely voiceless.
This term akusento-kaku is usually rendered in English as 'pitch accent' or
'accent', but we introduce it first by the Japanese term to try to decouple this use in
translation from the way these two English terms are used in AM models of several
other well-studied languages. In descriptions ofEnglish, for example, accent refers to
any of a number of prominence-lending pragmatic morphemes that can be asso-
ciated with the metrically strongest syllables in the most prominent content words of
an utterance. In English, the location of these prominence-lending morphemes is
determined by prosodic constraints such as ObligatoryHead (the principle that
the intonation contour for each intonational phrase must contain at least one pitch
accent associated to the metrically strongest prosodic position; see Hyman 2005) in

PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 465
Figure 17.3 FO contours for utterances of four sentences illustrating different pitch range
relationships between Ya'mano-wa... (or Ya'mano-ga...) and the following verb
phrase. The gray dashed line in (a) is a copy of the FO contour of the utterance Ya'mano-
ga oyo^ideru in figure 17.1a.
interaction with the information structure of the utterance in its discourse context.
For example, a native speaker of English may choose to place a particular rising-
falling configuration of accents on each of the nouns and verbs in the sentences in (2)
to invoke the relevant contrast sets for each person and each activity.
466 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(2) [context: Who's doing what?]
YaMAno is swiMming. KasHima is RUNning. YaMAda's just standing there
siNGing to 'em.
When speakers of English begin to learn Japanese, they may interpret the rises
and falls in figure 17.1a and 17.1b in terms of such head-marking tonal morphemes
in their native language. But this is a misparsing of the prosodic function of the
tone shapes in these two Japanese utterances. Although the steep fall in Yamano in
figure 17.1a is because this noun has a pitch accent on the first syllable, that fact is a
property of the word itself regardless of the context in which it is uttered. The
specification of a [H*+L] fall at this point is part of the phonological contrast
between accented Yamano and unaccented Yamada.
Japanese is like conservative varieties of Basque in having a lexical contrast
between words specified for an accentual fall and words without this specification.
(See Hualde 1991 and Hualde et al.2002 for descriptions of the conservative Basque
system and of the influence of contact with Spanish in other varieties.) Tokyo
Japanese is crucially different from Basque, however, in that this lexical specifi-
cation completely constrains the distribution of [H*+L] sequences in the surface
intonation pattern. That is, in Basque, an unaccented word must be grouped
together with a following accented word, and if a sentence contains only lexically
unaccented words, an accent is inserted somewhere一either in the last argument
before the sentence-final verb or earlier if there is narrow focus on an earlier
constituent (see Ito 2002a). By contrast, there is no postlexical insertion of accent
in Japanese. When a Japanese sentence contains no lexically accented words, the
intonation contour of an utterance of that sentence does not contain any accents,
whatever the focus pattern. Instead, it is composed only of the same tones as the
contour in figure 17.1c (see also (3b)); there are the rises for the [%L H-] or [L%
H-] sequences that mark the beginning of every AP, and there may be additional
boundary tones marking the end of some phrases, but there are no other tones.
Any fall in pitch within an AP is not the sharp localized fall of the accent [H*+L]
but some more or less gradual interpolation between the high pitch target for the
phrasal high and some following low tone. When these words are all grouped
together into one long AP, as in figure 17.2c, this gradually falling Fo can describe a
fairly long stretch of the contour from the high target at the end of the rise for the
initial[%L H-] to the IP-level boundary [L%] at the end.
Note that this account of the long gradual fall in figure 17.2c assumes under-
specification of tones relative to potential tone-bearing units. That is, none of the
morae between the demarcative rise in omiage and the boundary tone at the end of
the utterance is described as having an associated tone target of any kind. This
differs from older accounts within the Autosegmental Phonology framework, such
as Haraguchi (1977), who specifies a [H] tone target for each of the ten sonorant
morae after the demarcative rise from the first to the second V in omiage. In such
older accounts, the description of the fall that is actually observed over this pur-
ported sequence of ten [H] tone targets is relegated to declination一an extra-
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 467
grammatical" or £<paralinguistic" manipulation of global pitch trends. Pierre-
humbert and Beckman (1988) argue for their underspecified AM account (which
X-JToBI follows in this regard) on the basis of slope measurements for unaccented
APs containing varying numbers of syllables. In their data, the slope of the fall is
inversely correlated with its length, just as predicted in an account that models the
fall as an interpolation from the [H-] phrase tone to some later low target. In this
AM account, then, the fall in figure 17.2c is attributed to the transition between
different target values assigned to the [H-] and the [L%], just as the slightly rising
plateau-like interval in the first AP in figure 17.2a is attributed to a transition
between only slightly different target values for the phrasal [H-] at the beginning
and the higher tone target of the [H*+L] accentual fall at the syllable that is
lexically associated to the akusento-kaku.
The Fo contour for figure 17.2a also illustrates another phenomenon that has
been treated differently in at least one older account in the Autosegmental Pho-
nology framework. The [H*] target at the accent in tabeta is considerably lower
than that in chtizu. The same relationship holds between the accent on the VP and
the accent on the preceding NP in figures 17.1a and 17.1b. McCawley (1968) ac-
counts for this relationship by positing a mid (M) tone for Japanese一that is, a tone
target intermediate between [H] and [L] such as the [M] tone necessary to de-
scribe the lexical tone contrasts on monosyllabic words in Yoruba and Cantonese.
In the AM account, by contrast, the lowering of the tone target on the verbs
in figures 17.1a, 17.1b, and 17.2a is attributed instead to the component of the
grammar that specifies parameters of the backdrop pitch range for each AP and for
each IP.
Pierrehumbert and Beckman (1988) argue for the AM treatment on the
grounds that there are many more intermediate levels than just one. For example,
the medial AP-level [L%] boundary tone in figure 17.1a (see also example (ia)) is
certainly lower than either the preceding or the following accent peak. Yet it is
higher than an IP-level [L%] boundary tone at the end of the utterance. This can be
seen by contrasting the AP-level [L%] to the utterance-final [L%] in that example
or by contrasting the lower IP-level [L%] after oyoge'ru-ga in utterance figure 17.3b
to the merely AP-level [L%] after the following KaJshino-wa. This difference be-
tween the truly low target for the [L] at an IP boundary versus the intermediate [L]
at a mere AP boundary is a fairly reliable cue to the level of the disjuncture. It seems
to be the same kind of boundary strengthening effect noted for consonant features
in many languages by researchers such Pierrehumbert and Talkin (1992), Fougeron
and Keating (1997), and Jun (1998). Other types of systematic difference among
tones are illustrated in the Fo contours of the two example sentences that are
overlaid in figure 17.4.
One difference in figure 17.4 is contained just within the Akai ya'ne-no phrase
(gray line). Here the high target for the phrasal [H-] is lower than the high for the
following accent peak, and this is true for all three speakers. The same relationship
also accounts for the rise in pitch over the plateau-like interval in the Omiyage-no
chi'izu-o phrase in figure 17.2a. We have also seen flat or slightly falling shapes for
468 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Figure 17.4 Overlaid FO contours for utterances of two sentences produced (a) by the
same male speaker who produced all of the utterances shown in earlier examples, (b) by a
female speaker, and (c) by a different male speaker. In all three panels, the black line is for
the Ao'i... sentence and the grey line is for the Akai... sentence.
longer accented phrases, such as the one in figure 17.2b. In read speech, however, a
small rise seems typical for short phrases such as the Akai yane-no phrase. That is,
if [H-] is typically lower than the high target of [H*+L], then we can explain the
difference in peak heights between unaccented Yamada-ga in figure 17.1c and
accented Ya'mano-ga in figure 17.1a and between comparable minimal pairs in
prior experiments by many researchers, including Pierrehumbert and Beckman
(1988). This difference may be related to the same dissimilative pre-L raising seen in
many other languages, including Yoruba (Laniran and Clements 2003), Thai
(Gandour, Potisuk, and Dechongkit 1994), and Taiwanese (Peng 1997).
Another systematic difference seen in figure 17.4 is between the ya'ne-no phrase
in the two overlaid utterances. The accent peak on yarn is lower after accented ao'i
than it is after unaccented akai, as predicted by McCawley's rule lowering [H] to
[M] in this context. However, each of the subsequent accent peaks in both sen-
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 469
tences also is lower than its immediately preceding accent peak. Moreover, in the
female speaker's utterances in figure 17.4b, where the medial [L%] AP-boundary
tones are all clearly visible as local Fo minima, there is the same successive lowering
of Fo values across the two or three utterance-medial AP boundaries.
Which of these intermediate levels should be singled out as the target level
[M]? The X-JToBI model follows Pierrehumbert and Beckman (1988) in calling
none of them [M]. Instead, all tone levels in Japanese are either [H] or [L], with the
intermediate Fo values attributed to another type of phonological representation
than the categorical contrast between these two tones一namely, a representation of
backdrop reference pitch levels. For example, beginning with Poser (1984), all
accounts in the AM framework model the systematically lower value for the [H]
tone in yane after the accented adjective in figure 17.4 in terms of downstep, defined
as a compression of the pitch range that begins at the akusento-kaku and affects all
tone targets up to the following IP boundary. Other current formal models of
Japanese intonation patterns account for some of the systematic Fo target differ-
ences between and within utterances in subtly different ways from the account in
the X-JToBI model. However, despite their differences, all current formal models
of the Japanese intonation system share one property that distinguishes them from
older Autosegmental Phonology accounts such as McCawley 1968 or Haraguchi
1977. All provide some way of representing the kind of continuous variation dis-
cussed in these examples directly in the grammar. Understanding this aspect of the
AM framework model and other compatible models is critical for understanding
one of the basic mechanisms for focus marking in the language. We expand on this
aspect in the next section.
17.2.3	The Relationship between Tone Features
and Pitch Range Features
Pierrehumbert and Beckman (1988) describe an intonation synthesis program that
models the differences in Fo value among the various [H] or [L] targets in terms of
prominence relationships at two different levels of specification. One level involves
tone scaling within the local pitch range. For example, in figure 17.3b the more
prominent IP-level [L%] target after the oyoge'ru-ga is scaled lower in the pitch
range than the merely AP-level [L%] targets at the ends of the preceding and
following phrases. Similarly, the more prominent [H] target of the accent is scaled
higher in the pitch range than the phrasal [H-], as described above. In the synthesis
program, these two local prominence relationships are specified in terms of two
constants indicating tone-scaling ratios. The first constant positions an IP-final
[L%] proportionally closer to the bottom-line value for the local pitch range, and
the second one positions any accent [H*] target proportionally closer to the topline
for the local pitch range. Such variation in tone-scaling changes the target position
within the pitch range, but leaves the pitch range intact.
By contrast, other prominence relationships are modeled by varying the pitch
range. The synthesis program provides for a paradigmatic choice of hertz values
47〇 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
for the bottomline and for the topline of the pitch range of each IP. It also provides
for the paradigmatic choice of an "AP prominence" factor一a ratio value that
determines the topline for each AP relative to the pitch range of the IP that
dominates it. For example, the accent peak on /Yamano-wa/ in figure 17.3a (black
line) is lower than the accent peak on IYamano-gal in figure 17.1a (reproduced as
the gray line in figure 17.3a), because the topic IP IYamano-wal is not in focus
relative to the following predicate. In the synthesis program, this relationship is
generated by specifying a lower top-line value for the first IP /Yamano-wal in
figure 17.3a (black line). In a similar way, the accent peak on the Akai yane-no
phrase is very much higher than the peaks on ie and mie ru in all three speakers'
renditions of this sentence in figure 17.4, because the initial AP is produced in a
pitch range that is somewhat expanded relative to a more neutral reading. This
reflects the focus structure of the sentence in the kinds of discourse contexts that
the speakers could imagine for it. The distinctive roof color identifies which house
it is that is visible. In the synthesis program, this is specified by an AP prominence
ratio greater than 1.0 so that the topline for the first AP is above the topline for the
IP as a whole.
The discourse-level considerations just described are not the only ones at play
in determining the top-line value for an AP. There is also the general phonological
constraint that AP-level high tone targets are lower in APs that occur after an
accented AP within the same IP. This constraint is reflected in the lower value for
the accent peak on oy o'idem in figure 17.1a, where the subject and predicate are
grouped together into one IP, relative to the accent peak on oyo'idem in figure 17.3a
(black line), where the predicate stands alone in an independent IP. The same
relationship can be seen also on ya'ne in Ao'i ya'ne-no as compared to the accent
peak in the Akai ya'ne-no phrase in figure 17.4. In the synthesis program, these
differences are modeled by a downstep ratio that proportionally reduces the dis-
tance of the IP topline above the bottomline immediately after each accent [H*]
target. The very much lower values of the peaks on ie'-ga and mi'em in figure 17.4
then reflect the combined effects of focus subordination and of downstep.
The types of prominence relationships that are modeled in Pierrehumbert and
Beckman's synthesis program are also modeled in a comparably direct way in
Hiroya Fujisaki's model that was first described in Fujisaki and Sudo 1971 and that
has been adopted in an impressive body of later studies that became the basis for the
intonation synthesis modules in several leading Japanese text-to-speech and con-
cept-to-speech systems (e.g., Fujisaki and Hirose 1993; Fujisaki et al.1994; Hirai,
Higuchi, and Sagisaka 1997; Kiriyama, Hirose, and Minematsu 2002). In the Fuji-
saki framework, the prominence relationship among different intonation phrases is
modeled by specifying different amplitudes for their phrase commands. The phrase
command is a local pulse aligned near the beginning of the phrase and then con-
volved with a decaying declination function. The prominence relationship among
different APs, in contrast, is modeled by the specification of different amplitudes
for the accent commands. The accent command is a square wave that generates the
rise at the beginning of each AP and the subsequent steep fall after the accent peak
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 471
in an accented AP. The differences between the X-JToBI AM framework model and
Fujisaki's model primarily involve the treatment of unaccented phrases. The accent
command in Fujisaki's model implies a [H] target at the end of an unaccented AP.
In other respects the two frameworks provide comparable accounts of the many
intermediate Fo target levels observed within and across utterances. The different
frameworks are comparable enough that observations couched in one set of syn-
thesis parameters can be translated readily into the parameters of the other model.
That is, this kind of formal analysis-by-synthesis yields data that can be compared
across frameworks in a way that is not possible with the informal pretheoretic
observations reported in studies such as Selkirk and Tateishi 1991,which assumes a
direct and deterministic mapping between syntactic and prosodic structures in-
stead ofbuilding an independent formal model of the prosodic structure on its own
terms. Both synthesis models also provide an explicit representation of continuous
variation in the alignment of tone targets relative to the consonant and vowel
segments of the associated text. This explicit representation of tone-text alignment
is critical for describing the contrasting boundary pitch movements at the ends of
intonational phrases, which we describe in the next section.
17.2.4	Boundary Pitch Movements
The preceding two sections have discussed the relevant metrical structure at both the
AP and IP levels, as well as the tonal autosegments that mark the lower level of the
AP and the pitch range compression that is triggered by the accent tones and affects
all following tones until a new pitch range is chosen for the following IP. The
literature in English focuses almost exclusively on these aspects of the Japanese
intonation system, and all have been encoded even in the earlier J_ToBI conventions
(Venditti 1997). By contrast, the last major element of Japanese intonation一the
inventory of rises and more complicated tonal events that are licensed to occur after
a phrase-final [L%] boundary tone一is rarely given more than passing mention.
In the X-JToBI conventions, these events are called boundary pitch movements
(BPMs). A BPM occurs when the AP-level boundary [L%] is followed by one or
more other tone targets, including at least one [H], to create a simple rise, a concave
rise, a rise-fall, or some even more complicated Fo movement. There is a long-
standing consensus that BPMs are pragmatic morphemes that are licensed to occur
at the end of a phrase to contribute to the pragmatic interpretation of the phrase
(see Kindaichi 1951,Ohishi 1959, Kawakami 1963, Miyaji 1963, Kori 1989b, Fujisaki
and Hirose 1993, Muranaka and Hara 1994, Venditti, Maeda, and van Santen 1998,
Katagiri 1999, among many others). Despite this primordial characterization of
their general function, however, we do not yet have either an exhaustive inventory
of BPMs or an exact description of the contrasting discourse meanings that they
convey. In this section, we discuss the inventory of BPM categories in the X-JToBI
scheme, which were used to tag all178,0004- phrase boundaries in the forty-five-
hour Core portion of the CSJ (henceforth CSJCore), yielding the counts in table
472 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Table 17.1 Distribution of phrase-final tones in CSJCore
	L% only	L% + H%	L% + HL%	L% + LH%	L% + HLH%	Total
APSa	56,736	19,647	3,041	125	1	79,550
SPSb	64,546	11,148	6,997	259	9	82,959
Dc	7,152	1,705	565	34	4	9,460
Rd	5,118	1,636	33	1	〇	6,788
Total	133,552	34,136	10,636	419	14	178,757
%	747%	19.1%	5-9%	0.2%	〇%	100%
a APS (Academic Presentation Speech) refers to CSJ monologues collected from live academic presenta-
tions.
b SPS (Simulated Public Speaking) refers to monologues collected from lay subjects who were asked to give
short presentations about everyday topics.
c D refers to dialogue recordings.
d R refers to read speech of (i) passages from popular science books or (ii) "reproduced" transcriptions of
the APS/SPS spontaneous speech (see Maekawa 2003 for details).
17.1. We compare this list ofBPMs with the inventory proposed by Kawakami in his
insightful1963 paper on phrase-final rises.
As table 17.1 shows, many prosodic phrases in the CSJCore end simply in [L%],
without any additional boundary pitch events. This is true also of all of the pro-
sodic phrases in our read example utterances in figures 17.2-17.4 and figure 17.5a.
However, phrases ending in other boundary configurations are not rare even in
fairly scripted spontaneous speech. For example, nearly a quarter of the phrases in
the academic presentations (APS) in the CSJCore are tagged with some kind of
BPM after the [L%].
The most common BPM tag in the CSJCore is [H%]. This corresponds to the
shape that Kawakami (1963) termed the futsuu no jooshoochoo "normal rise'. The
pitch rises sharply from the onset of the final syllable of the phrase, as shown in
figure 17.5b. The [H%] BPM should not be confused with the superficially similar
"question rise' illustrated in figure 17.3d. Its function is instead more closely related
to that of [HL%], another BPM with which it also shares an alignment pattern for
the [H] tone target. In the [HL%] BPM, as in [H%], the Fo rises sharply at the
onset of the final syllable of the phrase, before it falls again. The final syllable is
usually lengthened as well, as in the example utterance in figure 17.5c.
In each of the examples in figure 17.5, the BPM occurs on a sentence-final
pragmatic particle ne. Katagiri (1999) describes ne as occurring only in dialogue,
where it indicates lack of commitment to the proposition just uttered (in contrast
to yo, which indicates the speaker's acceptance of the proposition into the mutual
belief space). Katagiri also describes how this core meaning of ne interacts with the
meaning of a rising versus a falling phrase-final intonation pattern to induce a
variety of conversational implicatures, such as confirmation question, polite as-
sertion, and the invoking of external authority. It is important to note, however,
that Katagiri does not distinguish between the two types of rising BPMs illustrated

PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 473
time (second^	time (second^
Figure 17.5 FO contours for utterances of the sentence Sugo'i ne 'Amazing, isn't it' pro-
nounced with four different final boundary-tone configurations.
in figure 17.5b versus 17.56. Thus, it is possible that some of the meaning contrasts
he shows are associated with tonal differences.
Katagiri is not alone in his failure to distinguish more than one rising BPM.
Indeed, in the literature in English, this is the rule rather than the exception. For
example, Pierrehumbert and Beckman (1988) also recognize only one rising BPM,
which they analyze as a [H%] boundary tone. Moreover, they elicit this rise only in
interrogative uses of the sentence-final particles ka and no. The occurrence of a
rising BPM in association with an utterance-final interrogative ka or no marks a
very salient, easily grasped speech act, so it is not surprising that all researchers
have recognized at least one rising BPM in at least this one discourse context.
Pierrehumbert and Beclcman also follow McCawley (1968), Haraguchi (1977),
and Poser (1984) in assuming that this rise occurs only in sentence-final position.
Based on this (mistaken) assumption, they posit a prosodic constituent above the
IP (termed the utterance) as the domain that licenses the [H%] target. However, as
figure 17.6a shows, the BPM that is tagged as [H%] in X-JToBI readily occurs
sentence-medially in spontaneous speech (see also Nagahara 1994 and Nagahara
and Iwasaki 1994 for a similar insight). Often the phrase-final syllable on which
[H%] is realized is a postposition or case particle, although this need not be the
case. For example, there are three instances of [H%] in figure 17.6a, but only one of
these is associated to a case particle. Moreover, as the counts in table 17.1 show, this
BPM occurs frequently in all genres represented in CSJCore. That is, unlike the
particles ne and yo, the simple rise BPM is by no means limited to dialogue.
(a)
250-
(b)
200-
150-
100-
-]	A	u	函 丿」 J \ ヽ5		: i	H% ん：k へ:M	;へ、 ! ;;	1 ヽ				
\akuzyo	surui	rafo -M2	yoru		arima^ite	<sil>«	s...	iikae-wa ,	
'(The method is			sutnrr.arization by deletion. Uhm. Rewording is not included.1						
96		945		97	97.5 time (second^		98		98.5	99
300-
a*4-L
250-
20〇・:
15〇-:
,•一L ：	:
r\	；
:	Lが	:
i f
H-
H^-L :

100-

a*to-wa
oioko-no-切 to - W
mukatie
475
'And then there's ...Eke ... also this thing about their attitude tow aid men.1
477
475.5
476	476.5
time (second^
；；HF ；	；	: ! H-	\ :	:	Di'- , E*+L F ー、落「	
sot itta yofom	ta^purno	remjogo	〇	kotue *ru
'...responds with the just described ty^e of semantic associate.1	
435	435.5	436	436.5	437
time (second^
Figure 17.6 FO contours for three utterances from the CSJCore. (a) An example of H%
marking sequential phrases. (Tags for the accent tones and AP-initial rise tones are
suppressed to highlight the [H%] BPM.) (b) An example of the HLH% boundary pitch
movement (from a conversation between two young women about how Chinese women
are different), (c) An example of the HL% PNLP: underlined extract of <ame> to ittara
<amai> toka soo itta yo'o-na ta'ipu-no rensoo^o^-o kotae'ru ... "When presented with
<candy>, the subject responds with <sweet> or some such associate of this type..from
a talk on processes of auditory lexical access of words that have near homophones dif-
fering minimally in lexical accentuation, such as ame 'candy' and a"me 'rain'.
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 475
In the (mostly non-English) literature that does distinguish at least two dif-
ferent rising BPMs, the function of the rise that is tagged as [H%] in X-JToBI is
described as one of imparting prominence to the constituent to which it associates
(see Ohishi 1959; Kori 1989b,1997; Venditti, Maeda, and van Santen 1998; Taniguchi
and Maruyama 2001;Oshima, 2007; among many others). This function contrasts
with the function of the question rise in figure 17.3d, and it relates [H%] instead to
[HL%], the rise-fall BPM illustrated in figure 17.5c. The rise-fall BPM in figure 17.5c
is not included in Kawakami's (1963) inventory, but it is among the shapes ex-
amined by Venditti and her colleagues in a perception experiment (Venditti,
Maeda, and van Santen 1998) matched with an extensive set of acoustic measure-
ments (Maeda and Venditti 1998). In the perception study, Venditti, Maeda, and
van Santen (1998) asked listeners to rate each stimulus on several semantic scales.
They observed that listeners perceive [HL%] to be highly 'explanatory' and Em-
phatic'. That is, Japanese listeners expect speakers to use [HL%] in contexts where
they are explaining some point to their interlocutor and want to focus attention on
a particular phrase in this explanation. Although it is not as frequent as [H%] and is
markedly rare in read speech, [HL%] occurs at 4-8 percent of the phrase bound-
aries in the different genres of spontaneous speech in the CSJCore.
The next most frequent BPM in the CSJCore is much rarer, occurring at only
0.2 percent of phrase boundaries. This is the [LH%] rise illustrated in figure 17.3d.
This BPM may occur sentence finally and is observed most often at the ends of
utterances expressing questions. As noted already, this BPM is superficially similar
in form to [H%] in that the Fo rises on the last syllable of the phrase. However,
unlike with [H%], where the onset of the rise aligns with the onset of the final
syllable, the rise of [LH%] occurs later within that syllable, making the overall shape
of [L% LH%] more "scooped" or "concave" than that of [L% H%]. In some cases,
especially in cases expressing incredulity, the final syllable is lengthened as well. In
the Venditti, Maeda, and van Santen (1998) perception study, stimuli carrying
[LH%] were perceived as "seeking confirmation' from the interlocutor, and those
that also had a lengthened final syllable yielded a high 'disbelief' rating (i.e., in-
credulity questions).
The X-JToBI [LH%] category corresponds to two different rise shapes in Ka-
wakami (1963), who describes simple information-seelcing questions such as kaeru?
or kaeru no? ' Are you returning?' as having a futsuu no jooshoochoo "normal rise'
and distinguishes this shape from interrogatives indicating 'deep' questioning,
which he describes as having a hanmon no jooshoochoo 'return rise'. In their acoustic
analysis of BPM contrasts, Venditti, Maeda, and van Santen (1998) show that both
the alignment and overall Fo curve shape categorically distinguish all questions
from prominence-lending rises: in both information-seeking and incredulity
questions ([LH%]), the rise onset occurs later in the syllable and the rise shape
is more concave than in the prominence-lending rise ([H%]). By contrast, the
phonetic distinction between the two question types is fuzzier. The duration of the
final syllable varies continuously from the shortest most clearly information-
seeking question (e.g., kcCeru no?) to the most drawn-out, clearest examples of an
4/6 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
incredulity question (e.g., kaeru no?!!). Additionally, the location of the rise onset
(and other points during the rise) is correlated with the varying durations of the C
and V autosegments on which the rise is realized. Given these results, we now
understand Kawakami's futsuu no jooshoochoo and hanmon no jooshoochoo to be
descriptions of the extreme endpoints of a continuum that includes many inter-
mediate degrees of emphatic lengthening. That is, the gradient nature of the rela-
tionship between the phonetic dimensions and the continuum of contrasting de-
grees of incredulity suggests an analysis akin to the one that Hirschberg and Ward
(1992) propose for the uncertainty versus incredulity interpretations of the English
fall-rise contour.
The rarest BPM distinguished by X-JToBI is [HLH%], a very complex shape in
which the Fo rises, then falls, then rises again. This BPM also is not included in
Kawakami's inventory of rises. It seems characteristic particularly of child-directed
speech, where it can give a wheedling or cajoling quality to the utterance to which it
attaches. The counts in table 17.1 show that [HLH%] occurs a total of only 14 times
on the 178,000+ boundaries of the CSJCore, one of which is shown in figure 17.6b.
This is likely because the speaking genres that CSJ includes are for the most part
not the types in which [HLH%] readily occurs; we would expect to count more
instances of [HLH%] in interactions between mothers and their young children or
in conversations between young female friends.
In addition to the BPM tags in table 17.1, the X-JToBI conventions provide a
number of diacritics that mark distinctions within categories. Several of these
could well be phonologically distinct tonal sequences. They correspond to cate-
gories that Kawakami (1963) discusses (e.g., "floating rise', "hooked rise') that do
not seem to have any kind of gradient relationship between the phonetic dimen-
sions of contrast and a continuum of pragmatic interpretation. However, research
on these distinctions is even less well-developed than research on the differences
between the two types of [LH%]. Moreover, the functions that have been suggested
for them are not directly relevant to the theme of this chapter. Therefore, the only
X-JToBI diacritic that we mention here is for an Fo rise that Kawakami does not
mention as a distinct BPM type.
The shape of this rise is convex, like that of the [H%] BPM, with the [L%]
target that begins the rise aligned early in the syllable to which it associates, and it
has been described by Ohishi (1959), Kori (1989b,1997), and others as having a
similar prominence-lending function. This rise contrasts with the [H%] BPM,
however, in that it occurs on the penultimate syllable of the phrase rather than the
last. In the X-JToBI conventions, this earlier rise is termed the PNLP (for penul-
timate non-lexicalprominence). Because the Fo typically also falls immediately after
the PNLP to a [L] target at the following phrase boundary, the X-JToBI convention
is to mark the PNLP using the [HL%] rise-fall BPM label on the tones tier, with an
additional tag ("PNLP') on the comments tier. A total of 1,162 cases of PNLP were
tagged in CSJCore (62.7 percent in APS, 33.7 percent in SPS,1.9 percent in dialogue,
and 1.6 percent in read speech). In the example in figure 17.6c, the PNLP tagged
rise-fall is indicated in bold.
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 477
17.3	The Prosodic Marking of
Prominence
Having provided an overview description of the Japanese intonation system, we
can now turn to the various ways in which intonation patterns are manipulated in
the marking of local prominence in the language. Given that this is an area of
research where the literature has been muddled considerably by drawing analogies
to pretheoretical intuitions about English focus-marking mechanisms, it is useful
to begin by describing one way in which focal prominence is not marked in
Japanese.
17.3.1	Distinguishing Accent from Akusento
Much of the theoretical literature on focus marking in English, German, and Dutch
invokes a structural property that is variously called accent, nuclear pitch accent,
sentence stress, or nuclear stress. As this jumble of terms suggests, focus marking in
these languages involves a complex interplay of prominence markers at several
levels of the prosodic hierarchy. We cannot do justice here to the richness of these
systems, however, and instead we discuss just one example from English that we
hope expresses as clearly as possible what we mean when we say that standard
Japanese has no analog to the notion "accent" when it is used as a synonym for
"nuclear stress" in these Germanic languages. Especially, we must emphasize that
the notion "accent" in that sense is neither a formal nor a functional analog to
'accent' as a translation of akusento-kaku.
In section 17.2.2, we alluded to a common cross-language misparsing of the
akusento-kaku in words such as Ya'mano, oyo'ideru, and hashitteru in figures 17.1a
and 17.1b. The utterances in figure 17.7 illustrate how the English intonation system
contributes to this misparsing. In figure 17.7a the first syllable of running is asso-
ciated to the nuclear pitch accent in the intonation contour. By nuclear pitch
accent, we mean a configuration of tones that marks the word (or some larger
constituent) as the focus of the utterance and simultaneously invites the listener to
make some inference about the pragmatic relationship between the focused con-
stituent and the shared model of the discourse context. In figure 17.7a, this con-
figuration is the fall in pitch defined by the transition from the [H*] pitch accent
on the first syllable of running to the following [L-] phrase accent. In figure 17.7b,
the second syllable of the (English) word Yamano is associated to the same kind of
fall that makes running focally prominent in figure 17.7a.
The tone labels in figure 17.7 follow the MAE_ToBI tagging conventions de-
scribed by Beckman, Hirschberg, and Shattuck-Hufhagel(2005). Other AM
models of English offer different analyses of the falling pitch that is aligned earlier
in figure 17.7b as compared with figure 17.7a. For example, Gussenhoven (2004)
labels the fall as [H*+L], because he disputes the relevance of the notion "phrase
accent" for English. Despite these differences across frameworks, however, there is
478 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Figure 17.7 FO contours of the English sentence Yamano is running, produced in response
to (a) What's happening in the next leg of the triathlon relay? (b) Who's doing this leg? and
(c) Who's doing what?
a broad consensus about the focus-marking function of the fall and about its
culminative role. That is, any complete, well-formed intonation contour of English
has exactly one nuclear pitch accent per intonation phrase. In figure 17.7c, then, the
sentence is divided into two intonation phrases so that both Yamano and running
can be associated to a nuclear pitch accent. That is, the restructuring of the sen-
tence into two intonation phrases in figure 17.7c preserves the culminative distri-
bution of nuclear pitch accents, with the result that there is exactly one word in
each IP that is marked as bearing the one obligatory pitch accent in the intonation
contour for the IP (what Liberman and Prince [1977] termed the '"designated
terminal element" of the phrase).
A noteworthy property of the English prosodic system is that this culminative
distribution of nuclear pitch accents relative to IP boundaries in connected speech
mirrors the culminative distribution of potential association sites for the nuclear
pitch accent in polysyllabic words in the lexicon. In the words Yamano and running
in figure 17.7, as in relay, doing, atom, atomic, retail, rattle, legislation, and many
other polysyllabic words of English, this potential association site is the penultimate
syllable. In atomize, rattlesnake, and legislature, it is the first syllable. The terms
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 479
primary stress and lexical stress refer to this potential fbr association to the nuclear
pitch accent. As Hyman (2005) and many others before him have pointed out, the
obligatory designation of exactly one primary stress per word imparts a sense of
wordhood. Thus, compound words such as rattlesnake and law degree can be
distinguished from phrases such as rattle it off and law and order because of the
Compound Stress Rule一a morphological process whereby all but one of the pri-
mary stresses in a compound word lose the potential to associate to accent. Also,
function words such as the, of, and but (which associate to pitch accents only in
unusual circumstances) are commonly understood to be prosodically cliticized
onto a neighboring content word. This link between the culminative distribution of
primary stresses in words in the lexicon and the culminative distribution of nuclear
pitch accents in the intonation phrases of a discourse gives rise to the terms sentence
stress and nuclear stress to designate the stressed syllable in the word that associates
to the nuclear pitch accent in an IP.
Another noteworthy property of the English intonation system is that asso-
ciation to the nuclear pitch accent is often accompanied by an exaggeration of
other phonetic markers of prominence that together constitute the formal prop-
erties that define the stress foot, a lower-level constituent in the English prosodic
hierarchy. These include, for example, (a) the aspiration of the foot-initial /t/ in
atomic and retail as opposed to the lenited pronunciations typical of the foot-
medial /t/ in atom and rattler, and (b) the constrained distribution of reduced/
elided vowels that yields the morphological alternation between a full long /a/ in
the foot-initial stressed syllable of atomic and the reduced short /a/ or deleted vowel
(making the [m] syllabic) in the corresponding unstressed syllable in atom. Thus,
the aspiration of foot-initial voiceless stops can be exaggerated when the word is
accented (e.g., Docherty 1992, among many others), whereas foot-medial It/ can be
weakened further and even deleted in unaccented contexts in running speech
(Raymond, Dautricourt, and Hume 2006). Similarly, the morphological alterna-
tion between full versus reduced/deleted vowels in related forms such as atomic and
atom is echoed by the optional prosodic alternation between disyllabic pronun-
ciations of words such as rattler ([rae?.lar]) in fast, unaccented contexts, and
trisyllabic pronunciations ([rae.ro.lsr] or even [rae.tA.19r]) when the stressed
syllables in these words are associated with accents in the intonation contour (as
noted by Beckman 1996a, among many others). Such segmental prominence
("stress proper") at the foot level is linked to the prosodic marking of focus in
English because lexical stress constrains where pitch accents can and cannot go: any
pitch accent in the intonation contour must associate to the head of a stress foot.
This is the source of the unequivocally syllabic "strong" variants of words such as
of, the, and but in contexts where they receive a pitch accent.
It is important to keep in mind that these links between syllable stress (in the
lexicon) and pitch accent (in the intonation system) are particular to English and
the handful of other languages that are like English. The prosodic organization of
Japanese words and intonation phrases is quite different from that of English, and
researchers should not be misled by the superficial phonetic resemblances that lead
native speakers of Japanese to misparse the distribution of nuclear pitch accents in
480 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Figure 17.8 FO contour of an utterance from a spontaneous narrative, illustrating a very
prominent but unaccented focal constituent.
an utterance such as figure 17.7c in terms of the distribution of akusento-kaku in an
utterance such as figure 17.1a, and vice versa.
The differences can be summarized most succinctly by contrasting the applica-
bility of the notion "stress" in describing the two prosodic systems. In descriptions of
English, this term is an indispensable shorthand way of capturing the many profound
implicational dependencies among categorical markers of segmental prominence at
the foot level and categorical markers of tonal prominence at the IP level. In Japanese,
by contrast, there are no such fundamental links between segmental prominence and
tonal prominence, and the term "stress" is at best a somewhat misleading translation
of technical terms for pragmatic functions such as kyoochoo (better translated as
'emphasis' or 'focal prominence'). For example, where vowel lenition in English is
constrained to occur in weak unaccented syllables, vowel lenition readily occurs in
accented syllables in Japanese even in very deliberate read speech. The deletion of the
[i] in the accented second syllable of hasitteru in figure 17.1b is by no means
anomalous, as can be seen by the counts that Maekawa and Kikuchi (2005) report in
all of the different genres in the CSJ. Also, where the typically unaccented (and
lexically unstressed) pronunciation of function words in English is often described in
terms of the notion "clitic"一that is, the prosodic grouping of function words onto
adjacent content words in running speech一many function words in Japanese, such
as ma de 'until', yo'rz'from', st/'ra 'even', and no'rm only', are lexically accented, and
although these words are almost always realized as clitics (i.e., produced without the
[L% H-] rise that would demarcate them from the preceding noun phrase),
the accented syllable nonetheless is often produced with an associated Fo fall for the
akusento-kaku, as noted by Sagisaka and Sato (1983) and Kubozono (1993), among
others. (See Maekawa and Igarashi 2006 for counts in the CSJ.) Conversely, content
words that are lexically unaccented (i.e., lexically marked as having no possible
association to an akusento-kaku) do not surface with an associated pitch accent even
under focus. This fact is illustrated by the utterance in figure 17.8, in which the focally
prominent word mannaka 'smack in the middle' is lexically unaccented and surfaces
without any accent, whereas the following verb okima'su is lexically accented and
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 481
surfaces with an accent but with none of the intonational hallmarks that make the
preceding locative phrase the focus of the sentence. We turn to these hallmarks in the
next section.
17.3.2	Phrasal Pitch Range and Focal Prominence
It has been widely noted in the literature that Japanese uses local pitch range
expansion to mark focal prominence (see Kindaichi 1951;Kawakami 1957; Fujisaki
and Hirose 1984; Fujisaki and Kawai 1988,1994; Poser 1984; Pierrehumbert and
Beckman 1988; Kori 1989a, 1989b,1997; Takeda and Ichikawa 1990; Maekawa 1997;
Nagao and Amano 2000; Ito 2002a, among others). Figures 17.3a and 17.8 illustrate
this. In figure 17.3a, the Fo contour for an utterance of Yamano-wa oyo'ideru is
overlaid on the Fo contour of an utterance of Yamano-ga oyo'ideru. The rendition
of the Yamano-wa... sentence (black line) invokes a garden-variety "thematic”
interpretation of wa (see Kuno 1973; Heycock, this volume), which makes the
following verb the focal constituent in the utterance. By contrast, the rendition of
the Yamano-ga... sentence (gray line) is an "out-ofLthe-bluen broad-focus ut-
terance. In keeping with these contrasting focus patterns, the pitch range is ex-
panded on oyo'ideru in the Ya'mano-wa... sentence relative to that on the same
word in the Ya'mano-ga... sentence. Conversely, the pitch range on Ya'mano-
ga.. .is expanded relative to that on Ya'mano-wa..., marking the subject as part of
the focus constituent, which is the whole sentence in the broad-focus case. Because
both Ya'mano and oyo'ideru are lexically accented, this pitch range expansion is
most readily observed around the [H] tone of the [H*+L] akusento-kaku, which
shows both a more extreme rise from the preceding [%L] or [L%] boundary tone
and a more extreme fall to the [L] of the akusento-kaku. The utterance in figure 17.8,
by contrast, shows that a word need not be accented to be a target of pitch range
expansion.
This utterance is from a spontaneous monologue narrative that Venditti and
Swerts (1996) elicit using a puzzle task in which the speaker is asked to describe the
moves chosen to build a house from colored pieces of paper. In the just-completed
move, the speaker places a triangular piece for the roof (sa'nkaku-no ya'ne), and in
the utterance just before figure 17.8 in the monologue, she states that she will next
place a pink rectangular piece for a window. In figure 17.8, then, she describes
where exactly on the roof she will put the window piece. She produces prosodic
prominence on the locative phrase mannaka-ni "smack in the middle', which is the
focal constituent. Note that this focused phrase is unaccented. That is, it does not
contain the sharp fall in Fo that is present in APs containing words that are lexically
specified as accented. Nonetheless, it is clearly marked for focal prominence by the
expanded local pitch range. As noted above, this is a key difference from promi-
nence marking in English, where a pitch accent is inserted on a rhythmically strong
syllable postlexically to cue the pragmatic function of focal prominence. English
speakers also employ pitch range expansion to mark focus, but it is localized to the
tone targets of the nuclear pitch accent. Japanese is different in that accents cannot
482 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
be inserted in phrases that do not contain lexically accented words. Therefore,
when unaccented phrases such as mannaka-ni in figure 17.8 receive focal promi-
nence, the local pitch range expansion must target tones other than the [H*+L] of
the akusento-kaku. Specifically, the pitch range expansion is most easily observed
on the [%L H-] boundary-marking sequence at the beginning of the focused
unaccented AP.
This kind of dramatic rise at the beginning of the focus constituent is often
termed reset or Fo reset. In both unaccented and accented phrases, the percept of
reset can be enhanced in a gradient way by a contrast effect, as Maekawa (1997)
notes in an experimental analysis of Fo heights of all phrases in an utterance
containing a focused constituent. He shows that the pitch range of the prefocal
phrase varies in inverse relationship to the degree of focal emphasis; more extreme
pitch range expansion on the focused phrase is accompanied by more extreme
pitch range compression on the immediately preceding phrase. Ito (2002a) simi-
larly observes that the Fo values of prefocal peaks are lower than those in a baseline
(broad focus) condition.
One topic of lively discussion in the early AM literature on Japanese is the
exact extent of the local pitch range expansion after reset. This debate centers on
the notion of the "domain" of pitch range specification and the "restructuring" of
the prosodic constituent hierarchy that would license a local pitch range expansion
such as that observed on mannaka-ni in figure 17.8. In Fujisaki's synthesis system
(Fujisaki and Sudo 1971,Fujisaki and Hirose 1984), as in other models from that era
when the paradigmatic specification of continuous variation in pitch range was
first incorporated directly into the phonological formalism, there are two ways in
which the extreme rise in Fo at the beginning of mannaka in this utterance can
be formalized. First, it can be generated by specifying an unexpectedly large am-
plitude for the accent command on mannaka-ni.2 (In the Pierrehumbert and
Beckman (1988) synthesis model, this corresponds to the specification of an AP
prominence ratio value that is much higher than 1.0 for the mannaka-ni phrase.)
Second, it can be generated by inserting an unexpected new phrase command with
an especially large amplitude around the beginning of mannaka-ni. (In the Pier-
rehumbert and Beckman model, this corresponds to an unexpected IP boundary
after yaJne-no, with an unusually high top-line value for the new IP that begins at
mannaka-ni.)
To try to decide between these two alternative accounts (i.e., a local AP prom-
inence or an IP break), Pierrehumbert and Beckman (1988) analyze utterances
containing adjective-noun sequences such as umcCi mame'-wa "tasty beans-TOP’
that differ minimally by which word receives a corrective narrow focus, comparing
these utterances with baseline utterances with broad focus on the noun phrase as a
whole. In one analysis, they have a fluent speaker of Japanese listen to each ut-
terance and tag the perceived degree of disjuncture between the two words. In this
test, focused nouns are usually perceived as being set off from the preceding ad-
jective by an IP boundary. Sometimes this percept could be attributed to a visible
pause or glottalization. Another analysis exploits the fact that application of down-
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 483
step is blocked across an IP boundary: Pierrehumbert and Beckman use materials
that systematically vary the adjective between accented umai <tasty> and unaccented
amai 'sweet', and they observe whether downstep has applied by comparing the
peak Fo in the following focused noun in the accented context versus the unac-
cented context. They find that the Fo height of the focused noun is not significantly
lower when following an accented word. They interpret this nonapplication of
downstep as further evidence indicating that an IP boundary is inserted immedi-
ately preceding a focused phrase. In other words, they conclude that focus marking
involves the second of the two mechanisms described above一that is, the insertion
of an unexpected high-amplitude phrase command in the Fujisaki model, or in-
sertion of an IP boundary in the Pierrehumbert and Beckman model.
Kubozono (1993, 2007), by contrast, argues for the first of the two mechanisms,
which corresponds to the unexpectedly large accent command in the Fujisaki
model (or a local AP prominence in the Pierrehumbert and Beckman model). He
shows summary statistics suggesting that downstep is not always blocked and thus
concludes that late narrow focus within an adjective-noun sequence (or any other
syntactic constituent that normally is produced as one IP) does not involve a
restructuring of the prosodic hierarchy. Rather, the focused AP is produced with a
"metrical boost" realized on the [H] tone targets. We return to this point in section
17.4.2 after describing other aspects of focus marking that also have been described
in terms of restructuring, albeit at a lower level of the prosodic hierarchy.
17.3.3	Prosodic Subordination after Focal Prominence
Another older observation reconfirmed by Pierrehumbert and Beckman's study is
that focal prominence has measurable effects on following material as well as on
the focused constituent itself. That is, putting focal prominence on a word in an
utterance induces some kind of prosodic subordination of all following words in
the intonation phrase. For example, in the utterance in figure 17.8, the Fo on the
verb okimasu is much lower than the [H-] target in the preceding mannaka. In
figure 17.3b, similarly, the accent peak on the verb oyogeru is very much lower than
the accent peak on the preceding Yamano-wa, in keeping with the "contrastive"
interpretation of the wa in this utterance. That is, the degree of pitch range re-
duction on the verb in this utterance is more than can be accounted for simply by
downstep, as can be gauged by comparing the peak Fo on oyogeru in figure 17.3b
with the oyo ideru in the broad-focus utterance of Yamano-ga oyo'ideru in figure
17.3a (gray line).
This postfocal prosodic subordination is realized in various ways that can be
modeled in terms of more or less elaborate manipulations of the prosodic struc-
ture. In the simplest case, the only feature that is affected is the pitch range; there is
an extreme pitch range reduction on all words in the postfocal region, but all tone
targets are realized in the Fo contour. An example of such a realization is the small
but observable rise-fall of the [L% H*+L L%] on oyoge'ru in figure 17.3b. In these
484 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
cases, the demarcative rise from the AP-level [L%] to a following [H] target (the
phrasal [H-] or the [H*] of an early accent) is preserved on the postfocal con-
stituent, although the manifestation of this rise can be very subtle because of the
substantially reduced range.
Quite often, however, the AP-initial rise is not realized after a focused word.
Pierrehumbert and Beckman (1988) describe this later type of postfocal prosodic
subordination as the process of dephrasing, which they define as a total deletion of
the [L% H-] demarcative AP-initial rise and (in cases where this deletion would
yield two akusento-kaku within the resulting merged AP) deletion of all but the first
[H*+L] accent fall. That is, they posit a restructuring under focus that not only
inserts a new IP boundary to set off the beginning of the focused constituent but also
erases any following AP boundary within the IP. They relate this restructuring to the
morphological processes that determine the accent patterns of compound words.
Pierrehumbert and Beckman illustrate dephrasing with figures of utterances
that place narrow focus on the adjective in their target adjective-noun sequences.
The figures show an extreme Fo rise marking the beginning of the adjective but no
Fo rise at the beginning of the following noun. The lexical accents of the component
words interact with dephrasing to yield three distinct contours. When the adjective
is accented, the purported dephrasing is realized as a very steep fall at the akusento-
kaku, followed by a gradual fall located in the lower part of the speaker's pitch
range. This combination of steep fall followed by gradual fall resembles the Fo
contour on the chi'izu-o ta "beta portion of figure 17.2a. Notice there is no Fo rise
onto tabeta in this case. When the adjective is unaccented, in contrast, dephrasing
results in a more or less gradual decline in the upper part of the pitch range. In an
unaccented adjective + accented noun sequence (e.g., amai mame" in Pierre-
humbert and Beckman's materials3), such dephrasing resembles the gradually de-
clining interpolation between the phrase-initial [H-] and the [H*+L] on the verb
shown in figure 17.2b. In the unaccented adjective + unaccented noun sequence
(e.g., amai ame), the shape resembles the interpolation between the initial [H-] and
the utterance-final [L%] shown in figure 17.2c. Pierrehumbert and Beckman in-
terpret all three of these patterns as indicating a prosodic restructuring that groups
the postfocal noun into the same AP as the focused adjective. They identify this
dephrasing with the morphological process of prosodic cliticization that distin-
guishes auxiliary verbs such as iru and rm ru from their full clause counterparts,
making the single AP yo'nde-mi'ru "try reading' distinct from the two AP sequence
y o'ride mi'ru "read and then see' (as described in Poser 1984, for example).
Later work by Kori (1997) gives further support for this account and also
clarifies the exact nature of the prosodic restructuring. Specifically, Kori's examples
show that postfocal prosodic subordination effectively deletes the [L% H-] se-
quence that normally marks the boundary between two AP, but it need not delete
the tone targets of the subsequent akusento-kaku when this dephrasing occurs
within a sequence of two or more accented words. Kori describes cases of prosodic
subordination after a focused accented word where postfocal accents are in fact
maintained, noting they are prosodically weakened due to the fact that they (a) are
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 485
realized in a reduced pitch range and (b) are lacking the phrase-initial rise. This is
shown by the "shoulder” of the postfbcal accent on ikima'shita 'went' in figure
17.9a. In contrast, Kori notes that prosodic subordination after unaccented focused
words is realized differently, although it can be modeled in terms of the very same
process of dephrasing at the AP level. That is, after an unaccented focused word,
the deletion of the AP-initial[L% H-] rise before any postfbcal word results in the
Fo remaining relatively high in the speaker's range, as illustrated in figure 17.9b. As
Kori points out, despite the striking superficial difference between low Fo after an
accented focused word and higher Fo after an unaccented focused word, there is a
common underlying prosodic restructuring. As he puts it, "At first glance, the
behavior under focus seems to differ depending on the accentuation, but actually
you can think of both of these realizations as 'weakening the autonomy of postfbcal
words'" (Kori 1997:178). That is, prosodic subordination can be accomplished by
dephrasing (deletion of the demarcative [L% H-] rise) in both accentual contexts.
To understand the significance of examples such as figure 17.9a, where a fo-
cused accented word is followed by another accented word within the same AP,
recall that Pierrehumbert and Beckman (1988) follow Fujisaki and Kawai (1988)
Figure 17.9 FO contours of utterances illustrating postfbcal prosodic subordination after
an early narrow focus on (a) an accented word versus (b) an unaccented word.
486 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
and others in assuming that dephrasing deletes the tones of the second akusento-
kaku as well as the demarcative tones at the AP boundary itself. Under this account,
the culminative distribution of accents in compound words (as described by
McCawley 1968 and Kubozono 1993, among many others) is mirrored in the
culminative distribution of accents in the postlexical process of dephrasing for
focus marking. Of course, in Fujisaki's model this linkage between dephrasing and
accent deletion is unavoidable, given that the square wave of the accent command
generates both the phrase-initial rise and the later fall at the accented syllable. In the
AM framework, by contrast, there is no necessary coupling between the demar-
cative rise and the accent fall. This means that dephrasing can delete the [L% H-]
sequence that marks the boundary between two accented words without deleting
[H*+L] in the second word. Thus, as noted previously, function words such asyo'ri
and sura can be cliticized onto the preceding content word and still surface with the
lexically specified fall at the accent.4 A related process of subordination of following
accents seems to be involved in the contrast that Poser (1984) notes between yo'nde-
miru ctry reading' (where the auxiliary verb is cliticized onto the main verb) and
yo'nde miru "read and see' (where the two verbs form separate APs). Because he
assumes a full specification account, Poser describes this contrast in terms of a
prosodic grouping that necessarily involves a complete deletion of all[H] tone
targets in the auxiliary verb miru, making the auxiliary reading lose its accent to be
yo'nde-miru. However, Maekawa's (1994) statistical analysis of Fo slopes in post-
focal yo'nde-miru versus yoJnde-iru 'is reading' shows that this account is not
tenable. That is, the contrast between accented miru and unaccented iru is pre-
served even for the auxiliary verb readings of these two verbs. And, as figure 17.9a
shows, narrow focus on the first word in a sequence of accented words can be
realized by a prosodic subordination of postfocal material that drastically lowers the
[H*] target without completely eliminating the accent fall in the second word.
Note that by this account (in contrast to Pierrehumbert and Beckman's original
formulation), dephrasing after the focus constituent is a "postlexical" intonational
process that is qualitatively different from the morphological processes that de-
termine the distribution of accents in compound words. As described at length by
McCawley (1968), Poser (1984), and Kubozono (1993), among many others, when
two accented words are conjoined in compound word formation, the output is a
word with at most one accent (e.g., shakai 'society' + seido 'system' -> shakaiseido
"social system').5 By contrast, by the account of postfocal prosodic subordination
presented here, when two or more accented words are conjoined by the deletion of
the boundary-marking rise, the output is a single AP that can contain two or even
more akusento-kaku. Note, too, that although his account is somewhat different
from the one presented here, Kubozono also differentiates the morphological
processes that enforce a culminative distribution of accents in compound word
formation from the postlexical grouping of words into phrases to reflect the syn-
tactic organization of sentences in a discourse. He reserves the term accentual phrase
for the output of the compound accentuation rules and terms the postlexical
prosodic grouping the minor phrase. Although Kubozono does not discuss post-
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 487
focus subordination in these terms, we can say that his "accentual phrase forma-
tion" is roughly analogous to the English Compound Stress Rule in the same way
that his "minor phrase formation" is roughly analogous to the application of the
Nuclear Stress Rule to larger constituents such as noun phrases in the older liter-
ature on the syntax-prosody mapping in English. This recalls the analogy that
Pierrehumbert and Beckman (1988) make between postfocal dephrasing in Japanese
and deaccenting in English—that is, the constraint in the English intonation sys-
tem against the occurrence of any further pitch accents within an IP after a word
that bears the nuclear pitch accent. These analogies serve to highlight both the
profound formal differences and the deeper functional similarities between the two
intonation systems. Where Japanese uses prosodic grouping to mark prosodic
subordination, English uses the culminative distribution of stress markers such as
association to a nuclear pitch accent. Nonetheless, in both languages, there is a
formal relationship between the mechanisms that mark morphological subordi-
nation in compound word formation and higher-level subordination of postfocal
material within the IP. We return to this point in section 17.4.3.
17.3.4	Prominence-lending Boundary Pitch Movements
In the two previous sections we described how speakers can use prosody to cue
focal prominence in Japanese (a) by inserting an IP boundary and manipulating
the pitch range before and after that boundary to make for a dramatic reset at the
beginning of the focus constituent, and (b) by processes of prosodic subordination
after the focus constituent that include the deletion of the rise at the beginning of
following APs as well as an extreme pitch range compression that can reduce
subsequent accent peaks to the same level as the [L] target of the first [H*+L] when
the focus constituent itself is lexically accented. We now turn to a different kind of
restructuring to cue focus whereby the speaker sets off the focus constituent from
adjacent material on both sides. That is, in addition to the reset that marks the
beginning of the focused word, there is some salient marking of the end of the
focus constituent to separate it prosodically also from following material. One way
that speakers can mark the end of the focus constituent is by inserting a silent
pause. When this pause is inserted after an unaccented word, it simply interrupts
the interpolation from the phrasal [H-] to the next tone target in an attention-
getting way. In figure 17.8, for example, the downward-sloping interpolation from
the [H-] in mannaka-ni toward the lowered [H*+L] in okimasu suddenly stops
for 200 ms before resuming again at the level that it would have reached if the two
words had been separated instead by a filled pause. Another way of marking the
end of the focal constituent to set it off from following material is by producing a
BPM. As noted earlier, two of the four BPMs that are tagged as tonally distinct
categories in the X-JToBI scheme一namely, [H%] and [HL%]一have been linked
to a prominence-lending function. Both of these are illustrated in figure 17.10, and
we describe each of them in turn.
488 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
time (second^
Figure 17.10 FO contours of the underlined portion of Kinoo, na 'oYA-mo oyo'ida 'naoya
also swam yes t er day \ illustrating five different ways of marking the focal prominence on
Na'oya-mo.
17.3.4.1	The prominence-lending rise
The [H%] prominence-lending rise (PLR) is the BPM most commonly associated
with a prominence-lending function. For example, focal prominence can be
marked on the phrase Na'oya-mo 'Naoya-also' in the sentence Kinoo Na'oya-mo
oyo'ida "naoya also swam yesterday' by inserting an intonation phrase break before
Na'oya accompanied by a large pitch reset, as described above and shown in figure
17.10a, or by putting a PLR at the end of the focused phrase, as shown in figures
17.10b and 17.10c. This second mechanism is noted by Ohishi (1959), Kawakami
(1963), Miyaji (1963), Kori (1989b,1997), Muranaka and Hara (1994), and Venditti
(1997), among others, and more recently has been investigated experimentally by
Venditti, Maeda, and van Santen (1998), Taniguchi and Maruyama (2001),Mar-
uyama and Taniguchi (2002), Oshima (2007), and Mesbur (2005).
Figure 17.10a shows the use of expanded pitch range to cue focal prominence
on Na'oya-mo 'Naoya-also'. Note the prosodic subordination of the following verb
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 489
oyo'ida 'swam', similar to figure 17.9a. Figures 17.10b-e illustrate the use of the
various BPMs to cue this same function: (b) shows [H%] marking Naoya-mo,
with no pause following; (c) shows [H%] with a pause following; and (d) gives an
example of the penultimate non-lexical prominence (PNLP), which we discuss
later. These three examples show prosodic subordination of the verb after the
BPM, similar to figure 17.10a. The final contour figure 17.10e gives an example of
the [HL%] 'explanatory' BPM, which was also illustrated in figure 17.5c.
Given that the PLR often occurs on phrases ending with a particle or post-
position, many accounts of its form and function use terms such as "prominent
particles," which might be misinterpreted as suggesting that the particle itself is the
focus constituent. The [H%] does make the final syllable in a phrase stand out in
the intonation contour, and its occurrence on a phrase-final particle can mark
narrow focus on the particle itself, as in Ohishi's (1959) example of metalinguistic
contrast in (3a).6 More typically, however, the focus constituent is the entire phrase
ending with the particle that is aligned with the PLR, as in Ohishi's example in (3b).
This fact has been pointed out by a number of scholars, including Ohishi him-
self, who says: "When prominence is placed on a particle, the thing that is focused
is not just the particle, but it is the word that that particle is affiliated or packaged
with" (Ohishi 1959:95). Maruyama and Taniguchi (2002:18) also highlight this
point: "Prominence on particles prosodically marks the right edge of the phrase
which includes the focused element, and has the function of prosodically indi-
cating the focus structure of an utterance which may not be represented by its
syntax."
A further point to make is that whereas [H%] can occur on a particle, it need
not do so, as is shown by the examples from various authors in Qd-f) and by the
contour in figure 17.6a. Indeed, it appears that the only constraint on prominence-
lending BPM placement (besides the need to be at or near the constituent edge) is
that a prominence-lending BPM cannot occur sentence finally.7 In this position,
focal prominence can only be cued by reset一that is, by having a phrase boundary
before the focus constituent where there can be a pronounced pitch-range ex-
pansion relative to prior material.
This constraint against marking focus on utterance-final phrases with PLR
complements the constraints on marking focus by the mechanisms identified in
the previous section. That is, on utterance-initial words, it is difficult to mark focus
by inserting an IP boundary and expanding the pitch range, because the beginning
of an utterance must be the beginning of a new IP in any case, and because there is
no preceding material to produce in a relatively reduced pitch range to contras-
tively enhance the phrase-initial rise.8 This functional motivation for the constraint
is reflected in Ohishi's (1959) discussion of two of his examples, given here as
(3b,c). Specifically, he suggests that although local pitch range expansion can in-
dicate narrow focus on am 'older brother' in (3c), it is impossible to use pitch-
range expansion to focus the entire noun phrase watashi-no ani my older
brother'. However, the speaker can still mark that phrase as the focus constituent
by producing a [H%] PLR on the final syllable, as in (3b).
490 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Another related point is that some speakers find it difficult to cue focus
by expanding the range of an unaccented phrase, without setting off the fo-
cus constituent somehow from following material. That is, it is generally ac-
knowledged among Japanese researchers (with suggestive instrumental support
in an experimental study by Ito [2002a]) that it is difficult to expand the range of
an unaccented phrase to mark focus. However, other experimental studies by
Kori (1989a) and Pierrehumbert and Beckman (1988) have observed pitch range
expansion on unaccented APs, and figure 17.8 shows that it can occur in spon-
taneous speech, too. The feeling of awkwardness probably originates in the
lesser salience of the AP-initial boundary rise when there is no downstep to reduce
the Fo values of the [L%] and any following [H*+L]. In such cases, the use of the
[H%] PLR is a likely alternative to inserting a pause in the middle of the AP, as in
figure 17.8.
(3) a. A. Gakkoo-no^ tooro'nkai?	(Ohishi 1959)
"Did you say it's a debate about the school?'
B. lya, gakkoo-de^ yatta n desu.
'No, it's that they held it at the school.'
b.	Watashi-no ani-wa^ otonashi'i.
‘MY OLDER BROTHER is sky.'
c.	Watashi-no A^Ni-wa otonashi"i. [with pitch range reset on a'ni-wa]
'My older brother is shy.'
d.	San-senchi-gu'rai akete^ shita-ni okima'su.	(Venditti 1997)
CI will open up about 3 cm and put it below there.'
e.	[Context: 'Is it the Mr. Yamada who lives in Miyajima?]
lie. Ao'mori-ni sunde-iru^ Yamada-san desu.
(Maruyama and Taniguchi 2002)
’No..(It's) the Mr. Yamada who lives in aomori'
f.	KaJzuya-wa bi'iru-o sa'nbaj} chuumon shima'shita. (Oshima 2007)
"Kazuya ordered three bottles of beer.'
Using PLR to mark focal prominence is optional, just as pitch range expansion
on the focal constituent is optional. In fact, Kori (1997) states that the only
obligatory prosodic marker of prominence is the postfocal prosodic subordination
discussed in section 17.3.3. In a naturalness-rating perception study, Maruyama and
Taniguchi (2002) find that [H%] does indeed cue focus but that [H%] alone is not
sufficient when the postfocal region is not prosodically subordinated as well. That
is, whereas their intonation contour with PLR followed by a compressed pitch
range (their pattern B) is judged by listeners as a highly natural way of focusing that
phrase, the contour with PLR and no compression of the following pitch range
(their pattern D) is judged as unnatural. They conclude, as Kori does, that post-
focal prosodic subordination is crucial for cueing focus naturally.9
That said, postfocal pitch-range compression does not occur in all cases where
apparently focal material is set off from following phrases by the insertion of [H%].
The utterance in figure 17.6a illustrates this point, representing a very deliberate
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 491
speaking style that is common in monologue narratives such as the academic talks
and prepared presentations in the CSJ; the speaker produces a string of phrases each
deliberately set off (and given a kind of focal prominence) by [H%], with no
obvious postfocal subordination. This use of [H%] to set off each phrase as a
separate focal constituent is reminiscent of the short intonation phrases and fre-
quent use of [L+H*] nuclear pitch accents in American radio and television news
broadcast style, where prosody is used to break up the densely information-packed
paragraphs typical of news stories. That is, examples such as figure 17.6a may point
to another function of [H%] in discourse—a use that shares the foregrounding
function of PLR in (3) but without the concomitant backgrounding of all material
outside of the focus constituent. In the information-packed paragraphs of this kind
of narrative monologue, the [H%] helps speakers and listeners chunk information
in the speech stream. This "Here, parse this!" function is alluded to in Muranaka
and Hara's (1994:396) descriptions of the PLR on particles as "making clear the
syntactic structure" or "uttered with higher Fo when the preceding noun phrase is
long, [indicating] the end of the phrase."
17.3.4.2	The rise-fall BPM and PNLP
The [HL%] BPM is also said to have a prominence-lending function, and some of
the remarks just made about when and why a speaker chooses to mark focus with
PLR also apply to the rise-fall. In the discourse in (4), for example, speaker B uses
[HL%] to put prominence on ano'hito 'that person'. At the same time, however,
[HL%] also expresses the speaker's irritation at B's misunderstanding. In their
perception study using ratings on various semantic scales, Venditti, Maeda, and
van Santen (1998) find that listeners perceive [HL%] as highly 'emphatic' {kyoochoo
shite iru) and 'explanatory' (joohoo-o setsumei shite iru)一that is, the rise-fall BPM
imparts a very strong sense of the speaker forcefully explaining some point to the
listener. In fact, [HL%] is rated higher on these two scales than [H%] is. However,
in this study listeners do not rate [HL%] as indicating the speaker's irritation, as it
seems to do in the context in (4).
(4) A: (talking to B) Anata-ga Yamada-san
desu ka?
B: lie, watashi-wa Yoshida desu.
C: Soshite watashi-ga^ Yamada de'su. (H%)
A: (talking to B) Wakarima'shita.
Ana'ta-ga Yamada-san desu.
B:lie, ano'hito-ga^ yamada-san nan
コek〃.(HL%)
Are you Mr. Yamada?
No, I'm Yoshida.
And I am Yamada.
I understand.
You are Mr. Yamada.
No, THAT PERSON is
Mr. Yamada.
The chunking function described for [H%] and illustrated in figure 17.6a is also
characteristic of the rise-fall BPM; in many utterances in the CSJ presentation
speech narratives, [HL%] sets off nearly every phrase in an especially deliberate
way. This use of the rise-fall BPM seems especially common in dialogues among
492 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
young speakers, especially young girls. In fact, some speakers use [HL%] so fre-
quently that it seems to lose any local focalizing function and becomes more of a
marker of the speech style and of the speaker's social identity in choosing the
style. That is, the rise-fall BPM in these speakers and this style may be Hke the
frequent use of the English high-rise contour by the younger speakers of American
English that McLemore (1991)describes, where the frequency of use effectively
weakens the meaning of this contour that is described by Hirschberg and Ward
(1995), among others, and makes it instead a marker of solidarity (with the speaker's
fellow sorority members, in the case of McLemore's study).
As noted earlier, X-JToBI uses the [HL%] sequence of the rise-fall BPM
to mark another distinct prominence-lending shape——namely, the penultimate
non-lexical prominence, or PNLP, illustrated in figure 17.6c. In that utterance, the
rise is localized on the penultimate syllable of the phrase soo itta yo'o-na ta ipu no
rensoogo-o "the aforementioned type of semantic associate' (indicated here by
underlining). The PNLP puts narrow focus on the newly introduced term rensoogo
"semantic associate', which is being defined in this appositional use of no.
We describe the PNLP together with the rise-fall BPM in this subsection
because it is tagged in the CSJCore using the [HL%] tone label (in conjunction
with the PNLP comment label). However, this choice of the rise-fall BPM label in
the tagging conventions should not be interpreted as indicating a commitment to
the implied phonological analysis on the part of any of the researchers who de-
veloped the X-JToBI tagging conventions. Rather, the [HL%] tag was chosen as a
quick-and-dirty first approximation to the superficially similar rise-fall shape that
PNLP typically shows. For example, in figure 17.6c, the Fo falls over the duration of
the accusative case particle 〇 onto the first syllable of the following phrase, the verb
kotae'ru 'respond'. However, there is an alternative account available for this fall.
Given that the beginning of the phrase immediately following a medial PLR [H%]
(like the beginning of a phrase after a silent pause) is marked by an initial [%L]
boundary tone, the Fo fall after a PNLP could be the transition to this indepen-
dently motivated [%L] target. The PNLP rise, then, could be a leftward-displaced
instance of the PLR [H%].
This alternative account is appealing to us, because the PNLP is often cited in
the literature (e.g., Ohishi 1959; Kori 1989b,1997) as a variant of the "prominent
particle" phenomenon we attribute to the PLR [H%]. Moreover, our impression
from the instances that we have seen is that the PNLP is more similar to [H%] than
it is to [HL%] in both form and function. Compare, for example, the slope of the
[L% H%] rise in figure 17.10b with that of the PNLP in figure i/.iod. Additionally,
the typical lengthening of the syllable that is aligned with the [HL%] (as seen in
figure i/.ioe) is not present in cases of either PNLP or [H%]. However, differen-
tiating between these two (and several other more controversial) alternative ac-
counts is a research question in its own right. Moreover, it is a question that
requires more extensive corpus work than would have been possible before the
development of resources such as the CSJ. We return to this point again briefly in
section 17.4.4.
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 493
17.4	Ambiguities of
the Prosodic Parse
At various points in our description of focus-marking mechanisms in section 17.3
we alluded to points of disagreement or potential disagreement among linguists
currently working on Japanese intonational phonology. Many of these are points
where the phonetic evidence that might differentiate between competing prosodic
parses is inherently lacking or ambiguous. In this section, we briefly describe four
of these points.
17.4.1	Postfocal Dephrasing
In section 17.3.3, we described the prosodic subordination of postfocal material in
terms of the notion "dephrasing,” which we defined as the deletion (or non-
realization) of the [L% H-] sequence that marks the beginning of every well-
formed accentual phrase. By this definition, the junctural cues are definitive. When
no [L% H-] sequence is realized between two accents and there are no segmental
cues to support an AP boundary in the absence of this tonal cue, dephrasing has
occurred. When two accented words are phrased together into a single AP, both
accent falls can be realized, although the second is typically reduced in prominence,
so that its [H*] target is at the same Fo level or a somewhat lower level than the [L]
target of the first accent, as in tabeta in figure 17.2a and ikimashita in figure 17.9a.
Note that by this account, for sequences of accented words, the line between
dephrasing and extreme pitch-range compression is a fuzzy one, particularly when
there is only one or two syllables separating the two accents. The Fo contour over
the sequence of words yo'o-na taipu in figure 17.6c illustrates this source of am-
biguity in the prosodic parse. The inflection point at the beginning of the small
rise to the accent peak on taipu could be parsed as the [L] of the accent on yoo-na
or as a [L%] boundary tone at the word boundary. The X-JToBI transcriber must
pay close attention to subtle cues such as the length of the word-final vowel in yoo-
na to distinguish between these two parses. This means that there are many dif-
ferent degrees of clarity to the phrasal disjuncture between two accented APs.
Moreover, this continuum of degrees of perceived disjuncture is in a gradient
relationship to the many different degrees of subordination that are also possible.
The postfocal dephrasing evident in figure 17.9a, then, is toward one end of a
continuum that includes (at the other end) the much less compressed pitch range
of the following verb phrases relative to the Ya}mano-wa and Ka'shino-wa phrases
in figure 17.3b.
By our account, in other words, sequences of two accented words are vul-
nerable to the kind of prosodic parsing ambiguity Beckman (1996b) describes,
because the Fo pattern in the middle of a sequence of two accents within a single
AP is phonetically very similar to the rise that marks the boundary between
two APs. By contrast, sequences of two unaccented words are not phonetically
494 the oxford handbook of Japanese linguistics
susceptible to this type of misparsing of the intended prosodic structure, because a
rise at the boundary between two unaccented words can only be parsed as [L%
H-]. Of course, sequences of unaccented words are vulnerable to the opposite
misparsing, because the [L%] is not subject to downstep and because (other things
being equal) the phrasal [H-] is scaled lower in the pitch range than the peak in the
accent [H*+L]. These two facts together mean that the demarcative rise is much
smaller for sequences of two unaccented words as compared with sequences of two
accented words for the same degree of prosodic subordination of the second word,
so that listeners may misinterpret an intended sequence of two unaccented APs as
having undergone postlexical dephrasing.
Note that this account of dephrasing as one endpoint of a continuum of
subordination differs from the more categorical distinction assumed in some other
accounts of postfocal subordination. That is, there is a broad consensus in the AM
literature that dephrasing does occur. However, many other phonologists have
assumed a slightly different account of dephrasing that does not go as far as our
definition in differentiating the postlexical intonational process from the mor-
phological processes that account for the accent patterns of compound words.
Specifically, in most previous accounts other than Kori 1997, the output of post-
lexical dephrasing is assumed to preserve the (almost perfectly) culminative dis-
tribution of akusento-kaku in the lexicon. When two accented words are phrased
together into a single AP, these accounts say, the second akusento-kaku must be
deleted along with the demarcative rise.10 In applying these models in analyses of
actual utterances, then, the presence of a second [H*+L] fall in a sequence of two
accented words is interpreted as unequivocal evidence that there is an intervening
AP boundary even when the second peak is reduced to a target level at or even below
the level of the inflection point for the [L] of the first accent. By these other
accounts, then, the fall on ta'beta in figure 17.2a must indicate an AP break after the
object NP, making the prosodic structure of this utterance different from that in the
syntactically identical sentences in figures 17.2b and 17.2c. Moreover, the different
shapes in the postfocal region in figures 17.9a versus 17.9b are interpreted as indi-
cating different focus-marking mechanisms depending on the lexical accentuation
of the word in focus.
For example, Sugahara (2002) observes what she takes to be evidence of an
effect of lexical accentuation in determining prosodic phrasing in the postfocal
region. That is, like Kori (1997), she describes a pattern of no AP-initial rise and
continuous gradual fall on postfocal (contextually "given") words in unaccented
sequences and a contrasting pattern with a "bumpier" transition when the focal
word and the following word are accented. To account for this difference, she
posits a dependency between accentual phrasing and lexical accentuation status.
That is, she notes that postfocal material is not subject to dephrasing when it is
contextually "new" information or at the left edge of a major syntactic constituent
(XP), as might be expected if accentual phrasing tends to reflect both the discourse
context and the syntactic structure of an utterance, but she also concludes that
postfocal material is not subject to dephrasing when it is lexically accented. This is a
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 495
somewhat surprising effect of the lexical tone pattern if we assume the strictly
modular division of classical generative phonology between the phonological
grammar that generates phonological structures and the phonetic processes that
implement them.
Other researchers also have observed apparent interactions of dephrasing with
lexical accentuation. Most notably, Ito and her colleagues (Ito, Speer, and Beckman
2003; Ito and Speer 2006) document such an interaction in spontaneous narratives,
where the contrast between "given" and "new" information arises naturally from
the nonlinguistic task that naive subjects were asked to perform. We can be con-
fident, therefore, that it is not an artifact of eliciting the contrasting information
structures in the laboratory using contrived dialogue scripts. More extensive
corpus work, in conjunction with analysis-by-synthesis methods, needs to be done
before we can say whether the apparent interaction can be explained away by the
different, complementary phonetic susceptibilities to ambiguity in the parsing of
tonal cues to disjuncture in accented-accented sequences as compared to unac-
cented-unaccented sequences.
17.4.2	Prosodic Restructuring or Local Boost?
In section 17.3.2, we described pitch range expansion under focal prominence
in terms of a prosodic restructuring, such that an IP boundary is inserted before
the focal constituent. As Kubozono (1989,1993, 2007) and others have pointed
out, however, there is an alternative account available, because the reset at the
beginning of the focus constituent is potentially ambiguous: it could signal
the start of a new IP, or it may be a more local boost that raises the topline of the
current AP only, without affecting the prosodic organization of the utterance at
the IP level.
To determine locations of IP boundaries, researchers sometimes compare the
height of the target peak to that of the previous one: if the target is the same height
or higher than the previous peak, they assume that there is an IP boundary between
the two phrases. Kubozono (2007) refers to this as the "syntagmatic approach."
Beckman and Pierrehumbert (1992) suggest that, as a research methodology, this
approach is circular; typical peak height relationships can vary to contrast two
categorically different levels of prosodic disjuncture (as in the contrast between IP
and AP in the Japanese prosodic hierarchy), but peak height relationships can also
vary in a continuous, iconic way to reflect discourse structure, including many
different degrees of relative foregrounding versus backgrounding of constituents.
They therefore suggest that the only way to definitively determine whether an IP
boundary exists between two phrases is to systematically vary the accentuation of
the first phrase and observe the downstep effects (if any) on the second phrase.
Kubozono (2007) refers to this as the "paradigmatic approach" and he, too,
suggests that it is a better method for deciding whether an IP boundary has been
inserted before a focus constituent.
496 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Using this paradigmatic approach, Pierrehumbert and Beckman (1988) find no
significant effect of previous accentuation on focused peaks in their data. Specifi-
cally, although they find a small (albeit insignificant) mean difference for the peak
height value in a focused word depending on the accent of a preceding word, a
scatterplot showing the peak height relationship for each token in the data set
suggests that this is due to variability in the phrasing, with a few tokens showing
a dramatic syntagmatic reduction after accent, and all the others showing reset.
This pattern leads them to propose that focal prominence typically introduces an
IP break before the focused element. This proposal has been widely adopted in
subsequent analyses of focus-related effects on phrasing in Japanese (Nagahara
1994, Ito 2002a, among others).
In contrast to Pierrehumbert and Beckman's findings, Kubozono (2007) finds a
significant difference in mean values for Fo peaks in focused w/i-phrases such as the
nani-o 'what-ACc' in (5). Here, the accentuation of the two phrases preceding the
target word na'ni is systematically varied, yielding a somewhat lower average peak
value on nani in (5a) relative to the mean in (5b) for five of seven speakers. This
small difference in mean values appears even though the pitch range of the 印//-word
appears to be expanded under focus in every token. Following his earlier work on
local pitch range expansion at major syntactic boundaries (see Kubozono 1989,
1993), Kubozono posits a local Fo "boost" that occurs on focused phrases without
undoing the effects of downstep from preceding accents, as would be predicted if
reset were associated with an unexpected IP boundary just before the target word.
Kubozono concludes that pitch range expansion for focus marking can occur
without the prosodic restructuring posited by Pierrehumbert and Beckman.
(5)	a.	accented	accented	accented	(focus)
Anata-wa	Ao'mori-de	Naoko-to	nani-o	mima'shita	ka?
you-TOP	Aomori-Loc	Naoko-with	what-ACC	saw-Q
'What did you see with Naoko in Aomori?'
b.	accented	unaccented	unaccented	(focus)
Ana'ta-wa	Oomori-de	Naomi-to	na'ni-o	mima'shita	ka?
you-TOP	Oomori-Loc	Naomi-with	what-ACC	saw-Q
'What did you see with Naomi in Oomori?'
How can we account for the discrepancies between these two studies? Kubo-
zono points to one possible source of the difference in results一namely, a differ-
ence between his materials and the materials used in most other experiments,
including Pierrehumbert and Beckman's. Kubozono examines 印ん-phrases, which
are (under most accounts of focus in questions) natural targets of focal promi-
nence.11 By contrast, most other laboratory studies of focus use scripted dialogues
that are designed to prompt the readers to perform a contrastive or even correc-
tive focal prominence. For example, the materials in Pierrehumbert and Beckman
1988 use the "contrastive 印ひ'' construction illustrated in figure 17.3b. As Prince
(1981)and many others have pointed out, the discourse phenomena that have
been termed "focus" are no more homogeneous than the prominence-lending
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 497
mechanisms that languages use to mark focus. Perhaps the differentiation of the
contrastive use of wa from the ordinary thematic use of wa requires a more
dramatic setting off of the focus constituent than does the "inherent" focus of the
w/i-word.
Another important point that emerges from comparing these studies is that
the potential for misparsing the degree of prosodic disjuncture before a focus
constituent interacts with the interpretation of focal prominence, and this inter-
action depends on the lexical accentuation in a way that is reminiscent of the
ambiguities regarding dephrasing after the focus constituent discussed in section
17.4.1. That is, when preceding material is unaccented, the listener can directly
compare the Fo before and after the [L% H-] rise to gauge the degree of relative
pitch range expansion on the focal constituent一as in Kubozono's syntagmatic
approach—and the speaker can induce the percept of focal prominence even with a
fairly small reset at the beginning of the focused element. When the preceding
material is accented, however, the listener must gauge the intended pitch-range
relationship against the backdrop of Bayesian expectations regarding downstep一
taking a necessarily paradigmatic approach by evaluating the reset relative to an
internal representation of the typical effects of being after an accented word within
the same IP versus being after an accented word across an IP boundary.
We suspect that this difference between the two cases is what gives rise to
another interaction with lexical accentuation that Kawakami (1957) observes.
He points out that after an accented word, pitch range expansion for focus
marking must at least mimic the effect of blocking the downstep, creating syn-
tagmatic cues that suggest an IP boundary, as in (6a). After an unaccented word,
however, the speaker can put focal prominence on a word simply by producing
the AP-initial rise within a syntactic constituent that is typically produced as one
AP, as in (6b).
(6)	a. Ka re-no || ane desu.	(Kawakami 1957)
'(She)'s his older sister?
b. Watashi-no \ ane desu.
'(She)'s my older sister?
Thus, just as the more extreme degrees of subordination of postfocal material leads
to an ambiguity of parsing at the AP level in a sequence of two accented phrases,
more extreme degrees of emphasis on the focal material leads to an ambiguity of
parsing at the IP level. Moreover, this phonetic ambiguity at the IP level depends
on the lexical tone pattern in a way that suggests that the components of the
grammar that determine the prosodic structure of an utterance are not rigidly
encapsulated away from the phonetic processes that implement that structure.
17.4.3	Scaling of High Tones within the AP
In section 17.4.1, we defined dephrasing as a postlexical process that differs from the
morphological processes involved in compound-word formation by targeting the
498 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
cues to the AP boundary alone, without deleting one of the accents when two
accented words are conjoined. We suggested that this difference between the two
processes may help to explain an otherwise puzzling dependency between de-
phrasing and the lexical accentuation of the focused and postfocal constituents. If
we are correct in saying that the conjoining of two morphemes into a compound
word differs prosodically from the conjoining of two words into a single AP, then
we might also expect different behavior in cases of metalinguistic contrast on one of
the elements in a compound word, as in (7).
(7)	a. OTOGi-ba'nashi janakute, MUKASHi-banashi da yo. (Gussenhoven 2004)
'It's not a nursery tale, but a legend (Lit. OLDENTiMES-tale, with
-ba'nashi from -hanashif).9
b.	Mukashi monoga'tari jana'kutey mukashi-BA nashi da yo.
'It's not an old-time story, but a legend (Lit. oldentimes-TALE).'
c.	Watashi-ga mi tai no wa eiga jana'kute, mukashi-ba"nashi da yo.
'What I want to see is not a film, but a legend (Lit. oldentimes-tale).'
d.	Ho" n-dana dew a nakute ho"n-BAKO de'su.	(Kawakami 1957)
'It's not a booksHELF, it's a book-BiN.'
e.	Koogyoo-DA^iGAKU da" ka koogyoo-ga"kkoo da" ka...
'Whether it's an industrial college, or an industrial school ...'
The sentences in(7a-c) are based on work by Gussenhoven (2004), who cites
Mariko Sugahara (pers. comm., 2000) as saying that the two elements of a com-
pound word cannot be focused separately. More specifically, he says that a com-
pound word such as mukashi-ba"nashi 'legend' (from mukashi 'oldentimes' plus a
sandhi form of hanashi" 'tale') in(7a-c) cannot be divided into two APs to have
different pitch ranges to express the difference between narrow focus on mukashi in
(7a) and narrow focus on hanashi" in (7b), and he shows Fo contours of elicited
utterances of(7a-c) that "are all basically the same" (Gussenhoven 2004:205). His
figure suggests two further pieces of evidence for the purported prosodic indi-
visibility of the compound word: (a) the initial consonant in the second morpheme
is [b] rather than the underlying [h], showing that the morphological process of
rendaku ("sequential voicing") has applied, and (b) the location of the accent fall in
the Fo contour reflects the compound accent pattern rather than the underlying
final accent of hanashv 'tale'.
By contrast, Kawakami (1957) says that corrective focal prominence on the
second element in compound words such as ho"n-dana versus ho"n-bako in (76)
and koogyoo-da"igaku versus koogyoo-ga"kkoo in(7e) can be expressed by having the
same kind of AP-initial rise in the middle of the compound word that he observes
in sequences of words such as (6b). At the same time, he points out that even when
this prominence-lending AP-initial rise occurs, the forms show the other prosodic
hallmarks of being compound words. Specifically, rendaku applies to both the
underlying tana 'shelf' and hako 'box' in(7d), and the compound accent pattern
applies to put an akusento-kaku on the first syllable of daigaku 'college' and gakkoo
'school' (both of which are unaccented as simplex forms) in(7e).
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 499
Figure 17.11 FO contours for two utterances with early narrow focus. The utterance in (a)
is in response to Are those Suzuki's glasses? The utterance in (b) is from one of the recipe
narratives in Venditti 200〇. The context describes why Emmenthal cheese (as opposed to
other types of cheeses) has qualities that make it perfect for use in fondue.
The conflicting cues to the nature of the word-internal juncture that
Kawakami describes for examples (/d,e) is reminiscent of the conflicting cues to
the lexical status of the initial morpheme in English words such as illiterate and
impolite when corrective focus associates the nuclear pitch accent to the prefix, as
in (8).
(8)	He s not polite. In fact, he's downright iMpolite.
Hay (2003) shows that native speakers find it easier to accent the prefix in such
contexts of corrective focus when the derived form has low token frequency rel-
ative to that of the bare stem form, which makes the prefixed form more de-
composable into its component morphemes. We suspect that similar consider-
ations are at play in the apparent discrepancy between Gussenhoven's description
of the impossibility of inserting an AP boundary to place focal prominence on the
second element of mukashi-banashi in (7b) and Kawakami's description of the
focalizing AP-initial rise at the beginning of the second part of ho'n-BAKO in (yd).
					
500 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
At the same time, it is important to point out that Gussenhoven's identifi-
cation of a common source of difficulty for expressing the narrow focus in (7a,b)
assumes that focus marking on the first element of a compound should be the
mirror image of focus marking on the second element. There is no logical necessity
to this assumption. As we noted in section 17.3, there are complementary con-
straints on the availability of different focus-marking mechanisms at different
positions in an utterance. Prosodic restructuring to begin the focus constituent
with an unexpected IP boundary and reset is not a possible way to express nar-
row focus on an utterance-initial word, whereas postfocal dephrasing is not a
possible way to express narrow focus on an utterance-final word. Analogously, the
production of unexpected tonal cues to an AP boundary that Kawakami describes
for (/d,e) should not be able to express the early narrow focus of (7a) as distinct
from the whole-word focus of (7c), and if there is an analog to postfocal de-
phrasing, we might expect it to be constrained to occur on nonfinal elements of a
compound word. The utterance in figure 17.11 suggests a possible analog to post-
focal dephrasing within a compound word form, so long as it is accented and
shows the late accent placement that is a typical output of the compound accen-
tuation rules.
We mentioned in section 17.2.2 that the [H*] target of the accent is inher-
ently scaled higher in the local pitch range for the AP than is the phrasal [H-]. In
section 17.4.1, we discussed the implications of this difference for the interpreta-
tion of rises in the middle of sequences of accented words where the second
accent is early in the word. Here we discuss another implication of this relation-
ship of [H-] < [H*]. When an AP groups together an unaccented word with a
following accented word, this difference in inherent tone scaling often results in an
upward-sloping interpolation from the initial [H-] to the following accent [H*].
This is the pattern over the initial AP Akai ya'ne "red roof' in all three panels
of figure 17.4 and in the first two words Omiyage-no chiizu "souvenir cheese' in
figure 17.2a. The productions of mukashi-ba"nashi that Gussenhoven shows for
the three focus patterns in(7a-c) also have this [H-] < [H*] tone-scaling rela-
tionship, and he follows most earlier AM accounts in interpreting this as evidence
that focal prominence on a word can only be marked by changing the pitch
range specification for the AP containing the word as a whole, without affecting
the inherent tone-scaling relationship of [H-] < [H*] within the phrase. As Pier-
rehumbert and Beckman (1988:108) put it, "focus is a property of the AP as a
whole, and is therefore reflected in the realization of the accent H as well as the
phrasal H."
Figure 17.8 already shows that this may be an oversimplification. The [H-]
target on the focused mannaka-ni is very much higher that the [H*] target at the
following accent in okima'su. Figures 17.9b and 17.11a show that this unexpected
relationship of [H-] >> [H*] can be produced to mark narrow focus on the first
element in an AP even when there is no silent pause interrupting the interpolation
from the [H-] to the [H*], as is the case in figure 17.8. Figure 17.11b shows that this
unexpected relationship of [H-] >> [H*] can even be produced in a compound
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 501
word. That is, because the sequence emmentaaru-chi izu is marked as a mor-
phologically conjoined sequence by the compound accentuation pattern (em-
mentaaru being underlyingly accented), the downsloping pattern in figure
17.11b is comparable to the patterns that Kawakami observes in (yd,e)一an instance
where focal prominence is marked on just one of the elements in a compound,
by reversing the expected relationship between tones and the prosodic structures
that they mark. Examples such as (yd,e) and figure 17.11b thus exemplify another
way in which the prosodic parse can be ambiguous; the segmental cues and
compound accentuation pattern tell the listener that these forms are very closely
conjoined morphologically, but the postlexical AP-boundary tones in(7d,e) and
the independent scaling of the two [H] targets that allows for the [H-] >> [H*]
relationship in figure 17.11b tell the listener that the two subelements of the com-
pound form are independent enough that the second or the first of them can be
marked separately as the focus constituent.
17.4.4	Prominence-lending Edge Markers
A final point of potential ambiguity that we briefly address here concerns the
phonological analysis of prominence-lending pitch movements. At first glance, the
rise-fall Fo movements located on or near the particle mo for the [L%H%] se-
quence in figure 17.10b, the PNLP in i7,iod, and the [L%HL%] in 17.10c are all
strikingly similar in shape to the [%L H*+L] sequence for the AP-initial rise and
lexical accent on the first syllable of Naoya in figure 17.10a. This surface similarity
has prompted some researchers to wonder whether the movements in figures
17.10b-e are in fact pitch accents (as opposed to boundary tones), and that is, in
fact, how some researchers model them. Fujisaki and Hirose (1993), for example,
generate all of these rises (including the more scooped question rise) by inserting
an extra accent command. Oshima (2007) similarly argues that all particles are
underlyingly accented, not just bimoraic ones such as made and sura. This allows
him to analyze the rise-fall shape on the particle mo in figures 17.10b-e as the
resurfacing of the accent tones under narrow focus. That is, Oshima would in-
terpret the PLR and other prominence-lending BPM in these examples as an
exaggeration of an underlying [H*+L] fall on mo, marking the particle as the focus
constituent.
The X-JToBI analysis that we adopt is different. Although the contour on mo
in figures 17.10b-e does superficially resemble the shape around the lexical accent
on the first syllable of Na'oya in figure 17.10a, we do not consider these BPMs to be
the realization of an underlying accent on the monomoraic particle mo. This X-
JToBI analysis is supported by Mesbur's (2005) experimental observation that
multimoraic particles that have lexically specified accent on some nonfinal mora
(e.g., guraicabout, as much as') can be uttered with both the rise-fall of the lexical
accent and a final [H%] PLR under focus, as in (9).
5〇2 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(9)	Omame gu'rap eiyoo no a'ru mono wa na'i n da kara.
'(You'd better eat them) since there's nothing with as much nutrition as
beans.'
That is, examples such as figure 17.10a show that prominence can be marked on a
lexically accented word simply by expanding the local pitch range so as to increase
the [H*] target. If it were the case that one simply expands the pitch range of an
underlying accent to make the particle prominent, as in Oshima's (2007) account,
then we would expect speakers to do the same for gurai. The fact that speakers can
preserve the lexical accent in gurai while putting an additional [H%] rise at the
end of the phrase suggests that the PLR is a phenomenon separate from the lexical
accent.
At the same time, we can see clearly why Oshima (2007) and Fujisaki and
Hirose (1993) were attracted to this account of prominence-lending BPMs as ac-
cents instead of as boundary tones. And an analysis that equates the prominence-
lending properties of these BPMs with focalizing mechanisms that expand the
accent fall in figure 17.10a is especially attractive for the BPM that X-JToBI calls
PNLP (penultimate non-lexical prominence). The rise-fall movement of PNLP is
transcribed as a [HL%] boundary tone, even though it is not realized at the phrase
edge, as is the canonical 'explanatory' [HL%] (with which it shares its X-JToBI
label) and the [H%] PLR (with which it is allied in alignment and duration
characteristics). Thus, PNLP is inherently ambiguous. It looks and acts like the
[H%] boundary tone of the PLR, but it violates our expectation that the phonetic
realization of a boundary-marking tonal morpheme should be localized at the edge
to which it is phonologically affiliated.
However, other languages have similarly ambiguous tones that can be analyzed
as boundary-marking events despite their dislocation from the phrase edge.
Compare, for example, the behavior of English phrase accents, which are associated
with the phrase edge but spread leftward to fill up the space between the nuclear
accent and the phrase edge. (The [L-] tones labeled in each panel of figure 17.7 are
an example of such phrase accents.) Grice, Ladd, and Arvaniti (2000) review a
number of languages that have prominence-marking tones with such an ambig-
uous or dual affiliation, including Greek and Hungarian. The prominence-lending
function of the [H%] and [HL%] in figures 17.10b-d already suggests an affinity
between these boundary tones and the phrase accents of languages such as English,
Greek, and Hungarian. This prominence-marking function makes them suscep-
tible to a diachronic reanalysis such as the one that may have given rise to the
possibility of postlexical insertion of accents in Basque. The PNLP shares with the
phrase accents of languages such as English, Greek, and Hungarian an even more
inherently ambiguous parse because of its displacement from the edge to which it is
phonologically associated. It will be interesting to see whether this displacement is
the harbinger of a sound change that will make Tokyo Japanese more similar to
Basque.
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM ZOZ
17.5	Theoretical Implications
We began this chapter by reviewing aspects of the Japanese intonation system that
are especially relevant for understanding the interplay between information
structure and prosodic organization. We then reviewed the literature that describes
the ways in which prosody is used by the language to mark focal prominence on
constituents in running speech. The literature shows that there is a rich variety of
prominence-marking mechanisms even when morphosyntactic mechanisms such
as scrambling are ignored.
In reviewing this literature, we have tried to highlight points of consensus that
emerge from comparing how a particular phenomenon or particular set of phe-
nomena is treated in models that make different assumptions about such aspects of
the intonation system as whether the [H-] tone at the beginning of an accentual
phrase is an independent target from the [H*] tone at the accent fall. When
different models make analogous generalizations about older observations leading
to similar predictions about future observations, this makes us confident that the
generalizations are robust.
One generalization that emerges from comparing treatments across frameworks
in this way is that pitch range specification plays an integral role in the intonational
phonology. That is, as we saw in section 17.4.2, it is possible to disagree about
whether the reset that marks the beginning of the focus constituent in examples such
as (5) involves the insertion of an unexpected IP boundary or a boost to the pitch
range after a mere AP boundary. But there is no disagreement that speakers have a
flexibly continuous control of the pitch range on either side of this boundary and
that they can use this control to produce a continuum of degrees of reset to indicate
different relationships of foregrounding the focus constituent against the back-
ground of reduced pitch range on the preceding constituent. Moreover, although
the exact details of the analysis differ across different frameworks, there is strong
agreement that this continuous control of pitch range interacts with the control of
categorical contrasts in lexical tone specification to produce superficially different
patterns, as shown in figure 17.9. Nonetheless, listeners can parse this variation in
terms of their expectations about how words and syntactic phrases will be reflected
in the prosodic organization of an utterance to recover the intended focus pattern.
A closely related (and overarching) generalization concerns the importance of
prosodic grouping and the role of constituent edges in the marking of focal
prominence. The exaggerated reset in utterances such as figure 17.8 targets the
beginning of the focus constituent, as does the unexpected AP boundary in ex-
amples such as (6b), whereas the prominence-lending boundary pitch movements
discussed in section 17.3.4 target the end of the focus constituent. This focus on
edges contrasts to the importance of head positions in the English intonation
system. That is, prominence-marking in Japanese, unlike prominence-marking in
English, does not target any such position as the syllable with primary stress in the
focused word or the "designated terminal element" of the intonation phrase.
5〇4 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Despite this profound formal difference between the two languages, however,
there is still a similarity concerning the associated types of phonetic properties that
mark some constituents as more prominent and others as less prominent. For
example, just as pitch range is manipulated to produce a more extreme rise to mark
the beginning of a focused word in Japanese, pitch range is expanded to produce a
more extreme rise or fall around the culminative pitch accent associated to the
syllable that is the obligatory head of a focused word in English. If we understand
the phonology-phonetics interface as being a counterpart to the syntax-semantics
interface at the other end of the grammar, then this speaks to a deeper similarity in
the ways in which the grammatical patterns are interpreted. However, this deeper
"semantic" similarity can only be described accurately once the analysis moves
beyond the fixation on more superficial similarities that lead to the cross-language
misparsings described in section 17.3.1. That is, one has to first analyze each lan-
guage on its own terms (and not just look at surface similarities) before one can see
how the two languages are fundamentally the same.
Moreover, once each prosodic system is analyzed fully in its own terms, an-
other related deeper similarity emerges. In each language, when there is no narrow
focus within an utterance, some of the prominence markers are associated with
constituents near the edge of the utterance. Looking at English first, we can say that
the generalization about association to the obligatory head means that there must
be a nuclear pitch accent somewhere in every well-formed IP. When there is no
narrow focus, the nuclear pitch accent goes on the last content word (by the
Nuclear Stress Rule). In Japanese, similarly, there has to be at least one IP-initial
rise at the beginning of every well-formed utterance, and when there is no narrower
focus prompting an IP break and reset later on, the rise from the utterance initial
[%L] makes the immediately next [H] target (whether a phrasal [H-] or the [H] of
a [H*+L]) the highest (most prominent) peak in the utterance. Thus, it is difficult
to distinguish broad focus on the utterance as a whole from narrow focus on the
relevant edge constituent in both languages, even though the edge is different一
namely, last in English, first in Japanese.
This generalization across the two languages predicts that there should also be
complementary patterns of focus projection within the VP in transitive clauses. That
is, given that objects follow verbs in English, placing the nuclear pitch accent on the
object NP should be ambiguous between narrow focus on the NP and broader
focus on the VP, as indeed it is, as Gussenhoven (1983) and others have shown
experimentally. Conversely, because objects come before verbs in Japanese, pro-
ducing a prominent reset before the object and dephrasing the following verb
should be ambiguous between narrow focus on the NP and broader focus on the
VP, as indeed it is, as Ito (2002a,b) has shown experimentally.
Comparing across languages in this way also highlights important lacunae in
our understanding of one or the other prosodic system. For example, Ito (2002a,b)
tests her predictions about focus projection only with sequences of lexically ac-
cented object followed by lexically accented verb. Much previous work on English
focus projection, comparably, had not examined the effects of varying aspects of
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM ZOZ
the tune other than the location of the nuclear pitch accent, but more recent work
shows, for example, that the broad focus reading of late nuclear accent placement is
less readily available when the pitch accent on the object is [L+H*] rather than
[H*] (e.g.)Welby 2003). Are there comparable interactions in Japanese, such that
focus projection is easier or more difficult in other types of sequences besides
accented object followed by accented verb?
Comparing across models also highlights other substantial gaps in our
knowledge. For example, one lesson to draw from the discrepancy between Ku-
bozono's and Pierrehumbert and Beckman's results described in section 17.4.2 is
that we need more work on the prosody-pragmatics interface, work that applies
additional methods drawn from other fields such as sentence processing.
Another, equally important lesson that we glean from this comparison across
frameworks is the reminder that phonological relationships such as the contrast
between an IP boundary and a mere AP boundary are grammatical abstractions
that native speakers acquire in the course of extensive exposure to a rich variety
of language-specific cues. Some of these cues come from parsing the Fo contour
in terms of tone targets and pitch range specifications. Others come from parsing
the spectral patterns in terms of the dynamic flow of consonant constrictions and
vowel resonance patterns. A frequently encountered congruence of cues from
multiple sources in the signal induces a stronger abstraction, which allows adult
native speakers to produce conflicting cues when necessary to convey the in-
tended information structure, as in the mannaka-ni okimasu sequence in figure
17.8, where the Fo contour suggests that the adverbial phrase and the verb are
grouped together into one AP, but the long pause suggests that an IP boundary
separates them. The native listener, conversely, can accommodate to such con-
flicting cues to recover both the intended focus pattern and the syntactic
grouping that the prosodic phrasing also cues. In a similar way, although rendaku
and the compound accent pattern of ho'n-dana typically occur on sequences of
morphemes that are grouped together into a single AP, the speaker can produce
the tonal cues to an AP boundary to convey narrow focus on the tana and can do
so without "undoing" the other prosodic cues to the morphological grouping.
Moreover, the speaker can produce these conflicting cues in full expectation that
the listener will recover both the intended information structure and the intended
morphological grouping. The disagreements described in sections 17.4.1 and 17.4.2
come about because the same kind of statistical dependencies drive the various
interactions between the preferred focus-marking mechanism and lexical accent
pattern, making for inherent ambiguities. What this lesson means for the
theoretical linguist, then, is that the next generation of models of intonational
phonology needs to do better justice to these complex interactions among dis-
crete contrasts (e.g., between accented and unaccented words) and continuous
variation (e.g., more versus less extreme degrees of pitch range expansion or
compression at the edges of focus constituents) and the ways that native speakers
and listeners take advantage of the statistical dependencies among different
patterns.
5〇6 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
NOTES FOR CHAPTER 17
1.	Following standard practice in the literature on Japanese phonology, we use an
apostrophe following the vowel to mark the location of the akusento-kaku in the roman
transliteration of any word that is lexically specified as containing a syllable that associates
to this [H*+L] tone sequence. Also, we use | to indicate an AP boundary and || to indicate
an IP boundary, when we need to highlight the distinction.
2.	Recall that the Fujisaki model uses a square wave aaccent command" to model both
accented and unaccented phrases; in the unaccented case, the fall at end of the square wave
is obscured either by a following accent command or by cessation of voicing for a following
silent pause.
z. Following the usual conventions in the literature on focus marking, we sometimes
adopt the shorthand notation of writing the focus constituent in small caps in lieu of
explicating the context.
4.	Kubozono follows Poser (1984) in calling this pattern "total downstep"; see pattern B
in Kubozono 1993 (p.104).
5.	The exceptions to this culminative distribution involve a handful of productive
prefixes such as jun 'quasi' and mo'to 'former' (the so-called Aoyagi prefixes (see Aoyagi
1969), which retain their accent in addition to the accent on the base noun, as in mo'to-
da ijin 'former minister'.
6.	In text-only examples, we indicate a prominence-lending BPM by underlining the
phrase-final syllable of the focus constituent, followed by the symbol f (to represent the Fo
rise that is realized on that syllable for [H%]) or A (to represent the rise-fall shape for
[HL%]). The symbol A is also inserted after the penultimate syllable to represent a PNLP rise.
7.	To clarify, [H%] can occur sentence finally, on sentence-final particles such as the ne
in figure 17.5b, but this usage does not have a prominence-lending function and is not an
example of PLR.
8.	Compare the asymmetry in English between marking narrow focus on nonfinal
constituents with an early nuclear accent versus the difficulty in marking narrow focus by
nuclear pitch accent placement in utterance-final position (although it is possible to set 〇仟
the final word with a preceding silence and by choosing L+H* as the nuclear accent so as to
produce a steep rise onto the peak that is associated with the accented syllable).
9.	Maekawa (1991)offers further evidence for this conclusion. He compares the pro-
sodic patterns observed on the w/i-question in (i) to that of the minimally different polarity
question in (ii).
(i)	Na'ni-ga mie'ru? 'What do you see?'
(ii)	Na'ni-ka mie'ru? 'Do you see something?
Utterances of (i) typically have an expanded pitch range on Na'ni, with the predicate mie'ru
being realized in a very reduced pitch range. By contrast, utterances of (ii) typically show a
lower peak on na'ni and a prominent AP boundary or even a reset on the predicate. In a
perception experiment using synthetic stimuli (where the /k/ vs. /g/ consonants are cru-
cially replaced with white noise), Maekawa shows that listeners' judgments are influenced
more by the degree of subordination of the predicate than by the height of the question
word itself That is, the percent of w/z-question judgments increases as the Fo height of the
predicate decreases, regardless of the height of the focused w/z-word. This finding em-
phasizes the crucial importance of the postfocal region in the interpretation of focal
prominence.
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 507
io.	That is, even though AM accounts such as Pierrehumbert and Beckman's (1988)
differ from Fujisaki's account (Fujisaki and Kawai 1988) in modeling the phrasal [H-] as an
independent target from the [H*] of the accent fall, most previous AM accounts effectively
model dephrasing as the formal equivalent of deletion of the whole accent command in the
Fujisaki model.
11.See, for example, the contrast between ^-questions and yes/〃〇-questions studied in
Maekawa 1991.
REFERENCES
Aoyagi, Seizo.1969. A demarcative pitch of some prefix-stem sequences in Japanese. Onsei
no Kenkyuu 14:241-247.
Arisaka, Hideyo.1941.Akusento no kata no honshitsu ni tsuite [On the nature of accent
pattern]. Gengo Kenkyuu 7:83-92.
Arvaniti, Amalia, D. Robert Ladd, and Ineke Mennen.1998. Stability of tonal alignment:
The case of Greek prenuclear accents. Journal of Phonetics 26:3-25.
Beckman, Mary E.1996a. When is a syllable not a syllable? In Phonological structure and
language processing: Cross-linguistic studies, ed. rFakashi Otake and Anne Cutler, 95-
123. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Beckman, Mary E.1996b. The parsing of prosody. Language and Cognitive Processes 11:17-67.
Beckman, Mary E., Julia Hirschberg, and Stefanie Shattuck-HufhageL 2005. The original
ToBI system and the evolution of the ToBI framework. In Prosodic typology: The
phonology of intonation and phrasing, ed. Sun-Ah Jun, 9-54. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Beckman, Mary E., and Janet Pierrehumbert.1992. Comments on chapters 13 and 14
[original title: Strategies and tactics for thinking about Fo variation]. In Papers in
laboratory phonology II: Segment, gesture, prosody, ed. Gerard J. Docherty and D.
Robert Ladd, 387-397. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bruce, Gosta.1977. Swedish word accents in sentence perspective. Lund: Gleerup.
Docherty, Gerard J.1992. The timing of voicing in British English obstruents. Dordrecht:
Foris.
Firth, J. R. (John Rupert).1957. Papers in linguistics, 1934-1951. London: Oxford University
Press.
Fougeron, Cecile, and Patricia A. Keating.1997. Articulatory strengthening at the edges of
prosodic domains. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 101:3728-374〇.
Fujisaki, Hiroya, and Keikichi Hirose.1984. Analysis of voice fundamental frequency
contours for declarative sentences of Japanese. Journal of the Acoustical Society of Japan
(English) 5(4):233-242.
Fujisaki, Hiroya, and Keikichi Hirose.1993. Analysis and perception of intonation ex-
pressing paralinguistic information in spoken Japanese. Lund Linguistics Working
Papers 41:254-257.
Fujisaki, Hiroya, and Hisashi Kawai.1988. Realization of linguistic information in the voice
fundamental frequency contour of the spoken Japanese. Annual Bulletin of the Re-
search Institute of Logopedics and Phoniatrics (RILP) 22:183-191.
Fujisaki, Hiroya, Sumio Ohno, Masafumi Osame, Mayumi Sakata, and Keikichi Hirose.
1994. Prosodic characteristics of a spoken dialogue for information query. In Pro-

5〇8 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
ceedings of the International Conference on Spoken Language Processing (ICSLP),1103-
1106. Tokyo: The Acoustical Society of Japan.
Fujisaki, Hiroya, and H. Sudo.1971.Synthesis by rule of prosodic features of connected
Japanese. In Proceedings of the 7th International Congress on Acoustics (ICA), 133-136.
Budapest: Akademiai Kiado.
Gandour, Jack, S. Potisuk, and S. Dechongkit.1994. Tonal coarticulation in Thai. Journal of
Phonetics 22:477-492.
Goldsmith, John A.1979. Autosegmental phonology. New York: Garland.
Grice, Martine, D. Robert Ladd, and Amalia Arvaniti. 200〇• On the place of phrase accents
in intonational phonology. Phonology 17:143-185.
Gussenhoven, Carlos.1983. Testing the reality of focus domains. Language and Speech
26:61-8〇.
Gussenhoven, Carlos. 2004. The phonology of tone and intonation. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Haraguchi, Shosuke.1977. The tone pattern of Japanese: An autosegmental theory oftonology.
Tokyo: Kaitakusha.
Hattori, Shiro.1961.Prosodeme, syllable structure, and laryngeal phonemes. Bulletin of the
Summer Institute of Linguistics: Studies in Descriptive and Applied Linguistics 1:1-27.
Tokyo: International Christian University.
Hay, Jennifer. 2003. Causes and consequences of word structure. London: Routledge.
Hirai,rFoshio, Norio Higuchi, and Yoshinori Sagisaka.1997. Comparison of Fo control
rules derived from multiple speech databases. In Computing prosody: Computational
models for processing spontaneous speech, ed. Yoshinori Sagisaka, Nick Campbell, and
Norio Higuchi, 211-223. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Hirschberg, Julia, and Gregory Ward.1992. The influence of pitch range, duration, am-
plitude and spectral features on the interpretation of the rise-fall-rise intonation
contour in English. Journal of Phonetics 20:241-251.
Hirschberg, Julia, and Gregory Ward.1995. The interpretation of the high-rise question
contour in English. Journal of Pragmatics 24:407-412.
Hualde, Jose Ignacio.1991.Basque phonology. London: Routledge.
Hualde, Jose Ignacio, Gorka Elordieta, Inaki Gaminde, and Rajka Smiljanic. 2002. From
pitch-accent to stress-accent in Basque. In Laboratory phonology 7, ed. Carlos Gus-
senhoven and Natasha Warner, 547-584. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Hyman, Larry. 2001.Tone systems. In Language typology and language universals: An
international handbook (vol. 2), ed. Martin Haspelmath, Elckehard Konig, Wulf
Oesterreicher, and Wolfgang Raible, 1367-138〇. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Hyman, Larry. 2005. Word-prosodic typology. Paper presented at the Between Stress and
Tone conference, Leiden, June.
Ito, Kiwako. 2002a. The interaction of focus and lexical pitch accent in speech production
and dialogue comprehension: Evidence from Japanese and Basque. Doctoral disser-
tation, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.
Ito, Kiwako. 2002b. Ambiguity in broad focus and narrow focus interpretation in
Japanese. In Proceedings of Speech Prosody, ed. Bernard Bel and Isabelle Marlien,
411-414. Aix-en-Provence, France: Laboratoire Parole et Langage, Universite de
Provence.
Ito, Kiwako, and Shari R. Speer. 2006. Using interactive tasks to elicit natural dialogue. In
Methods in empirical prosody research, ed. Stefan Sudhoffi Denisa Lenertova, Roland
Meyer, Sandra Pappert, Petra Augurzky, Ina Mleinek, Nicole Richter, and Johannes
Schliesser, 229-257. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM 5〇9
Ito, Kiwako, Shari R. Speer, and Mary Beckman. 2003. The influence of given-new status
and lexical accent on intonation in Japanese spontaneous speech. Poster presented at
the 16th annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing, 34. Boston,
March.
Jun, Sun-Ah.1998. The accentual phrase in the Korean prosodic hierarchy. Phonology
15:189-226.
Jun, Sun-Ah. 2005. Prosodic typology: The phonology of intonation and phrasing. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Katagiri, Yasuhiro.1999. Dialogue functions of Japanese sentence-final particles. In
Proceedings of LP'98 (Linguistics and Phonetics'98), ed. Osamu Fujimura, Brian D.
Joseph, and Bohumil Palek, 77-9〇. Charles University in Prague: The Karolinum
Press.
Kawakami, Shin.1957. Tookyoogo no takuritsu kyoochoo no onchoo [Tonal prominence
in Tokyo Japanese]. Reprinted in 1995 in Nihongo akusento ronshuu [A collection of
papers on Japanese accent], ed. Shin Kawakami, 76-91. Tokyo: Kyuko Shoin.
Kawakami, Shin.1963. Bunmatsu nado no jooshoochoo ni tsuite [On phrase-final rises].
Reprinted in 1995 in Nihongo akusento ronshuu [A collection of papers on Japanese
accent], ed. Shin Kawakami, 274-298. Tokyo: Kyuko Shoin.
Kindaichi, Haruhiko.1951.Kotoba no senritsu [The melody of language]. Kokugogaku
5(2)：37-59.
Kiriyama, Shinya, Keikichi Hirose, and Nobuaki Minematsu. 2002. Control of prosodic
focuses for reply speech generation in a spoken dialogue system for information
retrieval on academic documents. In Proceedings of Speech Prosody, ed. Bernard Bel
and Isabelle Marlien, 431-434. Aix-en-Provence, France: Laboratoire Parole et Lan-
gage, Universite de Provence.
Kokuritsu Kokugo Kenkyuujo [National Institute for Japanese Language (NIJL, formerly
NRLI)]. 2006. Nihongo hanashi kotoba koopasu no koochikuhoo [Construction of the
Corpus of Spontaneous Japanese]. NIJL report 124. Tokyo, http://www.kokken.go.jp/
katsudo/seika/corpus/public/index.html.
Kori, Shiro.1987. The tonal behavior of Osaka Japanese: An interim report. Ohio State
Working Papers in Linguistics (OSUWPL): Papers from the Linguistics Laboratory 36:31-61.
Kori, Shiro. 1989a. Fookasu jitsugen ni okeru onsei no tsuyosa, jizokujikan, Fo no eikyoo
[Acoustic manifestation of focus in Tokyo Japanese: The role of intensity, duration
and Fo]. Onsei Gengo 3:29-38.
Kori, Shiro. 1989b. Kyooshoo to intoneeshon [Emphasis and intonation]. In Nihongo no
onsei/on in (joo) [Japanese phonetics/phonology (1)],vol. 2 of Koza Nihongo to Ni-
hongo Kyooiku, ed. Miyoko Sugito, 316-342. Tokyo: Meリ1 Shoin.
Kori, Shiro.1997. Nihongo no intoneeshon: kata to kinoo [Japanese intonation: Form and
function]. In Akusento, intoneeshon rizumu topoozu [Accent, intonation, rhythm, and
pause], vol. 2 of Nihongo Onsei, ed. Tetsuya Kunihiro, 169-202. Tokyo: Sanseido.
Kubozono, Haruo.1989. Syntactic and rhythmic effects on downstep in Japanese. Pho-
nology 6:39-67.
Kubozono, Haruo.1993. The organization of Japanese prosody. Tokyo: Kuroshio.
Kubozono, Haruo. 2007. Focus and intonation in Japanese: Does focus trigger pitch reset?
In Working papers of the SFB632: Interdisciplinary studies on information structure
(ISIS) 9, ed. Shinichiro Ishihara, 1-27. Potsdam, Germany: University of Potsdam.
Kuno, Susumu.1973. The structure of the Japanese language. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Ladd, D. Robert.1996. Intonational phonology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
510 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Langendoen, D. Terence.1968. The London school of linguistics: A study of the linguistic
theories of B. Malinowski and ]. R. Firth. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Laniran, Yetunde, and G. N. Clements. 2003. Downstep and high tone raising: Interacting
factors in Yoruba tone production. Journal of Phonetics 31(2):203-25〇.
Liberman, Mark, and Alan Prince.1977. On stress and linguistic rhythm. Linguistic Inquiry
8(2):249-336.
Maeda, Kazuaki, and Jennifer J. Venditti.1998. Phonetic investigation of boundary pitch
movements in Japanese. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Spoken
Language Processing (ICSLP), 631-634. Rundle Mall, Australia: Casual Productions.
Maekawa, Kikuo.1991.Perception of intonational characteristics of wh and non-wh
questions in Tokyo Japanese. In Proceedings of the International Congress of Phonetic
Sciences (ICPhS), 4/5:202-205. Aix-en-Provence, France: Universite de Provence.
Maekawa, Kikuo.1994. Is there "dephrasing" of the accentual phrase in Japanese? Ohio
State University Working Papers in Linguistics 44:146-165.
Maekawa, Kikuo.1997. Effects of focus on duration and vowel formant frequency in
Japanese. In Computing prosody: Computational models for processing spontaneous
speech, ed. Yoshinori Sagisaka, Nick Campbell, and Norio Higuchi, 129-153. New York:
Springer Verlag.
Maekawa, Kikuo. 2003. Corpus of Spontaneous Japanese: Its design and evaluation. In
Proceedings of the ISCA and IEEE Workshop on Spontaneous Speech Processing and
Recognition (SSPR2003), 7-12. Tokyo.
Maekawa, Kikuo, and Yosuke Igarashi. 2006. 2-moora yuukaku joshi no inritsujoo no
dokuritsusei: Nihongo hanashi kotoba koopasu no bunseki [Prosodic independence
of bimoraic accented particles: Analysis of the Corpus of Spontaneous Japanese].
Journal of the Phonetic Society of Japan 10(2):33-42.
Maekawa, Kikuo, and Hideaki Kikuchi. 2005. Corpus-based analysis of vowel devoicing in
spontaneous Japanese: An interim report. In Voicing in Japanese, ed. Jeroen van de
Weijer, Kensuke Nanjo, and Tetsuo Nishihara, 205-228. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Maekawa, Kikuo, Hideaki Kikuchi, Yosuke Igarashi, and Jennifer J. Venditti. 2002. X-
JToBI: An extended J_ToBI for spontaneous speech. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Spoken Language Processing (ICSLP), 1545-1548. Boulder, Colo.: Center
for Spoken Language Research.
Maruyama, Takehiko, and Miki Taniguchi. 2002. Bun no shooten koozoo to kyokushoteki
takuritsu [Focus structure of sentences and local prominence]. Kansai Linguistics
Society 22:18-28.	'
McCawley, James D.1968. The phonological component of a grammar of Japanese. The
Hague: Mouton.
McCawley, James D.197〇. Some tonal systems that come close to being pitch accent
systems but don't quite make it. Papers from the 6th Regional Meeting of the Chicago
Linguistic Society (CLS) 6:526-532.
McLemore, Cynthia Ann.1991.The pragmatic interpretation of English intonation: Sor-
ority speech. Doctoral dissertation, University of Texas, Austin.
Mesbur, James. 2005. Evidence for prominence-lending rise in focus phrases in Japanese.
Ms., University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
Miyaji, Yutaka.1963. IV Intoneeshon [Intonation]. Kokuritsu Kokugo Kenkyuujo [National
Institute for Japanese Language (NIJL, formerly NRLI)] Report 23,178-208.rFokyo:
Kokuritsu Kokugo Kenkuujo.
PROMINENCE MARKING IN THE JAPANESE INTONATION SYSTEM Z11
Muranaka, Toshiko, and Noriyo Hara.1994. Features of prominent particles in Japanese
discourse. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Spoken Language Processing
(ICSLP), 395-398. Tokyo: The Acoustical Society of Japan.
Nagahara, Hiroyuki.1994. Phonological phrasing in Japanese. Doctoral dissertation,
University of California, Los Angeles.
Nagahara, Hiroyuki, and Shoichi Iwasaki.1994. Tail pitch movement and the intermediate
phrase in Japanese. Paper presented at the Linguistic Society of America (LSA) annual
meeting, Washington, D.C., January.
Nagao, Kyoko and Shigeaki Amano. 200〇• A role of fundamental frequencies in the per-
ception of emphasized words: Conference presentation abstract. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 108(5):2465.
Nakanishi, Kimiko. 20〇/. Prosody and scope interpretations of the topic marker wa in
Japanese. In Topic and focus: Cross-linguistic perspectives on intonation and meaning,
ed. Chungmin Lee, Matthew Gordon, and Daniel Luring, 177-194. Dordrecht:
Springer Verlag.
Ohishi, Shotaro.1959. Purominensu ni tsuite: Tookyoogo no kansatsu ni motozuku
oboegaki [Prominence: Observation of the Tokyo Dialect]. Kotoba no kenkyuu [Papers
of the National Institute for Japanese Language], 87-102. Tokyo: Kokuritsu Kokugo
Kenkuujo.
Oshima, David Y. 20〇/. Boundary tones or prominent particles? Variation in Japanese
focus-marking contours. Berkeley Linguistics Society (BLS) 31:453-464.
Peng, Shu-hui.1997. Production and perception of Taiwanese tones in different tonal and
prosodic contexts. Journal of Phonetics 25:371-40〇.
Pierrehumbert, Janet B.198〇. The phonology and phonetics of English intonation. Doc-
toral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Pierrehumbert, Janet B., and Mary E. Beckman.1988. Japanese tone structure. Cambridge,
Mass: MIT Press.
Pierrehumbert, Janet, and David Talkin.1992. Lenition of /h/ and glottal stop. In Papers in
laboratory phonology II: Segment, gesture, prosody, ed. Gerard J. Docherty and D.
Robert Ladd, 90-116. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Poser, William J.1984. The phonetics and phonology of tone and intonation in Japanese.
Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Prince, Ellen F.1981.Toward a taxonomy of given/new information. In Radical pragmatics,
ed. Peter Cole, 223-255. San Diego, Calif: Academic Press.
Raymond, William D., Robin Dautricourt, and Elizabeth Hume. 2006. Word-internal /t, d/
deletion in spontaneous speech: Modeling the effects of extra-linguistic, lexical, and
phonological factors. Language Variation and Change 18:55-97.
Roberts, Craige.1996. Information structure in discourse: Towards an integrated formal
theory of pragmatics. OSU Working Papers in Linguistics 49:91-136.
Sagisaka, Yoshinori, and Hirokazu Sato.1983. Secondary accent analysis in Japanese stem-
affix concatenations. Acoustical Society of Japan Transactions of the Committee on
Speech Research 883-05:31-37.
Selkirk, Elisabeth 〇., and Koichi Tateishi.1991.Syntax and downstep in Japanese. In
Interdisciplinary approaches to language: Essays in honor of S.-Y. Kuroda, ed. Carol
Georgopoulos and Roberta Ishihara, 519-543. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Sugahara, Mariko. 2002. Conditions on post-FOCUS dephrasing in Tokyo Japanese. In
Proceedings of Speech Prosody, ed. Bernard Bel and Isabelle Marlien, 655-658. Aix-en-
Provence, France: Laboratoire Parole et Langage, Universite de Provence.
512 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Takeda, Shoichi, and Akira Ichikawa.199〇• Analysis of prosodic features of prominence
in spoken Japanese sentences. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Spoken Language Processing (ICSLP), 493-496. Kobe, Japan: The Acoustical Society of
Japan.
Taniguchi, Miki, and Takehiko Maruyama. 2001.Shooten koozoo to zyosi no takuritu
[Focus structure and prominence of particles]. Kansai Linguistics Society 21:56-66.
Trubetskoi, Nikolai Sergeevich.1939. Grundzuge der phonologie. (Travaux du Cercle lin-
guistique de Prague No. 7.) Prague: Cercle linguistique de Prague. (Trans.1969, by
Christiane A. M. Baitaxe as Principles of Phonology. Berkeley: University of California
Press.)
Vallduvi, Enric.1992. The informational component. New York: Garland.
Venditti, Jennifer J.1997. Japanese ToBI labelling Guidelines. Ohio State University
Working Papers in Linguistics 50:127-162. (First distributed in 1995.)
Venditti, Jennifer J. 200〇. Discourse structure and attentional salience effects on Japanese
intonation. Doctoral dissertation, Ohio State University, Columbus.
Venditti, Jennifer J. 2005. The J_ToBI model of Japanese intonation. In Prosodic typology:
The phonology of intonation and phrasing, ed. Sun-Ah Jun, 172-20〇. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Venditti, Jennifer J., Kazuaki Maeda, and Jan P. H. van Santen.1998. Modeling Japanese
boundary pitch movements for speech synthesis. In Proceedings of the 3rd ESCA
Workshop on Speech Synthesis, ed. Mike Edgington, 317-322. Jenolan Caves, Australia.
New York: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
Venditti, Jennifer J., and Marc Swerts.1996. Intonational cues to discourse structure in
Japanese. Proceedings of the International Conference on Spoken Language Processing
(ICSLP) 2:725-728.
Welby, Pauline. 2003. Effects of pitch accent position, type, and status on focus projection.
Language and Speech 46:53-82.
CHAPTER 1 8
THE STRUCTURE
OF DP
AKIRA WATANABE
18.1	Introduction
The nature of functional categories is a controversial topic in the study of Japanese
syntax. DP is no exception. It is well known that Japanese does not possess articles,
definite or indefinite. It is premature, however, to jump from this simple obser-
vation to the conclusion that Japanese lacks DP altogether. Various properties of
nominal expressions must be investigated before drawing a conclusion.
The opinion is divided concerning the issue of whether Japanese has DP. Ta-
teishi (1989) posits D to accommodate the case particle. In Saito and Murasugfs
(1990) analysis of ellipsis, the agreeing nature of D plays an important role. Fukui
(1986), in contrast, takes the position that Japanese lacks DP. These authors, how-
ever, worked in the framework that posited only DP above NP. Since then, research
on Romance, Germanic, and Semitic languages has led to postulation of further
functional projections between DP and NP; see Bernstein 2001 and Longobardi 2001.
In studies on Japanese, too, Kawashima (1994,1998) and Kitahara (1993) make use of
a NumP that comes between NP and DP to place the numeral-classifier combination
at the position of its head. Thus, the issue is not limited to the presence or absence of
DP. The internal structure of DP as a whole must be taken up.
514 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
18.2 Core Data
This chapter concentrates on two significant properties of nominal expressions in
Japanese that set it apart from languages such as English. These properties turn out
to provide interesting insights into the internal structure of DP.
First, in Japanese a numeral can occupy various positions in relation to the
head noun and the case particle, as illustrated in (i).
(1)	a. John-wa hon san-satsu-o katta.
John-Top book 3-cl-acc bought
b.	John-wa san-satsu-no hon-o katta.
John-Top 3-cl-gen book-ACC bought
c.	John-wa hon-o san-satsu katta.
John-Top book-ACC 3-CL bought
"John bought three books?
In English, however, the numeral appears in a fixed prenominal position. This
contrast immediately raises the question about the source of the parametric dif-
ference between Japanese and languages such as English. Why does Japanese allow
such diverse possibilities for numeral placement, whereas English does not?
One might wonder whether the numeral+classifier combination forms a
constituent with the head noun in (ic), given that it appears after the case particle.
No such question arises for (la), where it is sandwiched between the head noun and
the case particle, nor for (ib), where it is connected to the head noun (or NP) by a
genitive-like linker no, as nonclausal prenominal elements generally are (Kitagawa
and Ross 1982, Murasugi 1991).The constituency of (ic) has been controversial
(see Fukui and Sakai 2003; Kamio 1983; Koizumi 1995, 2000; and Takano 2002),
but Watanabe (2006a) presents a straightforward argument, observing that the
same sequence acts as a constituent in the pseudopartitive construction, illustrated
in (2).
(2)	Roger-wa donburi-ni yon-hai-no gohan-o tabeta.
Roger-Top big.bowl-DAT 4-cl-gen rice-ACC ate
'Roger ate four big bowls of rice?
Notice that exactly the same type of structure (noun+case+numeral+classifier) is
used as the prenominal measure expression in (2). The dative phrase donburi-ni in
(2)	forms a constituent with the following numeral+classifier combination, which
in turn is connected to the head noun with the linker no. It is impossible to break
up the sequence of the dative phrase and the numeral+classifier combination, as
shown by the complete ill-formedness of (3).
(3)	*Roger-wa yon-hai-no gohan-o donburi-ni tabeta.
The mechanism that generates the measure expression of the form noun+
case+numeral+classifier as a constituent guarantees that the numeral+classifier
THE STRUCTURE OF DP
515
sequence in (ic) can also form a constituent with the preceding case-
marked NP.
Interestingly, this noun+case+numeral+classifier sequence can occupy the
same range of positions as the numeral, as shown in (4).1
(4) a. Roger-wa gohan donburi(??-ni) yon-hai-o tabeta.
Roger-Top rice big.bowl-DAT 4-cl-acc ate
b.	Roger-wa donburi(-ni) yon-hai-no gohan-o tabeta.
Roger-Top big.bowl-DAT 4-cl-gen rice-ACC ate
c.	Roger-wa gohan-o donburi(-ni) yon-hai tabeta.
Roger-Top rice-ACC big.bowl-DAT 4-CL ate
"Roger ate four big bowls of rice?
The diversity of possible positions is thus not limited to the numeral. Attributing
the diversity of placement to the properties of the numeral alone, therefore, is a
wrong direction to pursue, as noted by Kamio (1977).
An additional characteristic of the Japanese numeral system is that the
numeral must be accompanied by a classifier. This appears to be an areal fea-
ture of East and Southeast Asia (Aikhenvald 2000, Simpson 2005). The treat-
ment of numeral classifiers has come into the foreground of theoretical discussion
since Chierchia's (1998a, 1998b) influential work, which connects the use of
numeral classifiers with the absence of articles. The presence of a numeral classi-
fier itself, however, is not related to the diversity of numeral placement possibil-
ities (at least directly), given that languages such as Chinese do not exhibit
such diversity despite the use of classifiers (see Li 1999 for some discussion of
Chinese).
The second major characteristic of Japanese nominals is the indetermi-
nate system. It has been well known since Kuroda 1965 that Japanese forms vari-
ous quantificational expressions by adding a particle to a wh-phrase, as shown
(5)	Interrogative	Existential	Ne^-concord	Universal
Person	dare	dare-ka	dare-mo	dare-mo
Thing	nani	nani-ka	nani-mo	(nani-mo-kamo)
Place	doko	doko-ka	doko-mo	doko-mo
Time	itsu	itsu-ka	—	itsu-mo
The common w/i-part is called the indeterminate. English has sporadic cases like
somewhere, but the comparable system is absent. The question is what kind of
principles enable Japanese to have an indeterminate system.
More data is introduced as the discussion unfolds. In addition to addressing
analytical issues, which are presented next, this chapter also aims at putting to-
gether basic data on the syntax of quantifiers in Japanese in a more or less com-
prehensive way, because the past literature only gives a fragmentary picture. For
the purposes of choosing among alternative accounts of the internal structure of
nominal expressions, however, the minimal set given above suffices.
516 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
18.3	Analytical Issues
As to the treatment of numerals, the dominant view since Inoue 1978 has been that
the various structural options fbr numerals in (1)should not be attributed to a
unified underlying structure. The reason is that there are various differences, es-
pecially semantic, among the three kinds of expressions in (1). The nonuniform
approach, however, has left it completely open why English and Japanese differ in
the placement of numerals. No principled account of this parametric difference has
been provided in the literature. This is a serious failure from the perspective of the
principles-and-parameters approach.
Recently, Watanabe (2006a) put forth a concrete proposal that accounts for
the diversity of numeral placement possibilities in Japanese, relying crucially on the
presence of various functional projections between NP and DP to provide enough
structural resources for a uniform treatment of (la-c) as well as(4a-c). In fact,
Watanabe's analysis is the only comprehensive one existing in the literature that
covers the simple-looking data in (1)and (4) in a principled fashion. This proposal
is reviewed in section 18.3.1.
Given that Inoue's (1978) major argument is invoked time and again (Kawa-
shima 1998:61.2 and 28, and Nakanishi 2003, for example) to set aside the structure
in (ib), it is important to revisit Inoue's arguments and observations to see what
they really amount to. In fact, Haig's (1980) response nullifies their force, but
subsequent researchers have either forgotten or overlooked this part of Haig's
paper, leaving a vast empirical domain untouched as a result. Sections 18.3.2-18.3.4
are devoted to rectifying this situation.
The discussion of Inoue 1978 and Haig 1980 in section 18.3.2 leads us to the
problem of partitive constructions, which forms the topic of section 18.3.3. Dis-
tribution of quantifiers other than the numeral is taken up in section 18.3.4 in
relation to the problem of partitive constructions.
As stated at the beginning, the presence or absence of DP in Japanese has been
a major issue. Section 18.3.5 turns to the question of how the treatment of numerals
bears on the issue concerning D. Fukui and Takano's (2000) proposal, which does
not posit DP, is taken up there. It is also shown that the indeterminate system
provides an important insight into the nature of D in Japanese.
18.3.1	Articulated DP Structure and Placement of Numerals
18.3.1.1	Massive remnant movement
Watanabe (2006a) proposes that massive remnant movement within DP can
relate the three structural options for the numeral in a straightforward way,
assuming that Japanese nominals have the following layers of functional projec-
tions:
THE STRUCTURE OF DP Z1/
⑹[dp [qp [caseP [#p NP #] Case] Q] D]
The # head is the locus of classifiers under this proposal. First, the derivation
constructs the structure in (/a). After merger of the Case head with (7a), NP is
raised to Spec,CaseP, as in (7b). This movement is obligatory. If nothing other than
merger of higher functional heads takes place, (1a) is derived.
(7)a.
#P
#
san /
‘3’ NP
△
hon satsu
'book'
CaseP
hon
#P
Case
san
ZNP satsu
d.
今 CaseP
△
‘CaseP
hon-o /
#P
〇
D
Q
san-satsu
If #P is raised to Spec,QP, which dominates CaseP, (7c) is formed, corresponding
to (ib), with the linker no inserted through a morphological readjustment. Finally,
518 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
CaseP can be raised to Spec,DP as a next step, as in (yd), yielding (ic). These two
movement steps are optional. Some more aspects of these movement operations
are taken up in section 18.4.2.
One additional possibility not discussed in Watanabe 2006a is to move CaseP
to Spec,DP without raising #P to Spec,QP, as in (8).
This derivation is possible, because raising of #P to Spec,QP is optional. The
structure in (8) gives rise to the string corresponding to (la). Example (la) is thus
structurally ambiguous under Watanabe's proposal.
Thus, the diversity of numeral placement possibilities in Japanese is reduced
to the existence of optional phrasal movement within DP under the uniform
approach. Given the standard view that the presence or absence of move-
ment is a major source of parameterization, the fixed positioning of numerals in
languages such as English follows from the absence of movement of the kind
exemplified in (7).
The above analysis can accommodate the pseudopartitive construction in (4)
as well. The relevant part of the derivation starts with the structure in (9a), which
differs from (7a) in that the # head is phonologically null and that DP instead of a
numeral occupies Spec,#P. The details of CaseP and #P inside this DP are given in
⑼a.
,CaseP Q
yon-hai
THE STRUCTURE OF DP
519
b.	[caseP [NP donburf] t#p [case 瓦]]
big.bowl DAT
c.	[#p yon tNP [# hai]]
4	CL
Notice that DP in Spec,#P in (9a) is structurally identical to (/d). The structure in
(9a) undergoes the same set of derivational steps as (7) to give the three structures
in (4). In other words, optional remnant movement gives rise to the same struc-
tural diversity for the pseudopartitive construction, too.
Adapting Tang's (1990) proposal for Chinese to Japanese, Kawashima (1994,
1998) and Kitahara (1993) place the numeral+classifier combination under Num as
a complex head as in (10).
NP
△
hon-o
'book-ACC'
Num
san-satsu
'3-CL'
This type of approach cannot be extended to accommodate the structural di-
versity of the pseudopartitive construction, because phrasal expressions such as
donburi-ni yon-hai 'big.bowl-DAT 4 cl' cannot occupy a head position.2 See also
Simpson 2005 for additional arguments against putting the numeral+classifier
combination under a single head from a cross-linguistic perspective. The paral-
lelism between the pseudopartitive and the simple numeral supports the place-
ment of the numeral in the specifier position. Furthermore, the structure in (10)
is completely silent on the treatment of the cases where the numeral appears in a
prenominal position (1b).3
Now, recall that there are semantic differences among the three structures in
(1), which have been taken to constitute a prima facie argument against the uniform
account of the structural diversity. Note, however, that the derived structures for
the three kinds of nominal expressions in (1)are different from each other. The
structural difference at the end of the derivation should be sufficient to guarantee
semantic differences, given that derived structures are all that matters in semantic
interpretation. Let us turn to one such semantic difference next.
18.3.1.2	Justification for positing D: Specificity
Kamio (1977) briefly mentions the observation that the structure exemplified by
(ic) only allows the nonspecific reading. This intuition is most clearly brought out
in the intensionality context, as shown in Watanabe 2006a. Consider (11).
520 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(11)	a. John-wa piano ni-dai-o kai-tagatta.
John-Top piano 2-cl-acc buy-wanted
b.	John-wa ni-dai-no piano-o kai-tagatta.
c.	John-wa piano-o ni-dai kai-tagatta.
"John wanted to buy two pianos?
Examples (na,b) are ambiguous between the reading where John wanted to buy
two particular pianos and the nonspecific reading where John wanted two pianos
but did not care which ones. Unlike (na,b), however, (nc) lacks the reading where
John wanted to buy two particular pianos.
It is worth mentioning at this point that the pseudopartitive construction
exhibits an extreme case of nonspecificity. For (4) to be true, Roger does not need
four bowls. A single bowl suffices. It is thus no coincidence that the measure
expression in the pseudopartitive construction, which corresponds to the DP in
Spec, #P in (9a), takes the form it does, given that this is exactly the form spe-
cifically tailored for the nonspecific interpretation.
Insofar as (non-)specificity is a property of D, it is reasonable to expect D to
play a role in the formation of (11c). The uniform approach to the placement of
numerals captures this insight by saying that movement of CaseP to Spec,DP takes
place in the derivation of (11c). Under the current conception of movement, this
movement is regarded as triggered by the properties of D, which ensure the
nonspecific reading of this DP, a point that is taken up again in section 18.4.2.
There is another indication that the form exemplified by (ic) and (11c) forces
the nonspecific reading. Harada (1976) notes that the NP-case-numeral-classifier
order is incompatible with individual-level predicates, as illustrated in (12).
(12)	a. Gakusei san-nin-ga eigo-ga umai.
students 3-cl-nom English-NOM good
"Three students are good at English?
b.	San-nin-no gakusei-ga eigo-ga umai.
c.	*?Gakusei-ga san-nin eigo-ga umai.
The deviance of (12c) can be explained by the restriction that prohibits individual-
level predicates from taking a nonspecific subject (Diesing 1992), as suggested by
Ishii (1991).4
To summarize, the fact that there is a semantic difference correlated with
the different positioning of numerals does not necessarily present an obstacle to the
uniform approach to the placement of numerals, which can accommodate the
specificity difference in a principled fashion.
18.3.2	Inoue's (1978) Arguments and Observations Revisited
Next, let us take up Inoue's (1978) original arguments against the uniform treat-
ment of the numeral placement and Haig's (1980) response. As noted before,
THE STRUCTURE OF DP Z21
Inoue's arguments have been the obstacle to the uniform treatment of the numeral
placement in the past, so they are worth examining in some detail.
Inoue's major argument consists in the observation that there is a semantic
contrast between the following two examples, as indicated by the English translation:
(13)	a. [Mae-o hashitteita] ni-dai-no kuruma-ga tsukamatta.
front-ACC were.running 2-cl-gen car-NOM	got.caught
"The two cars that were driving (ahead of us) got caught.'
b. [Mae-o	hashitteita]	kuruma-ga ni-dai tsukamatta.
front-ACC were.running car-NOM	2-cl	got.caught
'Two of the cars that were driving (ahead of us) got caught.'
Inoue is careful enough to point out that this semantic difference typically arises
when the presence of a relative clause turns the nominal into a definite expression.
A related observation made by Inoue is that there are quantifiers that cannot
appear prenominally but are acceptable after the case particle, as illustrated in (14).
(14)	a. *Hanbun-no iawaseta	gakusei-ga kougi-ni
half-GEN happened.to.be.there student-NOM protest-LOC
sankashita.
participated
b. Iawaseta	gakusei-ga hanbun kougi-ni	sankashita.
happened.to.be.there student-NOM half	protest-LOC participated
'Half of the students who happened to be there participated in the protest.'
The gist of Inoue's arguments is that these differences cannot be captured under
the uniform approach.
Haig (1980) points out that both of Inoue's arguments should be subsumed
under the general problem of partitives. Significantly, Inoue's observation that the
semantic contrast illustrated in (13) is linked with definiteness finds an analogue in
the English partitive construction, exemplified by the translation in (13b), which is
most felicitous when the DP following of is definite, as shown in (15).
(15)	a. some of the women
b. *some of women
See Abbott 1996, Barker 1998, Hoeksema 1996, de Hoop 1997, Matthewson 2001,
and the references cited there for the discussion of English partitives and com-
plications related to this "partitive constraint."
There is another indication that the placement of the quantifier after the case
particle induces the partitive interpretation. Sauerland and Yatsushiro (2004)
observe that, whereas (16a) is not compatible with the scenario in which there is
only one book, (16b) can be true under that scenario.
(16)	a. John-wa hotondo-no hon-o yomi-oeta.
John-Top most-GEN book-ACC read-finished
John finished reading most of the books?

522 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
b. John-wa hon-o hotondo yomi-oeta.
John-Top book-ACC most read-finished
"John read most parts of the book(s).'
The interpretation of (16b) in question is known as mass partitive in the literature
(Abbott 1996, Hoeksema 1996, Wilkinson 1996; see also Chierchia 1998a and Selkirk
1977). Some English examples from Hoeksema 1996 are given in (17).
(17)	a. Most of the city is 〇压limits to foreigners.
b.	Some of him had stayed behind in his native Rumania.
c.	Half of every donation goes to administrative costs.
Mass partitives express part-of relations between an individual and its parts, or
between a quantity of some substance and its subquantities. Abbott (1996) argues
that mass partitives are partitives after all. The major reason is that mass partitives,
just like ordinary partitives (15b), disallow embedding of bare plurals and mass
nouns, as illustrated in (18).
(18)	a. *most of brooms
b. *some of milk
To conclude, when the partitive interpretation is singled out as a phenome-
non to be treated separately, Inoue's arguments lose their force. She is right in
singling out the partitive interpretation from the other readings of numeral
quantifiers. But she goes too far when she denies the possibility of uniform
treatment of numeral placement even for cases where the partitive interpretation is
not found. Note that the partitive interpretation is absent in cases such as (11c),
discussed in the previous subsection. If a semantic difference justifies positing a
different structure, cases such as (13b) should be treated differently from cases such
as (11c) by Inoue's own logic. Inoue (1978) simply draws a wrong line, as pointed
out by Haig (1980).
One should not be misled by superficial similarity in form. In-depth analysis
must be carried out to reach beyond simple observation. We have to turn next to
the question of how the partitive interpretation arises in cases such as (13b).
18.3.3	Partitive Constructions
The question facing us now is whether the partitive interpretation should be
attributed to the same structure as that of (ic) or is due to some other structure.
Haig (1980) seems to be inclined to think that there is no need to posit a different
structure. He points to the unambiguously partitive structure of the kind illus-
trated in (19) and states that the partitive interpretation requires the quantifier to
follow the head noun.
(19)	a. Mae-o	hashitteita	kuruma-no-#(uchi-no) ni-dai-ga
front-ACC	were.running car-GEN-out-of	two-CL-NOM
THE STRUCTURE OF DP
523
tsukamatta.3
got.caught
"Two of the cars which were driving ahead of us got caught?
b.	lawaseta	gakusei-no hanbun-ga kougi-ni
happened.to.be.there student-GEN half-NOM protest-LOC
sankashita.
participated
'Half of the students who happened to be there participated in the protest.'
c.	John-wa sono hon-no	hotondo-o yomi-oeta.
John-Top that book-GEN most-ACC read-finished
'John read most parts of that book.'
Haig's view is that this generalization is sufficient to guarantee that the partitive
interpretation is available when the quantifier follows the case particle.
Though the question is somewhat moot, there are several reasons to believe
that a distinct structure needs to be posited for (13b), (14b), and (16b). First, the
partitive interpretation is strongly linked to the definiteness of the nominals, as
observed by Inoue. Partitive quantification works on this definite expression. If the
DP structure in (6) is on the right track, it is reasonable to generate the quantifier
in (13b), (14b), and (16b) outside the definite DP. The external generation of the
quantifier allows us to capture the similarity between the English partitive con-
struction and its Japanese counterpart, given that the English construction also
generates the quantifier above the ordinary DP.
Second, the external generation of the quantifier makes it possible to account
for Inoue's observation that the partitive interpretation also arises when there is an
additional quantifier, as in (20).
(20)	[Narande hashitteita	suu-dai-no	torakku-ga] ni-san-dai
lined.up were.running several-CL-GEN truck-NOM 2-3-CL
gaadoreeru-ni butsukatta.
guardrail-LOC struck
'Two or three of the several trucks that were driving abreast struck
the guardrail.'
Given that the bracketed part in (20) is a full-fledged DP, it is no surprise that it
contains a quantifier.6 The impossibility of having multiple prenominal quantifi-
ers, as in (21), is also an automatic consequence of the fact that the partitive
construction does not involve prenominal quantifiers.
(21)	*Ni-san-dai-no narande	hashitteita	suu-dai-no	torakku-ga
2-3-CL-GEN	lined.up	were.running several-CL-GEN truck-NOM
gaadoreeru-ni butsukatta.
guardrail-LOC struck
It is also impossible to place the two quantifiers after the case particle as in
(22)	.
524 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(22)	*[Narande hashitteita torakku-ga suu-dai] ni-san-dai
lined.up were.running truck-NOM several-CL 2-3-CL
gaadoreeru-ni butsukatta.
guardrail-loc struck
The ill-fbrmedness of (22) follows from the nonspecific reading forced on the
bracketed DP.
Third, the structure exemplified in (19) is unambiguously partitive in inter-
pretation. If cases such as (13b) and (ic) are taken to share the same structure that is
compatible with the partitive and the nonpartitive interpretations, it is mysterious
why the structure for (19) is used exclusively for the partitive reading. Haigs
generalization that the partitive interpretation requires the quantifier to follow the
head noun is too weak to differentiate between (ic)/(i3b) and (19).
I would also like to point out that the partitive reading is not given for free.
In other words, the placement of the quantifier after the case particle does
not guarantee the possibility of the partitive interpretation, which is sensitive
to idiosyncratic properties of individual quantifiers. The quantifier takusan
'many', for example, does not allow the partitive interpretation. Therefore, it
cannot appear in the structures that force the partitive interpretation, as shown
in (23).
(23)	a. *John-wa toshoshitsu-ni	aru go-roku-jus-satsu-no hon-o
John-Top library.room-loc are 5-6-io-cl-gen	book-ACC
takusan yonda.
many read
'John read many of the 50 to 60 books in the library.'
b. *John-wa	toshoshitsu-ni	aru go-roku-jus-satsu-no hon-no
John-Top library.room-LOC are 5-6-io-cl-gen	book-GEN
takusan-o yonda.
many-ACC read
When the partitive interpretation is not forced, it can be placed after the case
particle, as in (24).
(24)	John-wa hon-o takusan yonda.
John-Top book-ACC many read
'John read many books.'
Hotondo contrasts with takusan in this respect, as indicated by the acceptability of
(25a,b).
(25)	a. John-wa toshoshitsu-ni	aru go-roku-jus-satsu-no hon-o
John-Top library.room-LOC are 5-6-io-cl-gen	book-ACC
hotondo yonda.
most read
"John read most of the 50 to 60 books in the library room.'
THE STRUCTURE OF DP
525
b. John-wa	toshoshitsu-ni	aru go-roku-jus-satsu-no hon-no
John-Top library.room-LOC are 5-6-io-cl-gen	book-GEN
hotondo-o yonda.
most-Acc read
We can pin down the special property of takusan by saying that it is a
nonpresuppositional quantifier in the sense of Diesing 1992. The partitive read-
ing presupposes that the restrictor of quantification is a nonempty set of indi-
viduals and therefore is incompatible with the nonpresuppositional nature of ta-
kusan.
Now, if nonspecificity (discussed in section 18.3.1.2) is an instance of non-
presuppositional quantification as claimed by Diesing, we need to posit a distinct
structure for cases where the quantifier placed after the case particle produces the
partitive interpretation, given that this reading is excluded by the structure that
imposes the nonspecific reading. Thus, we have another reason for recognizing the
structure that is specialized for the partitive reading.
To sum up, recognizing NP-case-numeral-classifier as a form of the partitive
construction in Japanese helps explain a number of peculiarities exhibited by this
form comparable to those of the English partitive construction.
18.3.4	Placement of Quantifiers Other Than Numerals
and the Structure of Partitives
Given that the discussion extended to quantifiers other than numerals in the
previous subsection, let us now consider their DP-internal distribution. It turns
out that the placement of nonnumeral quantifiers has significant consequences for
the structural analysis of partitive constructions.
Ishii (1991)observes that unlike numerals, takusan "many, much' cannot ap-
pear between the head noun and the case particle, as shown in (26).
(26)	a. *John-wa hon takusan-0 katta.
John-Top book many-ACC bought
b.	John-wa takusan-no hon-o katta.
John-Top many-GEN book-ACC bought
c.	John-wa hon-o takusan katta.
John-Top book-ACC many bought
"John bought many books.'
To account for this difference between numerals and takusan, Watanabe (2006a)
proposes to place it in Spec,QP, as in (27), which corresponds to (26b).
526 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Example (26c) is generated once CaseP is raised to Spec,DP. As long as NP does not
undergo movement to Spec,DP, the ill-fbrmedness of (26a) is accounted for. It
should be emphasized that positing the rich layers of functional projections enables
us to account for the distributional difference between the numeral and the
quantifier takusan in a straightforward way.7
Watanabe also notes that quantifiers such as zenin 'all (human)', zenbu 'all
(nonhuman)', and subete 'all' can come between the head noun and the case
particle. Examples are given in (28).
(28)	a. John-wa seito-zen'in-o atsumeta.
John-Top pupil-all-ACC gathered
'John gathered together all the pupils.'
b.	John-wa nimotsu-zenbu-o ugokashita.
John-Top luggage-all-ACC moved
'John moved all the luggage.'
c.	Yotei-subete-ga umaku itta.
plan-all-NOM well went
'All the plans went well.'
Watanabe suggests that the quantifiers in (28) are all generated after the case
particle in narrow syntax, as in (29), and placed between the head noun and the
case particle through the operation of morphological merger used in distributed
morphology (Embick and Noyer 2001,Halle and Marantz 1993).
(29)	John-wa seito-o zen'in atsumeta.
John-Top pupil-ACC all gathered
'John gathered together all the pupils.'
The fact that takusan does not undergo morphological merger appears at first
sight to be an idiosyncratic property. But once we recall from the previous sub-
section that takusan does not appear in the partitive structures, a generalization
emerges: only the quantifiers in the partitive structure of the form NP-case-
quantifier can undergo morphological merger. Indeed, other partitive quantifiers
can appear between the head noun and the case particle, as in (30).
THE STRUCTURE OF DP
527
(30)	a. John-wa	toshoshitsu-ni	aru go-roku-jus-satsu-no hon
John-Top library.room-LOC are 5-6-io-cl-gen	book
hotondo-o yonda.
most-ACC read
"John read most of the 50 to 60 books in the library room/
b. lawaseta	gakusei hanbun-ga kougi-ni	sankashita.
happened.to.be.there student half-NOM protest-LOC participated
"Half of the students who happened to be there participated in the protest/
At this point, one can entertain an alternative to the morphological merger
analysis. Examples (28) and (30) simply exemplify a third structure for the partitive.
The fact that takusan cannot appear in this structure is a consequence of its nonpre-
suppositional nature. And once the options of partitive constructions are ruled out,
the syntax of nonpartitive structures becomes directly observable, as illustrated in (26).
If the discussion so far is on the right track, Japanese turns out to have three
types of partitive constructions, summarized in (31).
(31)	a. nominal+だo+quantiher+case
b.	nominal+quantifier+case
c.	nominal+case+quantiher
How can we account for that fact?
Now, we are entering an uncharted territory, but let us discuss proposals in the
literature that attempted at least partially to cover the ground. For the type (31a)
construction, Sauerland and Yatsushiro (2004) adapt JackendofFs (1977) analysis
of the English partitive construction and frame it in terms of the structure in (7b).
More specifically, (19a), repeated here, is given the structural analysis indicated in
(32)	, where the relative clause is omitted.
(19) a. [Mae-o	hashitteita] kuruma-no-#(uchi-no) ni-dai-ga tsukamatta.
front-ACC were.running car-GEN-out-of	2-cl-nom got.caught
Two of the cars which were driving (ahead of us) got caught/
The higher N head, which takes another DP, is deleted as an instance of ellipsis
when identical to the noun in DP2, as indicated by strikethrough.8
(32)	DPi
QP	D
CaseP	Q
528 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Sauerland and Yatsushiro's structure can also be extended to the parti-
tive construction characterized by the numeral+classifier sequence placed after
the case particle一namely, type (31c)一if we assume that the higher Case head
becomes phonologically null when the Case head of DP2 reflects the case assigned
to DPi.
Interestingly, Nakanishi (2004:147) observes that cases such as (33) are unac-
ceptable.
(33) *[Narande hashitteita	suu-dai-no	torakku san-yon-dai-ga]
lined.up were.running several-CL-GEN truck	3-4-CL-NOM
gaadoreeru-ni butsukatta.
guardrail-loc struck
"Three or four of the several trucks that were driving abreast struck the
guardrail?
This means that the genitive-like linker no cannot be omitted from (32) when the
Case head within DP2 does not reflect the case assigned from outside DPi. This
account is natural under an analysis that assumes a higher N head, because the
linker is obligatory when there is a nonclausal prenominal phrase (Kitagawa and
Ross 1982).
Thus, Sauerland and Yatsushiro's proposal can handle the partitive con-
structions that feature numerals. There is a limitation, however: it cannot be
extended to quantifiers other than numerals. Recall that nonnumeral quantifiers
are generated in Spec,QP, a position too high to give the correct word order.
Kawashima (1994,1998) proposes that the quantifier in the partitive con-
structions should be placed under the head that takes DP as its complement.
It appears that this proposal can handle (31c), but not (31a,b), if the case particle is
located within DP. Construction (31b) can also be accommodated if we resort
to morphological merger, as noted above. This still leaves the postnominal linker
no in (31a) unexplained. rFhe real question, though, is whether placement under
a single head is tenable. Recall from section 18.3.1 that it is problematic to place
the numeral+classifier sequence under a head position. In the case of the parti-
tives featuring nonnumeral quantifiers, too, there are expressions such as hotondo
subete "almost all' that look phrasal but can be used in all three of the structures
in (31).
To conclude, there is much work to be done in the analysis of partitive con-
structions in Japanese. As in the case of the placement of the numeral+classifier
sequence in nonpartitives, adiversity" seems to be the key word in the account
of Japanese partitive constructions. We do not have a comprehensive account of
them yet, but we should keep in mind that recognizing multiple partitive struc-
tures is an indispensable step to a proper understanding of quantifier placement
in Japanese.9 The nonpresuppositional quantifier takusan 'many', which is free
from complications related to the partitive constructions, indicates that non-
numeral quantifiers are generated in a position higher than that reserved for
numerals.
THE STRUCTURE OF DP 529
18.3.5	Presence or Absence of DP
Let us now focus on DP in Japanese, whose existence is an essential element in the
uniform treatment of numeral placement reviewed in section 18.3.1.
18.3.5.1 DP and word order
The presence or absence of D has been controversial in the study of Japanese. It is a
trivial observation that Japanese lacks articles of the kind found in languages like
English.10 It is another matter, however, to conclude that Japanese lacks D (or
functional categories in general) altogether.
Fukui and Takano (2000) try to relate the head-final nature of the Japanese
nominals and the use of classifiers by adopting the assumption that Japanese lacks
D. Their proposal is based on the mechanism of linearization (34) put forward in
Fukui and Takano 1998, which gives rise to the specifier-complement-head order if
nothing special happens.
(34) Linearization
Applied to the structure £, Demerge yields {a, {£ - a}}, a an Xmax
constituent of Z, and Concatenate turns {a, {Z - a}} into a + (£ — a).
In languages such as English that have D, the head noun is raised into the domain
of DP as Xmax through agreement with D, producing the N-complement order.
The numeral is hosted by the NumP, which has a formal feature that needs to be
eliminated. This feature is eliminated by entering into an agreement relation with
the head noun raised to the domain of D. Through this agreement relation, NumP
is also raised to the domain of D, yielding the numeral-N-complement order. The
resulting structure is illustrated in (35), where the formal features FF(Num) and
FF(N) are adjoined to the D head as a result of agreement.
In Japanese, however, the head noun stays in situ. The formal feature of NumP
must be eliminated by means other than agreement. The only remaining possi-
bility, Fukui and Takano claim, is morphological realization at Spell-Out, which
happens to be a classifier; hence the head-final order and the existence of classifiers.
The structure is given in (36), where no will be inserted right after NumP.
53〇 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
(36)	NP
NumP
XP	N
san	satsu
3	CL	hon
,book,
Fukui and Takano's proposal is intended to handle only the prenominal
placement of the numeral, leaving (la) and (ic) unaccounted for.
(i)a. John-wa hon san-satsu-o katta.
John-Top book 3-cl-acc bought
c. John-wa hon-o san-satsu katta.
John-Top book-ACC 3-cl bought
'John bought three books.'
Fukui and Takano (1998) suggest the existence of KP on top of NP to host the case
particle in Japanese. One might then entertain the possibility that the head noun is
optionally raised into the domain of KP, giving rise to (37).
(37)	KP
N XX
hon NP K
'book,
NumP /X
ノへ、XP 成
san	satsu
3	CL
This movement would put the head noun in front of the numeral but give the
wrong order with respect to the noun complement/modifier (XP in (37)), as shown
in (38a).
(38)	a.りohn-wa hon san-satsu gengogaku(-no)-〇	katta.
John-Top book 3-CL Iinguistics(-GEN)-Acc bought
b. John-wa gengogaku-no hon san-satsu-o katta.
John-Top linguistics-GEN book 3-cl-acc bought
John bought three books on linguistics.'
The correct order is found in (38b). By now, it should be clear to the reader that the
impoverished structure such as (36) or (37) leaves no room for accommodating
apparent diversity of numeral placement in Japanese. Let me hasten to add that this
problem is not specific to Fukui and Takano's proposal. Apart from Watanabe
2006a, there simply is no analysis in the literature that can account for (1)and (4)
THE STRUCTURE OF DP
531
in a satisfactory way from the perspective of the principles-and-parameters ap-
proach.
The empirical generalization about the correlation of head-final order and
classifiers that is supposed to support Fukui and Takano's analysis seems to be
wrong, too, given classifier languages such as Thai and Vietnamese, where relative
clauses and modifying adjectives follow the head noun (Simpson 2005). In other
words, classifiers are not limited to head-final nominals. Thai and Vietnamese are
not isolated exceptions. Persian, another classifier language, also displays the same
word pattern as Thai and Vietnamese in the relevant respects (Ghomeshi 2003). Of
course, one can entertain the possibility that in these languages, the head noun is
raised to the domain of an intermediate functional projection, not of DP. But it
remains to be demonstrated that an alternative analysis of this sort is indeed
tenable. At present, there is no strong indication that the position of the head noun
is correlated with the obligatory use of classifiers. Thus, the idea that Japanese lacks
D does not receive support from classifiers or from the placement of the numeral.
18.3.5.2 Indeterminates
D plays an important role in another area of Japanese. Watanabe (1992) originally
proposed that the quantificational particle attached to a w/z-phrase occupies the D
position. For space reasons, only the paradigm for dare 'who' is repeated here.
(39)	Interrogative Existential Neg-concord Universal
Person dare	dare-ka dare-mo dare-mo
Watanabe (2004a, 2004b, 2004c) proposes to analyze the relation between this
particle and the w/i-part (indeterminate) by means of agreement. This agreement
relation is subject to the locality condition known as relativized minimality (Rizzi
1990) or the minimal link condition (Chomsky 1995), as demonstrated by Taka-
hashi (2002), who observes the contrast between (40a) and (40b).11
(40)	a. [[Dare-o hihanshita hito]-o	taihoshita keikan]-mo
who-ACC criticized person-ACC arrested policeman-MO
basserareta.
was-p unished
'For every person x, the policeman who arrested a person who
criticized x was punished.'
b. *[ [Dare-o hihanshita dare-ka]-0 taihoshita keikan] -mo
who-ACC criticized who-KA-ACC arrested policeman-MO
basserareta.
was-punished
'For every person x, the policeman who arrested someone who
criticized x was punished.'
Takahashi notes that the intervening particle ka in (40b) blocks the association of
the indeterminate dare-o with the particle mo)2 Takahashi proposes a head-
532 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
movement analysis of the long-distance association of the particle with the inde-
terminate, which Watanabe rephrases in terms of agreement. Schematically, the
relevant configuration is as shown in (41).
(41)	[dp. . .[cp. . .[dp. . .[cp. . .indeterminate...].. .D0]...].. .D°]
t___________________________I
Thus, the particle attached to an indeterminate is an instance of the agreeing D.13
Watanabe (2006a) observes that the quantificational particle also triggers
movement of CaseP. Given the identification of the particle as heading DP, the
movement in question is basically the same as that involved in the derivation of
(ic). Thus, (42b) is derived by raising CaseP to Spec,DP from (42a), whose direct
object has the structure in (43).14
(42)	a.	Sono	purojekuto-wa	nan-no	seika-mo	age-nakat-ta.
that	project-TOP	what-GEN	achievement-MO	raise-NEG-PAST
b.	Sono	purojekuto-wa	seika-o	nani-mo	age-nakat-ta.
that	project-TOP	achievement-ACC what-MO	raise-NEG-PAST
'That project didn't produce any result?
Now, Watanabe's (2004a, 2004b) cross-linguistic generalization is that those
languages with a Japanese-type indeterminate system display phenomena that
should be analyzed as movement of some constituent to Spec,DP, though the
category of the raised constituent varies from one language to another. Crucially,
English lacks phenomena of this sort, which means that the English D does not
agree.15 Watanabe further observes that those languages that have a Japanese-type
indeterminate system either have no overt article at all or have a definite article
quite unlike the English counterpart. The generalization can be summarized as
follows:
THE STRUCTURE OF DP
533
(44) D-system Generalization
The indeterminate system of the Japanese type cannot coexist with the
article system of the English type.
According to this generalization, the absence of overt articles of the English type is
a major characteristic of those languages whose D enters into an agreement relation
with some DP-internal element. The indeterminate system of the Japanese type is
another major feature of such languages. The article system of the English type,
however, is an indication that D does not agree. The D-system generalization is
taken up again in section 18.4.2.
18.4	Implications
The discussion in section 18.3 has various significant theoretical implications. Let
me start with those related to the pseudopartitives. I turn to the problem of
agreement in Japanese in section 18.4.2.
18.4.1	Nominal Denotations
Chierchia (1998a, 1998b) develops a theory of nominal denotations according
to which NPs are mass in languages in which the numeral must be accompa-
nied by a classifier. Chierchia uses Chinese to illustrate such a language, but the
same analysis should apply to Japanese as well.I examine his theory in this
subsection.
Chierchia proposes that languages differ in how NP is semantically mapped,
encoding this difference in terms of the [±arg] and [±pred] features. In a [+arg,
-pred] language, NP denotes a kind, so that it can appear as an argument without
the help of an article. At the same time, the kind denotation is translated into a
mass denotation in quantification by the 'up'-operator, so that languages of this
type need a classifier as a counting unit when using a numeral. Apparently, Jap-
anese fits this characterization.
Languages such as English, however, are [+arg, +pred], which means that NP
can freely be predicative or argumental. Such languages have both count and mass
nouns. At the same time, mass nouns as well as plural count nouns can appear as
bare arguments due to the [+arg] value.
One of the considerations that are often taken to speak in favor of the idea that
NPs are mass in languages such as Japanese is the analogy between classifiers and
pseudopartitives. Chierchia (1998a) explicitly refers to piles and stacks in (45) as
examples of classifiers.16
(45) a. two piles of wood
b. two stacks of hay
534 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
This analogy, however, is misguided. Expressions such as piles and stacks in
(45)	are nouns after all. Note their plural morphology. Now, the Japanese pseu-
dopartitive construction itself requires a classifier. Consider again (2), repeated
here as (46).
(46)	Roger-wa donburi-ni yon-hai-no gohan-o tabeta.
Roger-Top big.bowl-DAT 4-cl-gen rice-ACC ate
"Roger ate four big bowls of rice?
The expression donburi, which is supposed to count the amount of rice, is ac-
companied by a classifier hai, which is used for things that are intended to serve
food and drinks. The presence of this classifier is surprising under the analogy
invoked by Chierchia and other researchers, because one is forced to say that a
classifier is accompanied by another classifier. Once it is recognized that the counter
in the pseudopartitive construction is a noun (or NP), however, everything falls
into place. When a numeral is used together with a counter noun, it is expected that
a classifier for this counter noun is required.
The uniform approach to the placement of numerals in Japanese, outlined in
section 18.3.1, analyzes the classifier as nothing other than the # head responsible
for number morphology. This number morphology is sensitive to the singular/
plural distinction in languages such as English, but it takes the form of a classifier
in languages such as Japanese. The obligatory use of a numeral classifier itself
should not be taken to indicate that there is something special about nominal
denotations.
18.4.2	Agreement Relations within DP
The minimalist perspective (Chomsky 1995 and subsequent work) forces us to
think about the underlying agreement relation when we encounter instances of
movement to specifier. In other words, movement of X to Spec,YP presupposes
some agreement relation holding between X and Y. Agreement can also take place
without overt visible displacement. If the uniform approach to the numeral
placement reviewed in section 18.3.1 is on the right track, we are led to the hy-
pothesis that the following agreement relations can be justified within the Japanese
DP: those between NP and Case, between #P and Q, and between CaseP and D.
Thus, Japanese provides an ideal model for investigating agreement relations
within DP.
This is just the beginning. The next important task is to identify the features
involved in these agreement relations. Watanabe's (2006a) suggestion for the re-
lations between NP and Case and between CaseP and D is that Case features play a
role, on the strength of the observation that there are languages such as German
where both N and D inflect for case. Additionally, the feature for specificity (or
presuppositional quantification) should also be involved in the relation between
CaseP and D, given the discussion in section 18.3.1.2.
THE STRUCTURE OF DP
535
An obvious candidate for the relation between #P and Q is features related to
number. Watanabe (2006a) adopts the [isingular] feature of Noyer (1997) and
Harbour (2003) and the [±number] feature of Castillo (2001).The feature
[-singular] is responsible for plural morphology in languages such as English. The
feature [±number] is relevant for the mass/count distinction. As discussed in detail
by Chierchia (1998a), quantifiers are sensitive to these distinctions. Although nu-
meral classifiers in Japanese do not use different forms for singular and plural, it is
reasonable to assume that the relevant features are located where the number
information is found, given that they co-occur with a numeral.
At this point, comments are in order concerning the relation between these
features and morphology. According to Chomsky's (i995：chap. 4) theory of formal
features, interpretable features are sent to LF, not to PF. Only uninterpretable ones
are morphologically realized on their way to PF. This is a natural hypothesis, given
the division of labor between LF and PF. One thing that looks puzzling at first sight
under this conception of features is the fact that nominal plural morphology con-
tributes to meaning but is overtly realized in languages such as English. Plural
meaning should not be pronounced on nouns. I£ however, we can posit agreement
between an interpretable number feature and its uninterpretable counterpart within
DP, the latter will be sent to PF and can be realized morphophonologically. There is,
then, nothing surprising about nominal plural morphology, as long as it is justified
to assume an uninterpretable [isingular] feature on nouns. The [±singular] feature
on the # head, however, is sent to LF and contributes to semantic interpretation. In
this respect, agreement can be viewed as an essential element in the sound-meaning
correspondence, to the extent that it pairs interpretable and uninterpretable features.
This is a highly interesting conclusion from the minimalist perspective, because it
suggests that agreement is a good design specification in the system that connects the
PF and LF interfeces. It is a general observation about functional heads that they are
often unpronounced. The existence of uninterpretable features that enter into an
agreement relation with interpretable features of functional heads makes it possible
for pieces of meaning to be connected to sound.
Chomsky's theory of features also provides an interesting perspective on the
D-system generalization in (44) discussed in section 18.3.5.2. There, we see that the
relation between an indeterminate and the associated quantificational parti-
cle displays the locality typical of agreement. The D-system generalization states
that this type of the indeterminate system is incompatible with the article system of
the English type. The suggestion made in Watanabe 2004a, 2004b is that the
indeterminate system requires D to agree, whereas the article system of the English
type embodies the nonagreeing D. One might wonder what it means to say that the
ability ofD to agree is parameterized. The system of features proposed by Chomsky
(i995：chap. 4) enables us to give a very simple answer. Chomsky's theory distin-
guishes two kinds of features that reflect semantic properties: semantic features and
interpretable formal features. The difference between the two is that the former
does not participate in agreement whereas the latter does, although both con-
tribute to semantic interpretation. Suppose that the quantificational features and
536 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
the features of reference tracking such as definiteness and specificity are classified
as formal in some languages (e.g., Japanese) but as semantic in others (e.g., En-
glish). If the Japanese-type indeterminate has an uninterpretable quantificational
feature as proposed in Watanabe 2004c, it follows that languages such as English
cannot possess an indeterminate system of the Japanese type. An expression
containing such an indeterminate always fails to have the uninterpretable quan-
tificational feature in question eliminated, which leads to a crashing derivation.1 z
Thus, the syntax of quantifiers and indeterminates in Japanese provides an
exciting arena for exploring the general theory of features and agreement.
NOTES FOR CHAPTER 18
I would like to thank the audience at the Workshop of Linguistic Theory and the Japanese
Language at the LSA Summer Institute in 2005 as well as Gennaro Chierchia, Ken Hiraiwa,
Mamoru Saito, Andrew Simpson, and Daiko Takahashi for useful discussion. Thanks are
also due to Shigeru Miyagawa, Mamoru Saito, and an anonymous reviewer for comments
on earlier versions.
1.	The appearance of the dative case particle is marginal in (4a) for a reason not well
understood.
2.	Modified numerals, illustrated in (i), are also problematic for the single-head
analysis of the numeral-(-classifier combination, since sukunakutomo go-dai in (i)looks like
a phrase. (i)
(i) Kuruma sukunakutomo go-dai-ga	nusum-are-ta.
car	at.least	five-CL-NOM	steal-PASS-PAST
'At least five cars were stolen/
See Watanabe 2006a on modified numerals.
An alternative worth pursuing is to put the classifier together with the numeral in
Spec,#P, with the # head phonologically null. See Murasugi 1991,where the prenominal
numeralH-classifier combination is placed in Spec,〇? and its interaction with nominal
anaphora/ellipsis is discussed.
3.	Terada (1990) also places the numeral+classifier combination as a complex head
under Q in the structure [QP NP Q] for (ic). She claims that the relevant structure is NP
rather than QP for both (la) and (ib). She does not elaborate on the relation among the
three structures, however.
4.	Harada formulates the generalization in terms of stative versus eventive predicates.
See also Nishigauchi and Uchibori 1991 and Tateishi 1989. Nakanishi (2004) provides an
alternative account (though her major concern is the numeral+classifier sequence that is
not adjacent to the nominal projection).
5.	There seems to be a dialectal variation in the obligatoriness of uchi-no. Kawashima
(1994:43-44) regards it as obligatory. My judgment concurs. There are speakers who do not
require it, however; see Kubo 1996, for example.
6.	Kamio (1983) observes that examples such as (20) become degraded when the
relative clause is removed. See also Ishii 1998:61.7 for the relation between relative clauses
and the partitive interpretation. These observations should be understood in terms of the
definiteness requirement mentioned by Inoue.
THE STRUCTURE OF DP
537
7.	It is interesting to note that the syntax of numerals must be treated somewhat
differently from that of 'many' in Modern Hebrew as well. See Borer 2005 and Shlonsky
2004.
8.	Sauerland and Yatsushiro's own proposal differs slightly in the category labels used.
Note also that the treatment of the parenthesized item uchi still remains to be worked out
under this analysis.
9.	See Ishii 1998 and Kitagawa and Kuroda 1992 for other aspects of the partitive
interpretation induced by so-called floating quantifiers. They do not consider the con-
nection with the partitive constructions, though.
10.	Sono 'that' is a demonstrative. Its difference from the definite article can be seen in
the impossibility of *so〃〇 taiyou, in contrast to the English the sun. The existence of a
demonstrative itself does not justify positing D, given that it is generated in a relatively
lower position within DP. See Bernstein 2001 and Bruge 2002 for recent discussion of
demonstratives in general. See also Fukui 1986 for Japanese demonstratives.
11.	For various cases of long-distance association of the indeterminate and the
quantificational particle, see also Kishimoto 2001 and Nishigauchi 199〇.
12.	Note that the ill-formedness of (40b) is not caused by an alternative association with
the particle ka. Such an association is impossible, as shown by the unacceptability of (ii).
(ii) * [Dare-o	hihanshita	dare-ka] -ga	basserareta.
who-ACC	criticized	wIio-ka-nom	was-punished
'For some person x, someone who criticized x was punished.'
It is a task for future research to explain why (ii) is ill formed.
13.	Watanabe (2004a, 2004b, 2004c) suggests that the locality violation found in head-
internal relatives involves essentially the same configuration as (41) with an indefinite
(instead of an indeterminate) associated with D, again pointing to the agreeing nature of D
in Japanese. See also Watanabe 2006b for a summary discussion.
14.	The shape and the position of the case particle are affected by morphological
readjustment. See Watanabe 2oo6a:section 5.5 for details.
15.	It is not obvious under the current conception of DP whether the prenominal
genitive in English is located in Spec,DP. See Longobardi 2001.
16.	Krifka (1995) also invokes the same analogy. Krifka's theory is different from
Chierchia's in that even count nouns in English require a classifier, which happens to be
covert. Borer's (2005) theory is fairly close to Krifka's in this respect. So is Muromatsu's
(1998).
17.	Or more precisely, the uninterpretable quantificational feature cannot exist in the
English-type language, because such a feature must be formal by definition. Old English
had an indeterminate system of the Japanese type, but it was lost subsequently. See Wa-
tanabe, in press.
REFERENCES
Abbott, Barbara.1996. Doing without a partitive constraint. In Partitives, ed. Jacob
Hoeksema, 25-56. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Aikhenvald, Alexandra Y. 200〇. Classifiers. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Barker, Chris.1998. Partitives, double genitives, and anti-uniqueness. Natural Language &
Linguistic Theory 16:679-717.
538 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF JAPANESE LINGUISTICS
Bernstein, Judy. 2001.The DP hypothesis: Identifying clausal properties in the nominal
domain. In The handbook of contemporary syntactic theory, ed. Mark Baltin and Chris
Collins, 536-561. Oxford: Blackwell.
Borer, Hagit. 2005. In name only. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bruge, Laura. 2002. The positions of demonstratives in the extended nominal projection.
In Functional structure in DP and IP, ed. Guglielmo Cinque, 15-53. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Castillo, Juan Carlos. 2001.Thematic relations between nouns. Doctoral dissertation,
University of Maryland, College Park.
Chierchia, Gennaro. 1998a. Plurality of mass nouns and the notion of "semantic
parameter.n In Events and grammar, ed. Susan Rothstein, 53-103. Dordrecht:
Kluwer.
Chierchia, Gennaro. 1998b. Reference to kinds across languages. Natural Language Se-
mantics 6:339-405.
Chomsky, Noam.1995. The Minimalist Program. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Diesing, Molly.1992. Indefinites. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Embick, David, and Rolf Noyer. 2001.Movement operations after syntax. Linguistic Inquiry
32：555-595-
Fukui, Naoki.1986. A theory of category projection and its applications. Doctoral dis-
sertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA.
Fukui, Naoki, and Hiromu Sakai. 2003. The visibility guideline for functional categories:
Verb raising in Japanese and related issues. Lingua 113:321-375.
Fukui, Naoki, and Yuji Takano.1998. Symmetry in syntax: Merge and Demerge. Journal of
East Asian Linguistics 7:27-86.
Fukui, Naoki, and Yuji Takano. 200〇• Nominal structure: An extension of the symmetry
principle. In The derivation of VO and OV, ed. Peter Svenonius, 219-254. Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Ghomeshi, Jila. 2003. Plural marking, indefiniteness, and the noun phrase. Studia Lin-
guistica 57：47-74.
Haig, John.198〇• Some observations on quantifier floating in Japanese. Linguistics
18:1065-1083.
Halle, Morris, and Alec Marantz.1993. Distributed morphology and pieces of inflection. In
The view from Building 20, ed. Kenneth Hale and Samuel Jay Keyser, 111-176. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Harada, Shin-Ichi.1976. Quantifier float as a relational rule. Metropolitan Linguistics
1:44-49. (Reprinted 2000 in Syntax and meaning: S. I. Harada collected works in
linguistics, ed. Naoki Fukui, 339-345. Tokyo: Taishukan.)
Harbour, Daniel.2003. Elements of number theory. Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cam-
bridge, Mass.
Hoeksema, Jacob.1996. Introduction. In Partitives, ed. Jacob Hoeksema, 1-24. Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Hoop, Helen de.1997. A semantic reanalysis of the partitive constraint. Lingua 103:151-174.
Inoue, Kazuko.1978. Nihongo-no bunpou kisoku [Grammatical rules of Japanese]. Tokyo:
Taishuukan.
Ishii,'fasuo.1991.Operators and empty categories in Japanese. Doctoral dissertation,
University of Connecticut, Storrs.
Ishii, Yasuo.1998. Scrambling of weak NPs in Japanese. In Japanese/Korean Linguistics 8,
ed. David J. Silva, 431-444. Stanford, Calif: CSLI Publications.
JackendofG Ray.1977. X-bar syntax. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
THE STRUCTURE OF DP
539
Kamio, Akira.1977. Suuryoushi-no shintakkusu [Syntax of numeral quantifiers]. Gengo
6(8):83-91.
Kamio, Akira.1983. Meishiku-no kouzou [Structure of NP]. In Nihongo-no kihon kouzou
[Basic structures in Japanese], ed. Kazuko Inoue, 77-126. Tokyo: Sanseidou.
Kawashima, Ruriko.1994. The structure of noun phrases and the interpretation of quan-
tificational NPs in Japanese. Doctoral dissertation, Cornell University, Ithaca, N.Y.
Kawashima, Ruriko.1998. The structure of extended nominal phrases: The scrambling of
numerals, approximate numerals, and quantifiers in Japanese. Journal of East Asian
Linguistics 7:1-26.
Kishimoto, Hideki. 2001.Binding of indeterminate pronouns and clause structure in
Japanese. Linguistic Inquiry 32:597-633.
Kitagawa, Yoshihisa, and S.-Y. Kuroda.1992. Passive in Japanese. Ms., University of Ro-
chester and University of California, San Diego.
Kitagawa, Chisato, and Claudia N. G. Ross.1982. Prenominal modification in Chinese and
Japanese. Linguistic Analysis 9:19-53.
Kitahara, Hisatsugu.1993. Numeral classifier phrases inside DP and the specificity effect. In
Japanese/Korean Linguistics 3, ed. Soonja Choi, 171-186. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI Pub-
lications.
Koizumi, Masatoshi.1995. Phrase structure in minimalist syntax. Doctoral dissertation,
MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Koizumi, Masatoshi. 200〇• String vacuous overt verb raising. Journal of East Asian Lin-
guistics 9:227-285.
Krifka, Manfred.1995. Common nouns: A contrastive analysis of Chinese and English. In
The generic book, ed. Gregory N. Carlson and Francis Jeffry Pelletier, 398-411. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Kubo, Miori.1996. Some considerations on noun classes and numeral classifiers. In Keio
Studies in Theoretical Linguistics 1,89-124. Tokyo: Keio University.
Kuroda, S.-Y.1965. Generative grammatical studies in the Japanese language. Doctoral
dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Li, Yen-Hui Audrey.1999. Plurality in a classifier language. Journal of East Asian Linguistics
8：75-99.
Longobardi, Giuseppe. 2001.The structure of DPs: Some principles, parameters, and
problems. In The handbook of contemporary syntactic theory, ed. Mark Baltin and Chris
Collins, 562-603. Oxford: Blackwell.
Matthewson, Lisa. 2001.Quantification and the nature of crosslinguistic variation. Natural
Language Semantics 9:145-189.
Murasugi, Keiko.1991.Noun phrases in Japanese and English: A study in syntax, learn-
ability, and acquisition. Doctoral dissertation, University of Connecticut, Storrs.
Muromatsu, Keiko.1998. On the syntax of classifiers. Doctoral dissertation, University of
Maryland, College Park.
Nakanishi, Kimiko. 2003. Semantic properties of (non-)floating quantifiers and their
syntactic implications. In Japanese/Korean Linguistics 12, ed. William McClure,
365-376. Stanford, Calif: CSLI Publications.
Nakanishi, Kimiko. 2004. Domains of measurement: Formal properties of non-split/split
quantifier constructions. Doctoral dissertation, University of Pennsylvania, Phila-
delphia.
Nishigauchi, Taisuke.199〇• Quantification in the theory of grammar. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Nishigauchi, Taisuke, and Asako Uchibori.1991.Japanese bare NPs and syntax-semantics
correspondences in quantification. Ms., Osaka University, Toyonaka, Japan.
54〇 the oxford handbook of Japanese linguistics
Noyer, Rolf 1997. Features, positions, and affixes in autonomous morphological structure.
New York: Garland.
Rizzi, Luigi.199〇. Relativized minimality. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Saito, Mamoru, and Keiko Murasugi.199〇. N'-deletion in Japanese: A preliminary study.
In Japanese/Korean Linguistics 1,ed. Hajime Hoji, 285-301. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI
Publications.
Sauerland, Uli, and Kazuko Yatsushiro. 2004. A silent noun in partitives. In Proceedings of
NELS Z4, ed. Keir Moulton and Matthew Wol£ 101-112. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA
Publications.
Selkirk, Elisabeth.1977. Some remarks on noun phrase structure. In Formal syntax, ed.
Peter W. Culicover, Thomas Wasow, and Adrian Akmajian, 285-316. New York:
Academic Press.
Shlonsky, Ur. 2004. The form of Semitic noun phrases. Lingua 114:1465-1526.
Simpson, Andrew. 2005. Classifiers and DP structure in South East Asia. In Handbook of
comparative syntax, ed. Guglielmo Cinque and Richard Kayne, 806-838. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Takahashi, Daiko. 2002. Determiner raising and scope shift. Linguistic Inquiry 33:575-615.
Takano, Yuji. 2002. Surprising constituents. Journal of East Asian Linguistics 11:243-301.
Tang, Jane.199〇• A note on the DP analysis of Chinese noun phrase. Linguistics 28:337-354.
Tateishi, Koichi.1989. Subjects, SPEC, and DP in Japanese. In Proceedings of NELS 19, ed.
Juli Carter and Rose-Marie Dechaine, 405-418. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA Publications.
Terada, Michiko.199〇. Incorporation and argument structure in Japanese. Doctoral dis-
sertation, University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Watanabe, Akira.1992. Wh-m-situ, Subjacency, and chain formation. MIT occasional
papers in linguistics 2. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working Papers in Linguistics.
Watanabe, Akira. 2004a. Indeterminates and agreeing D. In Generative grammar in a
broader perspective, ed. Hang-Jin Yoon, 405-429. Seoul: Hankook.
Watanabe, Akira. 2004b. Indeterminates and determiners. In MIT Working Papers in
Linguistics 46: Proceedings of the Workshop on Altaic Formal Linguistics 1,ed. An汰〇
Csirmaz, Youngjoo Lee, and Mary Ann Walter, 390-405. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Working Papers in Linguistics.
Watanabe, Akira. 2004c. Parametrization of quantificational determiners and head-in-
ternal relatives. Language and Linguistics 5:59-97.
Watanabe, Akira. 2006a. Functional projections of nominals in Japanese: Syntax of clas-
sifiers. Natural Language & Linguistic Theory 24:241-306.
Watanabe, Akira. 2006b. The pied-piper feature. In \\lh-movement: Moving on, ed. Lisa
Cheng and Norbert Corver, 47-7〇. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Watanabe, Akira. In press. A parametric shift in the D-system in Early Middle English:
Relativization, articles, adjectival inflection, and indeterminates. In Historial syntax
and linguistic theory, ed. Paola Crisma, Chiara Gianolla, Christina Guardino, and
Giuseppe Longobardi. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wilkinson, Karina.1996. Bare plurals, plural pronouns, and the partitive constraint. In
Partitives, ed. Jacob Hoeksema, 209-23〇. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Author Index
Abbott, Barbara, 521,522, 537
Abney, Steven P., 222, 242
Aikawa, Takako,18, 246, 281
Aikhenvald, Alexandra Y., 515, 537
Akiba, Sachie, 261,262, 281
Akinaga, Kazue,165,173,188,189
Alderete, John, 95,103
Alexiadou, Artemis, 46, 50, 343, 344
Altmann, Gerry T. M., 222, 223, 245
Amano, Shigeaki, 220, 242, 481,511
Anagnostopoulou, Elena, 46, 50, 343, 344
Anand, Pranav,151,164
Andrews, Avery,159,162
Anttila, Arto, 85, 91,92,102,103
Aoshima, Sachiko, 222, 224, 235, 236, 241,242, 248,
249
Aoun, Joseph, 386, 390, 437, 45L 453
Aoyagi, Hiroshi,12,107,113-115,127-129,132,134,
138
Aoyagi, Seizo, 506, 507
Aoyama, Ikuko, 232, 242
Arad, Maya, 45, 50, 335, 336, 338, 344
Arikawa, Koji, 292, 296-297, 299, 303, 308,
313, 318
Arimoto, Masatake, 417, 420
Arisaka, Hideyo, 456, 507
Aronoff, Mark, 336, 343, 344
Arregi, Karlos, 368, 369, 382, 39〇
Arvaniti, Amalia, 502, 507, 508
Babyonyshev, Maria, 230, 240, 243, 279, 280
Baddeley, Alan, 219, 243
Baker, Carl L., 251,281,386, 390
Baker, Mark C., 37, 46, 50, 265, 281,320, 326, 331,
344, 434, 448, 453, 454
Barker, Chris, 521,537
Bauer, Laurie, 339, 344
Beck, Sigrid, 357, 369, 371,39〇
Becker, Judith, 282
Beckman, Mary E., 8-9,11,15,18,187,189, 456,
467-470, 473, 477, 479, 481-487, 493, 495-496,
500, 505, 507, 5〇9, 511
Bedell, George,192, 215
Berman, Stephen, 311,316, 386-387, 390
Bernstein, Judy, 513, 537, 538
Best, Catherine T., 95,103
Bever, Thomas G., 231,237, 242, 243, 246
Bloom, Paul,256, 281
Bobaljik, Jonathan David, 151-152,158-159,162,
3〇3, 310, Z16, 368, 369
Borer, Hagit, 9,15, 267, 279, 281,391,455,
537, 538 v
BoSkovic, Zeljko, 6, 7,16, 409-410, 413,
419, 420
Bradley, Dianne, 223, 239-240, 244, 249
Branigan, Holly P., 231,248
Bresnan, Joan, 435, 454
Brodie, Belinda, 310, 317
Brody, Michael,27, 50, 389, 390
Bruce, Gosta, 458, 507
Bruge, Laura, 537, 5)8
Biiring, Daniel,65, 80
Burzio, Luigi,102,103, 334, 431,454
Cable, Seth, 351,363, 367, 368, 369
Campbell, Lyle,100,103
Caplan, David, 219-220, 232, 243
Carlson, Greg,122,138
Carpenter, Patricia A., 218-219, 220, 243, 245
Carstens, Vicki, 342, 344
Castillo, Juan Carlos, 535, 538
Chang, Franklin, 237, 249
Charlkley, Mary Anne, 282
Chien, Yu-Chin,161,163, 278, 281
Chierchia, Gennaro, 406, 420, 515, 522, 533-535,
537, 538
Cho, Young-Mee Yu, 92,103
Choe, lae W., 350, 369, 378, 390
Choi, Hye-Won, 80, 82
Choi, Youngon, 246
Chomsky, Noam, 5, 6,16, 27, 45, 50, 93,103,134,
136,138,194,196,197,199, 200-202, 211,213, 215,
221,239, 243, 246, 251,256, 266, 281,292, 316,
320, 344, 379, 390, 395, 4〇2, 4】〇, 420, 439, 454,
531,534, 535, 538
Chujo, Kazumitsu, 234, 243
Cinque, Guglielmo,136,138
Cipollone, Domenic, 25, 26, 50
Clahsen, Harald, 238, 247
Clancy, Patricia M., 257, 271,277, 281
Clements, G. N., 468, 510
Cole, Peter, 351,368, 369
Collins, Chris, 331,344
Crain, Stephen, 229, 243, 252, 278, 281
542 AUTHOR INDEX
Crocker, Matthew, 226, 249
Cuetos, Fernando, 231,243
Daneman, Meredyth, 220, 243
Dautricourt, Robin, 479, 511
Dechongkit, 8., 468, 508
Declerck, Renaat, 79, 80
Deguchi, Masanori, 366, 369, 389, 391
Demuth, Katherine, 279, 281
Den, Yasuharu, 221,243
Diesing, Molly, 59-60, 80, 316, 520,
525,	538
Dikken, Marcel den, 67, 68, 80
Docherty, Gerard J., 479, 507
Doetjes, Jenny, 310, 313, 316
Doron, Edit, 62, 81,418, 421
Downing, Pamela, 312, 316
Dowty, David,155,163, 3〇7> 3】〇, 3】4> 316, 317, 327,
344
Dubinsky, Stan, 23, 24, 50
Dupoux, Emmanuel, 94-95,103,105,166,189
Eberhard, Kathleen M., 249
Ekida, Fusae, 214, 216
Elboume, Paul,278, 281,419, 421
Elordieta, Gorka, 508
Embick, David, 46, 50, 336, 343, 344, 345,
526,	538
Emonds, Joseph, 400, 421
Endo, Mika, 9,19, 270, 285
Evans, Gareth, 399, 421
Everaert, Martin, 343, 344
Farmer, Ann K., 320-321,345
Felser, Claudia, 238, 247
Feng, Gary, 246
Ferreira, Victor S., 237, 243
Fiengo, Robert, 65-66, 70, 74-75, 77, 78, 79, 80,
379, 389, 390, 391
Fintel, Kai von, 65, 81
Firth, John Rupert, 459, 501
Fitzpatrick, Justin, 303, 310, 313, 317
Fodor, Janet D., 221,227, 229, 243, 244, 245
Fodor, Jerry A., 242, 243
Folli, Rafaella, 49, 50
Fong, Sandiway, 231,246
Fortin, Catherine R., 46, 50
Fougeron, Cecile, 467, 507
Fox, Dana, 282
Fox, Danny, 7,16, 279, 281,419, 421
Fuji, Chisato, 246, 274-275, 280, 281,283
Fujisaki, Hiroya, 456, 470-471, 481-483, 485-486,
501-502, 506, 507, 508
Fujita, Naoya, 301-302, 307-308, 317
Fukazawa, Haruka, 8,16, 85, 91,101,103
Fukui, Misa,183,190
Fukui, Naoki, 7,16,19,107,118,124-127,134-136,
138,192, 215, 263, 281,284,407,421,447, 454,455,
513, 514, 516, 529-531, 537, 538
Fukushima, Kazuhiko,125,136,138, 294, 295, 301,
312, 315, 317, 321,324-325, 327-331, 333, 335-342,
343, 344, 345
Furukawa, Yukio, 321,343, 345
Futagi, Yoko, 80, 81
Gamerschlag, Thomas, 321,345
Gaminde, Ihaki, 508
Gandour, Jack, 468, 508
Ganger, Jennifer, 280
Garnsey, Susan M., 222, 243
Garrett, Merrill F., 242, 243
Geenhoven, Veerle van, 310, 317
Ghomeshi, Jila, 531,538
Gibson, Edward, 221,230-231,235, 240, 243, 244,
246, 247
Giorgi, Alessandra, 444, 454
Gleitman, Lila R., 279, 281
Goldsmith, John A., 459, 508
Goodell, Elizabeth, 95,103
Goro, Takuya, 261-262, 281
Gorrell, Paul,226, 243
Green, John N., 413, 421
Grewendor£ Gunther, 7,16
Grice, Martine, 502, 508
Grimshaw, Jane,155,163, 325, 341,345
Grodzinsky, Yose£ 155,161,163, 278, 279, 281
Groenendijk, Jeroen, 390, 391
Guasti, Maria Teresa, 265, 281
Gunji, Takao, 294, 296-297, 301,307, 312, 317
Gussenhoven, Carlos, 94,104, 457, 477, 498-500,
504, 508
Hagiwara, Hiroko, 232, 236, 242, 243,
245, 247
Haig, John H., 6,16, 288, 297, 317, 430, 454, 516,
520-524, 538
Hagstrom, Paul, 355-357, Z6Z, 367, 368, 369, 378,
384, 388, 389, 390, 391
Hale, Kenneth, 5-7,10,16, 36, 38-39, 41,50, 206,
215, 253, 281
Halle, Morris, 37,51,93,103,133,138,320,335,345,
526, 538
Hamano, Shoko, 294, 302, 317
Hamblin, Charles, 353-354,369,379, 384-387,390,
391
Han, Chung-hye, 80, 81
Hankamer, Jorge, 415-416, 420, 421
Hara, Noriyo, 471,488, 491,511
Hara, Yurie, 55, 56, 76, 81
Harada, Kazuko, 250, 281
Harada, Shin-Ichi, 7,10,16, 24, 51,143,144,163,
192,194, 210-211,215, 223, 243, 290, 301,317, 417,
421,520, 536, 538
AUTHOR INDEX 543
Haraguchi, Shosuke, 8,16,167,171,189, 459, 466,
469, 473, 508
Harbour, Daniel,535, 538
Harley, Heidi,12, 39, 48, 49, 5〇> 5L 321,343, 452,
454
Hasegawa, Nobuko,10,16, 221,244, 311,317, 321,
325-326, 245, 395, 421
Hashida, Koichi, 294, 296-297, 301,307,
312, 317
Hashimoto, Tomoko, 24, 52, 257, 266, 272, 274,
275, 278-279, 280, 283
Hashimoto, Yumi,185,190
Haspelmath, Martin, 373, 391
Hattori, Shiro, 456, 508
Hay, Jennifer, 499, 508
Hayashibe, Hideo, 9,16, 263, 281
Hayes, Bruce, 172-173,189
Haywood, Sarah L., 222-223, 245
Heck, Fabian, 352, 364, 369, 389, 392
Heim, Irene, 63, 379, 386-387, 291,432, 454
Hermon, Gabriella, 353, 345
Heycock, Caroline,11,12,16, 56, 61-63, 65, 67-69,
79, 81,457, 481
Higginbotham, James, 342, 345
Higgins, Francis Roger, 68, 81
Higuchi, Norio, 470, 508
Himeno, Masako, 322, 345
Hinds, John, 3-4,16
Hirai,rFoshio, 470, 508
Hiraiwa, Ken,13,159-160,163,192-194,199-207,
214, 215, 364-365, 369
Hirose, Keikichi, 470-471, 481-482, 501-502, 507,
508, 5〇9
Hirose, Yuki,103,189, 226-228, 231,244
Hirotani, Masako, 366, 370, 389, 391
Hirschberg, Julia, 476, 477, 492, 5〇7> 5〇8
Hoeksema, Jacob, 310, 317, 521-522, 538
Hoekstra, Teun, 279, 281
Ho氐 Jean, 322, 346
Hoji, Hajime, 5-7,15,16,19, 56-57, 78, 81,116-118,
134,138, 204, 215, 253, 281,284, 297,317,356-357,
370, 375, 391,395, 397, 4】6, 421,424-435, 44〇,
442-451,452, 454
Holmberg, Anders,107,134,138
Holmes, V. M., 230, 244
Hoop, Helen de, 521,538
Hornstein, Norbert, 251,282, 343, 345
Hoshi, Hiroto,134,138,151,157-158,163, 271,280,
282
Howard, Irwin, 3-4,16
Hsiao, Franny, 231,244
Hsu, Chun-Chieh, 231,244
Hualde, Jose Ignacio,189, 466, 508
Huang, C.-T. James, 254, 282, 348, 368, 370, 379,
388, 389, 391,395, 396, 399-400, 414-415, 418,
421,453, 454
Hume, Elizabeth, 479, 511
Hyams, Nina, 256, 279, 281,282, 285
Hyman, Larry M.,187,189, 456, 464, 479, 508
Ichikawa, Akira, 481,512
Igarashi, Yosuke, 480, 510
Iguchi, Yoko, 224, 244
lida, Masayo, 21,25, 46, 47, 48, 51
Ikejiri, Kayo, 246
Inkelas, Sharon, 85, 91,103
Inoue, Atsu, 221-223, 226, 227, 244, 245
Inoue, Kazuko, 5,16,144,163,192, 216, 290, 302,
317, 516, 520-523, 536, 538
Inoue, Masakatsu, 225, 232, 242, 243
Inui, Toshio, 219, 226, 240, 244
Ishii, Yasuo, 294, 296-300, 303, 312, 314, 3】7, Zi8,
451,454, 520, 525, 536, 537, 538
Ishihara, Shinichiro, 136-137,138, 366, 370, 389,
391
Ishizuka, Tomoko, 231,244
Isobe, Miwa, 259-260, 270, 285, 449, 455
Ito, Junko, 8,11,16,17, 84-85. 89, 91-93, 98,102,
103,104,178,189,190,
Ito, Katsuhiko,166,189
Ito, Kiwako, 466, 481-482,490, 495-496, 504, .508,
5〇9
Ito, Takane, 321,344, 345
Itoh, Kenji, 222, 223, 226, 233, 246, 247
Itoh, Kiwako, 243
Iwabuchi, Etsutaro, 257, 282
Iwasaki, Shoichi, 473, 511
Jackendoff, Ray, 66, 408, 421,527, 538
Jackson, Eric, 46, 51
Jacobs, Haike, 94,104
Jacobsen, Wesley M., 22-23, 29, 33, 36, 39-40, 49,
51
Jaeggli, Osvaldo, 413, 421
Jayaseelan, K. A., 386, 388, 390, 391
Jincho, Nobuyuki, 220, 244
Johnson, Mark, 222, 242
Jun, Sun-Ah, 457, 467, 5〇9
Junker, Marie-Odile, 310, 317
Just, Marcel A., 218, 219-220, 230, 245
Kabuto, Yoshie, 255, 282
Kager, Rene,102,104
Kageyama, Taro,134,138,143,144,157-158,163,
321-327, 340, 342, 345
Kakehi, Kazuhiko,103,189, 233, 245
Kamide, Yuki, 222-224, 231-232, 245
Kamio, Akio, 292, 317
Kamio, Akira, 514, 515, 519, 536, 539
Kamp, Hans, 386, 391
Kanagawa Prefecture Social Studies Research
Council,96,104
Kang, Yoonjung, 94,100,104
Kanno, Osamu, 247
Karimi, Simin, 7,17, 49, 50
Karttunen, Lauri, 354, 370, 379, 391
Katagiri, Masumi, 294, 317
544 AUTHOR INDEX
Katagiri, Yasuhiro, 471-473, 509
Katayama, Motoko, 95,104,188,189
Kato, Sachiko, 24, 52,157-158,163, 280, 283
Kawahara, Jun-Ichiro, 249
Kawahara, Shigeto,102,104
Kawai, Hisashi, 481,485, 507
Kawakami, Shin, 471-472, 475-476, 481,488, 497,
498-501,509
Kawamura, Tomoko, 7, 9,17,18, 263-264, 271,283
Kawashima, Ruriko, 7,17, 292, 312, 317, 513, 516,
519, 528, 5)6, 539
Kayne, Richard,122,138, 342, 345
Keating, Patricia A., 467, 507
Kenstowicz, Michael, 94-95,104,166,189,190
Kess, Joseph F., 217, 245
Keyser, Samuel Jay, 36, 38-39, 41,50
Kibe, Nobuko,185,190
Kiguchi, Hirohisa, 219, 245
Kikuchi, Akira, 294, 313, 317, 413, 421
Kikuchi, Hideaki, 480, 410
Kim, Shin-Sook, 357, 369
Kim, Soowon,14, 402, 405, 418, 421
Kim, Young-Joo, 278, 282
Kindaichi, Haruhiko, 471,481,509
King, Jonathan, 220, 230, 245
Kiparsky, Paul,338, 345
Kiritani, Shigeru,175,191,246
Kiriyama, Shinya, 470, 509
Kishimoto, Hideki,12,107,129-132,134,139,
144-145,149,163,355,367,368,370, 400,452, 454
537,539	,
Kiss, Katalin E., 74, 81
Kitagawa, Chisato, 514, 528, 539
Kitagawa, Yoshihisa, 21,25, 27, 47, 51,298,
307-308,312,314,318,321,345,366,369,370,389,
391,428-429, 445, 451,452, 453, 454, 537, 539
Kitahara, Hisatsugu, 7,17, 513, 519, 539
Kitahara, Maiuyu, 8,16,101,103
Kluender, Robert, 222, 234-236, 249
Ko, Heejeong,136, 297, 318, 369, 37〇, 388, 391,413,
421
Kobayashi, Mari, 228, 248
Koizumi, Masatoshi,12, 47, 52,107,111-113,
118-120,122,124-127,134,135,136,139,148-151,
157—159,162,163, 219, 232, 234, 242, 245, 249,
400, 4〇5, 421,429-430, 445, 449, 451,453, 454,
514, 539
Kokuritsu Kokugo Kenkyuujo (National Institute
for Japanese Language [NIJL, formerly NRLI]),
458, 509
Komori, Mie, 248
Kondo,rFadahisa, 220, 222-223, 226, 233, 242, 245,
246
Konishi, Jyunji, 244
Koopman, Hilda, 342, 345
Kori, Shiro, 458, 471,475, 476, 481,484-485, 488,
490, 492, 494, 509
Kornfilt, Jaklin, 214, 216
Koshida, Ichiro, 247
Koso, Ayumi, 236, 245
Kratzer, Angelika, 45, 46, 5E Z01, Zi8,354,374,384,
387, 389, 391
Krifka, Manfred, 307, 318, 537, 539
Kroch, Anthony, 68, 81
Kubo, Miori, 280, 282, 536, 539
Kubozono, Haruo, 8-9,11,17, 95,104,166,
167-168,170-173,175,178-185,188,190,191,
480-483, 486, 495-497, 505, 506, 509
Kuno, Susumu, 3-5,10-11,17, 20, 22 24, 26-27, 51,
54-57, 60, 64, 69, 76, 78, 81,127,139,141-143,
146-148,163, 236, 245, 268-269, 282, 290, 303,
318, 320, 345, 416, 421,457, 481,5〇9
Kuroda, S.-Y., 4-7,10,17, 20-25, 47, 49, 51,55,
56-57, 60, 63-65, 70-73, 78, 79, 81,141,143,146,
163, 280, 282, 288, 297-298, 307-308, 312, 314,
318,320,345,373,375,386,391,395, 421,426, 430,
449, 453, 454, 455, 515, 537, 539
Kurohashi, Sadao, 236, 245
LaCharite, Darlene, 94,105,166,190
Ladd, D. Robert, 457-458, 502, 507, 508, 510
Langendoen, D. Terence, 459, 510
Laniran, Yetunde, 468, 510
Larson, Richard, 430-431, 439-440, 446, 448, 451,
455
Lasnik, Howard,196,197,199, 216, 252, 280, 282,
379, 389, 391,395, 420, 421,432, 454
Law, 8am-？〇, 231,282
Lee, Kwee-Ock, 278, 282
Lee, Miseon, 221,248
Lee, Sun-Hee, 240, 245
Lees, Robert B., 214, 216
Legate, Julie Anne, 278, 282
Leung, Man-Tak, 231,245
Lewis, Richard, 240, 245
Li, Yafei, 320-321, 324-327, 342, 343, 345
Li, Yen-Hui Audrey, 312, 318, 386, 390, 437, 451,
453, 515, 539
Liberman, Mark, 478, 510
Lightfoot, David, 251,282
Lillo-Martin, Diane, 256, 282
Lim, Hyungjung, 249
Lin, Chien-Jer, 231,246
Lin, Jo-wang, 384, 386, 391
Lobeck, Anne, 408, 419, 421
Longobardi, Giuseppe, 513, 537, 539
Lotocky, Melanie, 243
Lust, Barbara,10,17
Machida, Nanako, 9,17
MacWhinney, Brian, 242, 248, 263, 274, 282
Maeda, Kazuaki, 471,475, 488, 491,510, 512
Maekawa, Kikuo, 9,11,457-458, 472, 480-482,
486, 506, 507, 510
Maki, Hideki,13,149, 378, 391
Manning, Christopher, 21,25, 46, 47-48, 51
AUTHOR INDEX
545
Marantz, Alec, 28, 37, 39, 45-46, 49～5〇, 5L 52, H4,
133,138,139, 320, 334, 335, 336, 343, 344, 345, 346,
435, 437, 455
Maratsos, Michael,267, 282
Maruyama, Takehiko, 475, 488-490, 510, 512
Mascaro, Joan,102,104
Matsuda, Yuki, 67, 79, 81
Matsumoto, Yo, 22, 48, 52, 280, 282, 321-322,
324-326, 336, 339, 340, 342, 343, 344, 346
Matsumoto-Sturt, Yoko, 231,248
Matsuoka, Kazumi, 278, 282
Matsuoka, Mikinari, 433-434, 440, 442-444, 450,
452, 455
Matthewson, Lisa, 521,539
May, Robert, 432, 454
Mazuka, Reiko,10,17, 217, 220-222, 226, 228, 233,
239, 244, 245, 246, 248
McCarthy, John J., 91,93, 98,104, 251,281
McCawley, James D., 8,17, 93,104,126-127,139,
165-166,168-169, 173-174,176,186,190, 456,
467-469, 473, 486, 510
McCloskey, James, 290, 293, 310, 328, 418, 421
McClure, Madelena, 243
McClure, William, 65-66, 70, 74-75, 77, 78, 79, 80
McElree, Brian, 237, 243
McGinnis, Martha, 453, 455
McKee, Cecile, 252, 281
McLemore, Cynthia Ann, 492, 510
McNally, Louise, 63, 65-66, 78, 79, 81,82
McRoberts, Gerald W., 95,103
Mehler, Jacques,103,189
Mermen, Ineke, 507
Merchant, Jason, 310, 318
Mesbur, James, 488, 501,510
Mester, Armin, 8,11,16,17, 84-85, 89, 91-93, 98,
102,103,104,178-179,189,190
Mihara, Ken-ichi, 294-295, 301,303, 3〇5一3〇7> 3】5>
316, 318
Miller, George A., 220, 239, 246
Minai, Utako, 9,17, 267, 269, 271,282
Minematsu, Nobuaki, 470, 509
Misono, Yasuko, 225, 246
Mitchell, Don C., 222, 224, 231-232, 243, 245
Miyagawa, Shigeru, 6-7, 9,13,17,18, 22-24, 27-28,
3〇-33> 35-36, 42-44, 47, 48, 49, 5〇, 52,128-130,
132,136-137,139,149,159,162,164,192-197,199,
205, 210-211,214, 216, 246, 269, 28〇, 283,
288-293, 296-297, 299, 3〇2-3〇3, 3〇5, 3〇8-3〇9>
312-314, 318, 320, 343, 346, 4〇〇, 4〇5, 415, 4以,
422, 424, 426-429, 433, 435-447, 449～45〇, 451,
452, 453, 455
Miyaji, Yutaka, 471,488, 510
Miyamoto, Edson T., 7, 9,10,13,18, 219, 221-224,
226, 228, 231-236, 238, 240-241,244, 245, 246,
247, 248, 269-270, 283, 449, 455
Miyamoto, Tadao, 217, 245
Miyamoto, Yoichi, 289, 318
Miyaoka, Yayoi, 249
Miyata, Susanne, 263, 269, 283
Morikawa, Hiromi, 278, 280, 283
Moriyama, Yoshiyuki, 402, 405, 407, 418, 422
Moro, Andrea, 68, 82
Muller, Gereon, 119-121,139
Muraishi, Shozo, 257, 282
Muranaka, Toshiko, 471,488, 491,511
Muraoka, Satoru, 224, 247
Murasugi, Keiko, 7, 9,13,18, 24, 52, 204, 214, 216,
252, 254, 256-259, 263-264, 266, 271,272,
274-275, 278-279, 280, 283, 408, 417, 418, 420,
422, 513-514>536, 539, 540
Murata, Koji, 277, 283
Muromatsu, Keiko, 537, 538
Myers, Elizabeth, 243
Nagahara, Hiroyuki, 473, 496, 511
Nagano, Satoshi, 257, 278-279, 283
Nagao, Kyoko, 481,511
Nagao, Makoto, 236, 245
Nagata, Hiroshi, 229, 238-239, 247
Naitoh, Kazuo, 246
Nakagome, Kazuyuki, 219, 240, 247
Nakai, Satoru,192,195, 216
Nakajima, Heizo, 247
Nakamura, Michiko, 221,231-232, 234, 236, 240,
246,	247, 248
Nakanishi, Kimiko,13, 56, 82, 300-302, 310-311,
313, 314, 3巧,318, 457, 511,516, 528, 536, 539
Nakano, Yoko, 238, 247
Nakatani, Kentaro, 229, 231,249, 244, 247
Nakayama, Mineharu, 217, 232, 237-238, 240, 245,
247,	248, 264, 284
Namai, Kenichi, 342, 346
Namiki, Hiroshi, 220, 244
Nemoto, Naoko, 270, 284, 441,455
Nevins, Andrew,151,164
Newmeyer, Frederick J., 343, 346
NHK (Japan Broadcasting Corp.),102,182,183,
188,190
Nicol, Janet L., 228, 248
Nishigauchi, Taisuke,14,157,164, 294, 298, 301,
318,319,35〇> 357—358,361-362,364-365, Z67,37〇,
375-381,386, 389, 39〇, 392, 536, 537, 539
Nishimura, Kohei, 98-99,102,104,105
Nishio, Hiroko, 31,52
Nishiyama, Kunio,13, 47, 321,324, 327-329,
331-335, 341-342, 343, 344, 346
Nishizaki, Yukiko, 248
Nishizawa, Sadahiko, 244
Niwa, Shinich, 246
Noguchi, Yasuki, 248
Noji, Junya, 274, 284
Nomura, Masashi, 152-154,164
Noyer, Rolf, 49, 51,343, 345, 526, 535, 538, 540
Ochi, Masao,13,18,192-193,197-199, 205-207,
209, 214, 216, 368, 370, 378, 387, 388, 392
546 AUTHOR INDEX
Oehrle, Richard T., 52
Ogawa, Yoshiki, 344, 346
O'Grady, William, 221,248
Ohishi, Shotaro, 471,475-476, 488-490, 492, 511
Ohki, Mitsuru, 301,319
Ohno, Sumio, 508
Ohno, Yutaka, 361-364, 370, 375, 381,385, 392
Ohso, Mieko, 395, 422
Oishi, Hiroaki, 222, 248
Okada, Tomohisa, 244
Oku, Satoshi, 6,14,18, 403-405, 409-410,413-415,
417, 418, 422
Okubo, Ai, 277, 284
Okutsu, Keiichiro, 290, 319
Ono, Hajime,103,104, 241,248
O'Regan, J. K., 230, 244
Orgun, Orhan, 85, 91-92,103,105
Ortiz de Urbina, Jon, 351-352, 370, 382, 392
Osaka, Mariko, 220, 248
Osaka, Naoyuki, 248
Osame, Masafumi, 508
Oshima, David Y., 475, 488, 490, 501-502, 511
Oshima, Shin, 23, 52
Ota, Mitsuhiko, 8,16,101,103
Otani, Kazuyo,12,14,107-108,110-111,116-118,
134> 139, 396, 399-402, 414, 418, 422
Otsu, Yukio, 9,18, 244, 253, 263-264,277, 278, 280,
284
Pallier, Christophe,103,189
Paradis, Carole, 94,105,166,190
Pater, Joe, 85, 87, 91-92,105
Pearlmutter, Neal J., 243, 246
Peng, Shu-hui, 468, 511
Peperkamp, Sharon, 94-95,105
Perlmutter, David M.,102,105, 291,319
Pesetsky, David, 280, 356, 370, 386, 389, 392, 452,
455
Phillips, Colin, 222, 224, 235-236, 241,242, 248,
249, 279, 284
Pierce, Amy E., 266, 284
Pierrehumbert, Janet B., 8,18, 87,105, 456-458,
467- 47〇, 473, 481-487, 49〇, 495-496, 5〇〇, 505,
5〇7, 511
Poeppel, David, 266, 284
Pollock, Jean-Yves,134,139, 400, 422
Portner, Paul, 63-66, 70, 78, 82
Poser, William J., 8,18,168,173,177,190, 469, 473,
481,484, 486, 506, 511
Potts, Christopher, 64, 82
Prince, Alan S., 91,93, 98,104,183,190, 478, 510
Prince, Ellen F., 496, 511
Pritchett, Bradley L., 221-222, 248
Pylkkanen, Liina, 32, 50, 52, 334, 346
Radfbrd, Andrew, 265-267, 284
Ramchand, Gillian, 384, 392
Raymond, William D., 479, 511
Rayner, Keith, 218, 248
Reinhart, Tanya,118,139,154-155,161,163,164,
252, 278, 281,284, 320, 346, 379, 386, 389,
391,392
Rezac, Milan, 369, 370
Richards, Norvin,14, 227, 352, 357-360,
364-365, 369, 370, 373, 376, 378-379, 381-383,
389, 392
Riemsdijk, Henk van, 352-353, 370, 379,
389, 392
Rizzi, Luigi, 5,18, 265, 279, 284, 387, 392, 426, 455,
531,540
Roberts, Craige, 65-66, 82, 457, 511
Roehrs, Dorian, 366, 369, 370
Romero, Maribel,311,318
Rosen, Sara Thomas,155,163
Ross, Claudia N. G., 514, 528, 539
Rullman, Hotze, 390
Russell, Kevin,102,105
Sabel, Joachim, 7,16
Sadakane, Kumi, 47, 52
Sag, Ivan, 21,25, 46, 47, 48, 51,118,139, 415-416,
420, 421
Sagisaka, Yoshinori, 470, 480, 508, 511
Saito, Mamoru, 5-7,10,15,18,19, 20, 29, 57, 82,
118-120,134,135,139,143,151,157,162,164,192,
208, 214, 216, 223, 248, 250, 253, 263, 284, 292,
297,312, 313, 319,321,324, 343, 346, 357-358,370,
382, 388, 390, 392, 395, 397-398, 408-410, 413,
418, 419, 420, 421,422, 447, 455, 513, 540
Sakai, Hiromu,12,107,113-115,118,124-129,132,
134,135-136,138,139,192, 216, 249, 514, 538
Sakai, Kuniyoshi L., 219, 248
Sakamoto, Tsutomu, 222, 224, 232, 239,
247, 248
Sakata, Mayumi, 508
Sano, Keiko, 9,19, 263, 284
Sano, Masaki,147,164
Sano, Tetsuya, 9,19, 231,149, 270, 272, 279, 285
Santen, Jan P. H. van, 471,475, 488, 491,512
Sasaki, Yoshinori, 242, 248
Sato, Hirokazu, 480, 511
Sato, Kaori, 228, 248
Sauerland, Uli, 389, 392, 521,527-528, 537, 540
Schlenker, Phillipe, 68, 82
Schwarzschild, Roger, 78, 82
Sedivy, Julie C., 249
Selkirk, Elisabeth 〇., 8,19, 471,511,522, 540
Sells, Peter, 321,342, 346
Sharvit, Yael,389, 392
Shattuck-Hufhagel, Stefanie, 477, 507
Sheldon, Amy, 231,248
Shibatani, Masayoshi, 5,19, 20, 23, 52, 60, 65, 74,
77, 82,142-143,145,147,149,162,164,168,191,
192, 216, 290, 319, 417, 422, 438, 455
Shimojo, Mitsuaki, 80, 82
AUTHOR INDEX
547
Shimoyama, Junko,14,19, 349, 353~354, 358,
361-362, 365, 367, 368, 371,374-375, 377, 381,
384-387, 389, 390, 391,392, 393
Shinohara, Michie, 397-398, 417, 422
Shinohara, Shigeko, 95,105,170,172,180,
188,191
Shirai, Yasuhiro, 217, 248
Shirose, Ayako,175,191
Shlonsky, Ur, 310, 319, 537, 54〇
Sibata, Takesi,167,184,191
Siloni, Tai,320, 346
Silverman, Daniel,94,105,166,191
Simpson, Andrew, 515, 519, 531,540
Smiljanic, Rajka, 508
Smith, Jennifer L., 94, 96,105, 366, 371
Smolensky, Paul,94,105,183,190
Snyder, William, 259-260, 279, 285, 427,
451,455
Sohn, Hyang-Sook,166,189,190
Sohn, Keun-Won, 120-122,139
Soshi, Takahiro, 236, 245
Speer, Shari R., 495, 508, 509
Spivey-Knowlton, Michael J., 249
Sportiche, Dominique, 290, 293, 310, 319
Stechow, Arnim von,14,19, 361-365, 367, 371,375,
378-381,385, 389, 393
Steedman, Mark, 65-66, 78, 79, 82
Stokhof, Martin, 390, 391
Stowell, Timothy, 5,19, 254, 259, 285
Stump, Gregory T., 34, 52
Sturt, Patrick, 226, 231,248, 249
Sudo, H., 508
Sugahara, Mariko, 356, 366, 371,494, 498, 511
Sugioka, Yoko, 321,344, 345
Sugisaki, Koji, 7, 9,13,19, 254-255, 259-260,
262-263, 267, 269-271,279, 285, 449, 455
Suzuki, Seiichi, 277, 285
Suzuki, Shogo, 388, 389, 393
Svenonius, Peter, 46, 52
Swerts, Marc, 512
Tada, Hiroaki,147,148,159,164, 270, 285
Tagashira, Yoshiko, 322, 346
Takahashi, Daiko, 6-7,14,16,118, 361,371,
375, 385, 393, 409-411,413, 419, 420, 422,
531,540
Takahashi, Shoichi, 222, 232-235, 238, 241,247,
449, 455
Takami, Ken-ichi, 292-295, 3〇3～3〇5, 3〇7, 312, 3巧,
319
Takano, Yasukuni, 312, 319
Takano, Yuji,14, 48, 52,107,118,120-124,127,134,
135,136,138,139,148,151,164, 293, 343, 428-432,
446-449,451,452,453,455,514,516,529-531,538,
540
Takayama, Tomoaki, 90,105
Takazawa, Satoru, 247
Takeda, Shoichi, 481,512
Takeuchi, Tatsuya, 248
Takezawa, Koichi,142,149,162,164, 223, 249, 253,
285
Talkin, David, 467, 511
Tamaoka, Katsuo, 234, 242, 245, 249
Tanaka, Hidekazu, 262, 286,357, 368,371,378,387,
393
Tanaka, Shigeki, 244
Tanaka, Shin'ichi,173,181,191
Tancredi, Christopher, 390, 393
Tanenhaus, Michael K., 222, 249
Taniguchi, Miki, 475, 488-490, 510, 512
Tang, Jane, 519, 54〇
Tateishi, Koichi, 8,19, 99-101,105, 47L 5H» 513,
536, 540
Terada, Michiko, 23, 52, 292, 300, 312, 319>
536, 540
Thornton, Rosalind,155,164, 252, 278, 279, 281,
286
Tokimoto, Shingo, 232, 249
Tomioka, Satoshi, 57, 62-64, 67, 69, 72, 76, 78, 82,
366, 369, 370, 397, 4〇5-4〇7, 409-410, 415, 418,
422
Tonoike, Shigeo,162,164
Torrego, Esther, 390, 393
Toyoshima, Takashi, 384, 387, 393
Tranel, Bernard,102,106
Travis, Lisa deMena, 46, 52, 445, 455
Trubetzkoy, Nikolai Sergeevich, 95,106, 456, 512
Tsai, Wei-Tien Dylan, 350, 371,386, 388, 393
Tsujimura, Natsuko,15,19
Tsujioka, Takae, 280, 283, 429, 433, 435-442,
444-447, 449-451,452, 453, 455
Tsunoda, Tasaku,144,164
Uchibori, Asako,13,149, zoi,319, 536, 539
Ueda, Masanobu, 6,19, 289, 319
Uehara, Keiko, 223, 239-240, 249
Ueno, Mieko, 222, 234-236, 249
Uetsuki, Miki, 232, 249
Ueyama, Ayumi,126,140, 442, 455
Uffmann, Christian,166,190
Ura, Hiroyuki,149,160,162,164,192, 216
Uwano, Zendo,168,191
Vainikka, Anne, 265, 286
Valian, Virginia, 256, 286
Vallduvi, Enric, 61,63, 65,67,70,74-76,79, 80, 82,
457, 512
Venditti, Jennifer J., 9,11,225, 227, 249, 458, 471,
475, 481,488, 490-491,499, 510, 512
Vendler, Zeno,152,164
Vermeulen, R., 63, 78, 83
Vikner, Sten, 56, 83
Vilkuna, M., 74-76, 79, 80, 82
Volpe, Mark J., 23, 48, 49-5〇, 53, 321,335-337, 343,
346
548 AUTHOR INDEX
Ward, Gregory, 476, 492, 508
Washio, Ryuichi, 280, 286
Watanabe, Akira, 6,14,19, 47, 75, 80, 83,122,140,
192,194,199* 210, 213, 214, 216, 292, 302, 312,
319,349* 356-357* 359* 361,368,371* 378,382,389,
393, 419* 514, 516, 518-519, 525-526, 530-532,
534-536, 537, 540
Watanabe, Eiju, 248
Waters, Gloria S., 219-220, 243
Weinberg, Amy, 222, 235-236, 241,242
Welby, Pauline, 505, 512
Wexler, Kenneth, 9,15,17,18,19,155,161,163,
164, 256, 262, 266-267, 278, 279, 280, 281,
282, 283, 284, 286
Whitman, john,12,14, 56, 83,107-108,110-111,
116-118,134* 139* 356,371* 396,399-402,4〇5,407*
414-415* 417, 418, 422
Wilkinson, Karina, 522, 540
Williams, Edwin,109,134,14〇* 324, 341,347, 389,
392, 399, 420, 422
Wold, Dag E., 390, 393
Woolley, Jacqueline D., 218, 245
Wurmbrand, Susi, 151-152,158-159,162
Xu, Liejiong, 396, 416, 422
Yabushita, Katsuhiko, 63-66, 70, 78, 82
Yamakoshi, Kyoko, 9,19, 270, 285
Yamashina, Miyuki, 390, 393
Yamashita, Hideaki, 311,319
Yamashita, Hiroko, 221,225,231,232,236-237,243,
249
Yatabe, Shuichi, 312, 319
Yatsushiro, Kazuko,148,164,375,393,429,432-433,
440-442, 449, 452, 455, 521,527-529, 537, 54〇
Yi, Li, 246
Yip, Moira, 94,106
Yokoyama, Masayuki, 257, 278-279, 286
Yoshida, Masaya, 224, 231,241,248, 249
Yoshida, Tomoyuki, 387, 393
Yoshita, Hiromi, 237, 243
Yumoto, Yoko, 321-322, 347
Zenno, Yasushi, 23, 30, 33, 53
Zoll, Cheryl,85, 91,103
Subject Index
Accent: antepenultimate accent rule (see Loanword
accent rules); commands, 470-471,482-483,486,
501,506, 507; compound (see Compound accent
rules); loanword (see Loanword accent rules);
patterns,11,165-175,177-179,181-189, 484, 494,
498,505; pitch (see Pitch accent); specification in
the lexicon (see Lexical specification); verbs and
adjectives,11,165-168,172,181-182,186-187; word
(see Word accent)
Accenting morphemes,166,174-176,186
Accusative object,13,147-148,150-151,
154-157,162, 210-211,223, 234, 324, 4〇3,
443
A-chains, 9-10,13, 267, 269-272, 279
Acquisition: of lexical items, 24,166,169,171,
175-176, 272-275; of syntax, 8, 9-10,13, 24,
250-286, 449
Adverb view of FNQs, 288, 294, 296, 302-303,
307-310, 313, 315
Adverbs of quantification, 311,387
Affixal causatives, 20-28
Agree, 37,159-160,194, 200-204, 212, 214, 360,
364-365, 369. See also Multiple Agree
Agreement relations,15,162,194, 200, 202, 206,
212, 265, 324, 529, 531-536
AkusentOy 464, 467, 469, 477, 480-482, 484, 486,
494, 498, 506
Anapkora, 23, 65-67,120-121,143, 264, 268, 271,
396, 400-401, 405-406, 411,415, 420, 432, 440,
536
Applicative keads 334, 340, 436-437, 439, 444-445
Attachment, high/low, 4,13, 45-46, 230-232
A-movement,119,128-129,196,199, 210, 269-270,
279, 448-449
A7-movement, 42,119-120,196,199, 264, 297, 313,
413, 448
Argument structure, 21,26, 41,44, 222, 273,
325-327, 334, 340, 341,343
Articulators, 458
Autosegmental-Metrical framework,12, 457-458
Autosegmental Phonology, 459, 466-467, 469
Basque 189,160, 351-352, 354, 364, 366, 368,
373-374, 382, 466, 502
Binding, 24, 25, 36, 42, 57,118,120,142-143,146,
252, 278, 356, 358, 395, 425-426, 428-429,
431-434, 441,443-444, 449, 451
Blocking effect, zz-zz, 37—38, 4〇
Bound variables. See Variable binding
Boundary pitch movements (BPMs),
ii,464, 471-476, 487-489, 491-492, 501-50),
506
Boundary tone marking, 8, 463-464, 466-467,
469, 471,47Z» 481,492-493, 501-502
Brain responses in processing, 219, 449
Bulgarian, 359～36〇, 369
Burzio*s Generalization, 334
Cantonese, 231,456, 467
Case alternation. See Ga/no conversion
Case marking 13, 28,148-151,156-161,162,192-194,
197-199, 201-207, 210-213, 214, 215, 253-254,
257-258, 268-271, 278-279, 313, 334, 343, 432,
447, 449, 517-520, 526,528, 532, 534- See also
Morphological case marking
Case Marker Drop (CMD) phenomenon, 253,
269, 278
Case Resistance Principle, 254
CaseP, 517-520, 526, 532, 534
Catalan, 456, 457
Causative construction,12, 20-53,131,234, 239,
272, 274-275, 277, 280, 321,435-436, 441；in
acquisition studies, 24; inchoative alternations,
29-30, 38-40, 42-44, 48, 49. See also Affixal
causatives. See also Lexical causatives. See also
-Sase
C-command, 39, 42,117-118,121-122,135,150,
157-160,195-196, 208-209, 250, 252, 264, 289,
313, 333, 357, 369, 387, 417, 425, 427, 453- See also
Mutual c-command requirement
Center embedding,13, 219, 226, 239-240
Chain Condition, 426-427, 429, 432-433,
440-442, 447, 449, 451,453
CHILDES database, 263, 274, 280
Chinese 90,149-150,167, 231,312, 324, 343, 384,
386, 396, 399-400, 413-415, 419, 515, 519, 533
Clause boundaries in processing,13, 217,
223-225
Co-grammars, 91-92
Complex NP,199, 259, 349, 351,360, 375, 376,
378-379, 382-383, 386, 388, 389
Compound accent rule,11,165-166,169,
182,186
Compounding Parameter, 259-261
55〇 SUBJECT INDEX
Compounds: aspectual and psychological,
323-324; means/manner relation, 339; flexible
argument, 331,337, 340; V-te-V, 229; V-V
(see V-V compounds)
Condition A, 431
Condition B,155, 278, 395-396
Condition C, 6,120, 252
Configurationality of languages, 7,10,14, 252-254,
178
Control,21,23-26,30,36, 42, 44,156-158,184, 239,
331,333-334, 343, 416, 420, 441-442
Conversion of galno. See Galno conversion
Corpus of Spontaneous Japanese (CSJ), 458,
471-476, 480, 491-492
Covert movement 14,134,197-199, 207, 348,
350-352, 354, 356-358, 362, 364, 368, 369,
378-383, 389, 410, 419, 432, 451
Dagur, 206
Dative construction, 21,23-24, 47,118-120,
123-125,132,135,142,145-146,160,162, 210-211,
223, 229, 235, 239 241,290, 324, 343, 423-424,
428-429, 431,434-444, 452, 514, 536
Dephrasing, 484-487, 493-495, 497-498, 5〇〇, 5〇4,
5〇7
Determiner phrase (DP),13,14-15,44, 59,122,127,
192-200, 206-210, 212, 312, 408, 410, 418-419,
436-	439, 449, 452, 513-540
Discourse-level prosody,12, 462, 465, 470-471,
473, 477, 479, 486, 491,494, 495, 496
Dissimilation, 468
Distributed Morphology,14, 36-38, 49, 320, 321,
335-336, 341-342, 526
Ditransitive constructions,14, 35, 225-226, 232-
234, 236-237, 270, 273, 333-334, 340, 423-455
Double-o Constraint, 223
Double object construction, 424, 428-429, 435,
437-	438, 452
Downstep 469-470, 483, 490, 494-497, 506
DP structure, 418, 516-520, 523
D-system generalization, 533, 535
Dutch, 260, 313, 477
Ellipsis; NP,14, 394-422, 513, 527, 536;
phonological,462; VP,12,108-109,111,116-118,
134
Elsewhere Condition, 37-46
Empathy marker (kureru), 228-229
English, 3, 5-6,11,15, 20, 21,23, 34, 46, 49, 59-61,
66-68, 75-77, 78, 79, 80, 84, 87, 92, 94-97,
99-101, 107-109, 116-118,121-122,126,131-134,
137,152,161,172,184,187, 208, 213, 219, 222, 224,
229-231,237, 241,252-257, 259, 261-262, 265,
267-269, 273-274, 278, 290, 310-311,323, 338,
348, 349, 366, 374, 378-379, 384, 386, 389,
394-397, 399, 4〇4, 4〇6～4〇7, 410, 416, 418-419,
423-424, 430-432, 434-436, 439, 447, 449, 453,
456-459, 464-466, 473, 475-481,487, 492, 499,
502-504, 506, 514-516, 518, 520-523, 525, 527,
529, 532-537
English Compound Stress Rule, 487
Event quantification, 301
Extended Projection Principle (EPP), 7,128,
159-161,210, 313, 439
Eye tracking, 218, 225, 233, 235
Fo reset, 482
Feature specification, 8, 37-38
Filler-gap dependencies, 229-231, 235-236, 238
Floating numeral quantifiers. See Quantifiers,
floating numeral
fMRI. See Brain responses in processing
Focal prominence, 9,11-12, 457, 477, 480-483,
487-491, 495-501,503, 506
Focus,12,22,58-63, 65-67, 69-71, 74-75,77,78,79,
80,112-115,120-121,135-136,162, 428, 441,452,
457, 469-471, 477-505, 506； projection, 59-61,
504-505
French, 95,114,213,214, 239,262, 266, 290,313,400
Functional categories 149-150, 408, 513, 529; in
acquisition, 265-267, 272, 279
-Ga: conversion with -no (see Gal no conversion);
exhaustive and descriptive,11,55, 57-60, 70-71,
73, 78; information structure, 54-83
Gal no conversion (GNC),13,192-216;
optionality, 209, 211-212; transitivity
restriction, 209-211
Genitive case,13,149,162,192-212, 214-215, 232,
254, 257-258, 278,408,429, 514,528,537. See also
No
German, 75, 77, 262, 266, 310-311,477, 532
Germanic languages,11,56, 78, 252, 262, 276, 513
Goal-theme order. See Theme-goal order
Goodall, Jane, 276, 280
Greek, 46, 502
Hamblin semantics, 384-385, 390
Head-driven Phrase Structure Grammar
(HPSG), 25-26
Head-final languages, 49,107, 221-222, 263, 342,
425, 529, 531
Hebrew, 45, 418
Honorification, 22, 48,142-143, 323, 342, 343,
443-444, 452
Hungarian, 457, 502
Hyakurakan test, 220
Hybrid view of FNQs, 291-300, 309-310
Idioms, 23-24, 30-33, 36, 44-45, 4& 5〇,132,138,
338, 341-342, 439-440, 442
Ijo, 342
SUBJECT INDEX ZZ1
Imbabura Quechua. See Quechua
Implicit prosody. See Prosody, implicit
Inchoative construction, 29-30, 38-40, 42-44, 48,
49, 433-434, 443-444-
Inclusiveness Condition, 402
Incorporation, 27-28, 37, 320, 344
Indeterminate pronouns,14, 372—393； and
locality, 376-378, 380, 384-387, 39〇
Indexed Faithfulness, 91-94, 96, 98-99,102
Indexed Markedness, 92-93
Information structure, 10-12, 54-83, 303-305, 465,
495, 5〇3, 505
Interrogative construction,14, 349, 353, 365,
367-368, 372-374, 376, 378-381, 384-386, 388,
390
Intervention effects 14, 202, 357, 359, 361,368
Intonation systems, 456-512
Irish, 418
Island effects, 349-366, 378, 381-385, 390; adjunct,
349, 351,388; complex NP, 349, 352, 383, 386,
389; w/i-island 5, 349～35〇, 352-361,366, 369,
376-378, 381-387, 389, 39〇
Italian, 5, 256, 262, 400
Ittait 14, 349-350, 356, 359
J_ToBI labeling conventions, 457-458, 471
Ka,14, 23,135,194-199, 201,207-209, 241,262,354,
361-362, 366, 368, 373-377, 380, 385, 388, 389,
390, 473, 506, 515, 531,537
Kagoshima Japanese,168,172,184-185,188
Korean, 48, 80,100,142, 240, 278, 375, 402
Kureru. See Empathy marker {kureru)
Last Resort, 7, 410-413, 419
Late Insertion,12, 37, 39, 46,133
Lenition. See Vowel lenition
Lexical class,11,84-106
Lexical causatives,12, 22-25, 28-46, 48, 49-50,
277, 280
Lexical specification, 165-167,171,176, 466
Lexicalism, 320
Loanword accent rule,11,165-167,169,171,187;
antepenultimate rule, 168-173,180-181,186;
Latin rule, 172-173
Loanword phonology, 8, 97,166-167,170,187
MAE_ToBI labeling conventions, 477
Malayalam, 386, 388, 390
Maturation: of UG properties, 256, 265-272, 276;
of A-chains, 9-10,13, 267-271,279
Memory, working. See Working memory
Minimal Link Condition, 352, 365, 434, 531
Mo: 'also'; universal, 375-378, 380-381, 385-388,
Morae, 167-172,176-184,186,189, 469, 461,466,
501
Morphological case marking, 28, 210-212, 214,
223-224
Morphology, 4, 8,12,13, 21,27, 29, 33-34, 36-39,
43, 46, 48, 49,113,133,194, 200-201,214,
228-229, 239, 320-321,324, 335-337, 341-342,
526,534-535. See also Affixal causatives. See also
Distributed Morphology. See also Rentai
morphology
Morphology-syntax interface,12
Multiple Agree, 159-160,162, 202, 365
Multiple nominative, 61,78, 239-240
Mutual c-command requirement, 290-292,
294-295, 297-300, 3〇5, 312
Naze, 121-122,135, 254-255, 349-350,388, 389
Negation-disjunction expressions, 261
Negative evidence, 250, 277, 280
Negative polarity items (NPIs), 24, 28, 241,373
N0,13,149-150, 192-216, 257-259, 278-279, 473,
528-53〇. See also Galno conversion.
Nominal denotations, 533-534
Nominalization, 22-24, 34, 48, 49-50, 67,136,
204-205, 214, 335, 337, 344
Nominative object, 12-13,141-164
Noncompositionality, 33, 324, 335-337
NP ellipsis. See Ellipsis, NP
Nuclear pitch accent, 477-479, 481,487, 491,499,
504-505, 506
Nuclear Stress Rule, 487, 504
Null-argument parameter, 264-265
Null object,12,108,110-111,116-118,134,143,
394-401, 404-406, 414-415, 417, 418, 420
Null-subject parameter, 256
Numeral-classifier combinations, 513, 515, 520,
525, 528, 534-535, 536
Numeral quantifiers, floating. See Quantifiers,
floating numeral
Object, nominative. See Nominative object
Optimality Theory, 8,11,85, 91
Otagai, 411,426-427, 441-442, 449, 451,452. See
also Anaphora
Overgeneration, 257-259, 278-279
Parameter setting; delayed,10, 256, 259, 261-262,
265, 267, 271,278
Partitive constructions, 302, 307-308, 514, 516,
518-528, 533-534, 536, 537
Passives, 9, 46, 49,145-146, 234, 237-238, 267-271,
280, 290-291,312, 329, 417, 453
Penultimate non-lexical prominence (PNLP),
474, 476, 489, 491-492, 501-502, 506
Persian, 49, 531
Phrasal pitch range, 456, 481-483
552 SUBJECT INDEX
Phrase commands in prosody, 470, 482-483
Phonology 8-9,11-12, 84-106, 166-167,170,175,
187, 348-349, 367, 456-512. Se also Loanword
phonology
Pied-piping,14, 35i~355» 357-359, 362-365, 367,
378-383, 389
Pitch accent, 8,59,187,456,464,466,477-481,487,
491,501,504-505, 506. See also Akusento
Pitch range features, 469-471
Positive polarity items (PPIs), 261-262
Predicate raising. See Raising, predicate
Principle of Minimal Compliance, 360,
365, 389
Pm,135,142, 329, 418, 425, 442, 450
PRO, 239, 323, 333-334, 343
Probe, 159-160, 201-203, 214, 232, 360, 364-365,
369
Processing, 7,10,12-13, 217-249; incremental
models, 221-224, 229, 234
Prominence-lending rise (PLR), 475, 488-492,
501-502, 506
Prominence marking, 458-512
Pronouns, indeterminate. See Indeterminate
pronouns
Proper Binding Condition,118
Prosodic phrases, 462, 464, 472
Prosodic subordination, 483-490, 493-494
Prosodic word, 459, 462
Prosody: commands (see Phrase commands,
see Accent commands); effects with FNQs,
307-308; implicit, 227-228; word level,456
Psycholinguistics. See Acquisition.
See Processing
Quantificational particles, 372, 531-532, 535, 537.
See also Indeterminate pronouns
Quantified phrase (QP), 398-399, 406, 442-443,
448, 517-518, 525, 528, 536
Quantifier Indexing Rule, 387
Quantifier stranding, 288-310
Quantifiers, floating numeral (FNQ),13, 287-319,
437-438; aspectual delimitedness, 305-306, 316;
distributional restrictions,13, 288-289,
293-294, 302-303, 3〇9；locality, 296-299;
semantic restrictions, 300-302; pragmatic
considerations, 303-305
Quechua,199, 351-355, 364, 366-367, 368
Questions, wh-. See W/z-questions
Raising: predicate, 26-27; verb 12,107-140
-Rare, 49,145,147,152,155,157, 268-271,
280, 343
Reading experiments. See Eye tracking
Reconstruction, 7, 9,14, 57,119-120,124,151,159,
196,199, 264, 271,362-363, 368, 379-383, 390,
400-402, 404, 406, 417, 425, 428, 431-432, 434,
447-449
Relative clauses,10,13,149,196-199, 201,204-206,
210, 213, 217, 223-227, 230-233,351,375,379,389,
521,527>531,536； attachment, 231-232; gap
position, 230-231; parameter 259, 278, 27
Relativized Minimality, 387
Remnant movement,119,123, 363, 516, 519
Rendaku, 84,188,189, 338, 344, 498, 505
Rentai morphology, 193-194, 199-201, 203-204,
210, 213, 214-215
Reset. See Fo reset
Resultatives, 46, 259-261,343
Rise-fall BPM, 471,475-476, 483, 491-492,
501-502, 506
-Sase, 21-49, 274-275, 280
Scope,13, 23-28, 36, 42, 44, 60, 64, 77, 79,128-133,
1Z7,147-148,150-161,162,194-199,206-209,241,
261,309-310, 349-362, 366-366, 368, 376,
382-383, 385, 388, 389, 417, 425-429, 437, 451,
452;left-edge effect, 196-197, 207-209
Scrambling, 7-8, 9-10,14,112,118-119,121,124,
126-129,135,162, 210, 217, 219, 222-223, 230,
232-239, 241-242, 263-264, 271,292, 297, 309,
312, 313, 409-410, 413-415, 419, 424-450, 451,
453； reading times, 218-235; plausibility task,
234; antecedent reactivation and resolution,
237-239； acquisition, 263-264, 271.See also
Filler-gap dependencies
Secondary predicates, 260, 289
Selectional requirements,115,158, 332, 338,
409-414, 419
Semantic interpretation of indeterminate
pronouns, 378-387
Sentence processing. See Processing
Sinhala, 355-356
Sino-Japanese accent pattern, 8, 84, 86, 90,102,
166-167,172,182, 458
Shuri Okinawan, 356
Sloppy interpretation, 108-111,116-118,134, 396,
400-401, 403-406, 413-415, 417. 418. See also
Strict interpretation
Spanish, 231,256, 260, 390, 413-415, 466
Specificity, 519-520, 525, 534, 536
Split quantifiers, 310
Split Topicalization, 310-311
Stranding view of FNQs, 288-300, 302-303,
307-310
Stress foot, 479
Strict interpretation, 108-110,118, 417. See also
Sloppy interpretation
Stricture gestures, 458
Subjacency, 5,122,132, 353, 364, 383, 389
Syntax-semantics interfece, 367, 372, 378, 504
Synthesis systems in prosody, 469-471,482, 495
Taiwanese, 468
Takusariy 200, 203, 524-528
SUBJECT INDEX ZZZ
TETU, 98-99,102
Thai, 260, 468, 531
Thematic hierarchy, 430-431,448
Theme-goal order, 425-426, 428-431,433,
448-450
〇-roles, 241,266, 271,280, 325, 340, 343, 439, 444
Tlingit, 351-352, 354-355, 364, 366, 368
Tokyo Japanese accent system, 168-173,175,
184-188, 366, 458, 466, 502
Tone marking. See Boundary tone marking
Tone scaling, 469, 500
Topic, 12-13, 54, 58, 61-72, 74-80,136,162, 225,
240, 264, 310-311,315, 368, 457, 470
Toyama dialect, 204, 257-258
Truth-value judgment task, 252, 260, 262
Two-T hypothesis, 214
Unaccusatives, 9, 39, 48, 49, 59-60, 237, 269-270,
272-274, 290-291,306, 325-327, 329, 332-337,
343
Unselective binding, 225, 356, 380
Variable binding 425, 428, 433, 443, 449, 451
Verb raising. See Raising, verb
Very Early Parameter-Setting, 9, 262
Vietnamese, 531
Vowel lenition, 480
VP-ellipsis. See Ellipsis, VP
V-V compounds, 13-14, 320-347; serial verb
constructions, 326, 331,339, 342, 343
-Wa: information structure, 10-12, 54-83; topic,
240; contrastive and thematic, 55-57, 74~77, 7&
483, 490, 496, 497; noncontrastive, 55-58,
63-66, 70, 74-77, 78. See also Topic
Weak crossover, 6, 428
Wh-movement, 6, 213, 254-255, 265, 348, 350-351,
358-359, )64, 366, Z68, 378, 380, 382, 384, )89;
covert, 350, 358, 364, 378, 382. See also Island
effects, w/z-island
Mi-questions, 6,14,121,262-263, 348-371,
373-374,376,379,385,389,5〇6,507； acquisition,
255;long-distance dependencies, 217, 220;
in-situ 印/!-phrases,14, 240-242, 255, 349-350,
352-359, 367, 368
Word accent,11,165-167,188. See also Loanword
accent rule
Working memory,10, 217, 219-220, 222,
229-230
X-JToBI labeling conventions, 457, 462-463,
467, 469, 471,473, 475-476, 487, 492-493,
501-502
Yoruba, 331,342, 456, 467, 468
Zibun, 23,108,iiG-111,116-117,120-121,143,146,
238-239, 264, 268-269, 271,274, 396-398,
400-406, 408-409, 412, 418, 419, 443-444, 452,
453. See also Anaphora